
--- PAGE 0 ---

--- END PAGE 0 ---

--- PAGE 1 ---

--- END PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
Dedication 
This book is dedicated to all my students and readers who
continue to graciously spread awareness of this work. To my
late father, Patrick, who encouraged me to see things
differently. And to my mother, Teresa; wife, Sinead; and
daughter, Lauren—thank you for your beautiful smiles.
--- END PAGE 2 ---

--- PAGE 3 ---
Epigraph 
It isn’t the mountains ahead to climb that wear you out;
it’s the pebble in your shoe. 
—M UHAMMAD A LI
--- END PAGE 3 ---

--- PAGE 4 ---
Contents 
Dedication
Epigraph
Foreword by Dr. Joseph Mercola 
Introduction: Do More with Less 
Part I: The Secret of Breath 
1. The Oxygen Paradox
2. How Fit Are You Really? The Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT)
3. Noses Are for Breathing, Mouths Are for Eating
4. Breathe Light to Breathe Right
5. Secrets of Ancient Tribes 
Part II: The Secret of Fitness 
6. Gaining the Edge—Naturally
7. Bring the Mountain to You
8. Finding the Zone 
Part III: The Secret of Health 
9. Rapid Weight Loss Without Dieting
10. Reduce Physical Injury and Fatigue
11. Improve Oxygenation of Your Heart
12. Eliminate Exercise-Induced Asthma
13. Athletic Endeavor—Nature or Nurture?
14. Exercise as if Your Life Depends on It 
Part IV: Your Oxygen Advantage Program 
Summary and General Program Based on BOLT Score and Health
Quick Reference Summary of the Oxygen Advantage Program
--- END PAGE 4 ---

--- PAGE 5 ---
Oxygen Advantage Exercise Summary
Breathe Light to Breathe Right (Advanced Method)
General Program Based on BOLT and Health
Program for BOLT Score of Less Than 10 Seconds (or an Unhealthy or
Older Person)
Program for BOLT Score of 10 to 20 Seconds
Program for BOLT Score of 20 to 30 Seconds
Program for BOLT Score of 30 Seconds Plus
Program for Weight Loss or Obesity (suitable for all BOLT scores)
Program for Children and Teenagers 
Appendix: Upper Limits and Safety of Breath Holding
Notes
Acknowledgments
About OxygenAdvantage.com
Index
About the Author
Also by Patrick McKeown
Copyright
About the Publisher
--- END PAGE 5 ---

--- PAGE 6 ---
Some Important Guidelines Before We Begin 
A lthough the Oxygen Advantage program is perfectly safe for the vast
majority of people, part of the program includes powerful exercises that
simulate high-altitude training and would be similar to performing high-
intensity exercise. Just as high-intensity exercise is suited only to
individuals with reasonably good health and fitness, those with any medical
issues should refrain from practicing any of the exercises that simulate
high-altitude training. (These exercises include the Nose Unblocking
Exercise and any that simulate high-altitude training.)
If you are pregnant, this program is not suitable. For those with high
blood pressure, cardiovascular disease, type 1 diabetes, kidney disease,
depression, or cancer, it is advisable to practice only nasal breathing and the
more gentle exercises, including “Breathing Recovery” and “Breathe Light
to Breathe Right,” during rest and physical activity until these conditions
are resolved.
If you have any medical issues then you should follow this program
only with the consent of your medical practitioner. For further information,
please visit OxygenAdvantage.com.
--- END PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---
Foreword 
by Dr. Joseph Mercola 
I t has been well documented that those who live at higher altitudes tend to
live longer. The precise mechanism behind this is not known and could be a
result of several factors. However, one of the leading candidates for this
explanation is a reduced pressure of oxygen at higher altitudes.
Research is very clear that calorie restriction extends life span. But
another nutrient many of us don’t frequently consider is oxygen. Just as
excess calories can cause metabolic damage, excess oxygen can also
prematurely damage your tissues through the generation of excess free
radicals. These are highly reactive and destructive molecules that cause
damage to the fats in your cell membranes, proteins, and DNA. Free
radicals are generated by the normal breakdown of oxygen during
metabolism. We all create a certain amount of free radicals through the very
act of breathing, and incorporating breathing exercises designed to maintain
a healthy breathing volume seems to be an effective strategy to keep your
oxygen at an optimum level, and thus minimize free radical damage.
Additionally, altitude training is a tactic many elite endurance athletes
use to gain a competitive edge. One way of tapping into your body’s natural
resources is to purposefully expose yourself to reduced oxygen intake for a
short period of time. This will improve your blood’s oxygen-carrying
capacity and also increases the maximum volume of oxygen that an athlete
can use, known as your VO2 max.
Of course, most of us live our lives close to sea level and do not achieve
this benefit. But there are simple strategies that will allow you to access the
benefits of living at a high altitude with reduced oxygen intake: keeping
your mouth closed while you are breathing and practicing the various
--- END PAGE 7 ---

--- PAGE 8 ---
exercises outlined in this book. This is a challenge during intense exercise
due to air hunger, but this is when most of the benefit actually occurs. I
have personally implemented the information in The Oxygen Advantage 
during my high-intensity workouts. It took me several weeks to make the
transition to breathing through my nose the entire time, but once
accomplished, breathing became a far more efficient process for me.
Many may know that I am a major fan of using simple, inexpensive
lifestyle changes to avoid expensive and dangerous medications and
surgery. The strategies in The Oxygen Advantage are tools that I believe
should be included in your health habit arsenal. There simply are no
downsides that I can identify, and there are massive upsides. I personally
use this program and would strongly encourage you to apply it in your life
so you can reap the rewards.
--- END PAGE 8 ---

--- PAGE 9 ---
INTRODUCTION
Do More with Less
W e can live without food for weeks and water for days, but air for just a
few brief minutes. While we spend a great deal of time and attention on
what we eat and drink, we pay practically no attention to the air we breathe.
It is common knowledge that our daily consumption of food and water must
be of a certain quality and quantity. Too much or too little spells trouble. We
also recognize the importance of breathing good-quality air, but what about
the quantity ? How much air should we breathe for optimum health?
Wouldn’t it be fair to surmise that air, even more important than food or
water for human survival, must also meet basic requirements?
The quantity of the air you breathe has the potential to transform
everything you thought you knew about your body, your health, and your
performance, whether you’re a “pre-athlete” just trying to get off the couch,
a weekend warrior running an occasional 10K, or a professional athlete in
need of a game-changing edge over your competition.
You may wonder what I mean by quantity. After all, air isn’t exactly
something you can binge on at the kitchen table late at night, or take too
many swigs of over the weekend. But what if, in a certain sense, it was?
What if healthy breathing habits were just as important as healthy eating
habits in fostering maximum fitness—or, in fact, even more so?
In this book you will discover the fundamental relationship between
oxygen and the body. Improving fitness depends on enhancing the release
of oxygen to your muscles, organs, and tissues. Increased oxygenation is
not only healthy; it also enables greater exercise intensity with reduced
--- END PAGE 9 ---

--- PAGE 10 ---
breathlessness. In short, you will be able to discover better health and
fitness as well as better performance.
If you do compete, you’ll also enjoy your training and competition more
than ever, because you’ll be able to achieve more with less effort. Overall
fitness and sports performance is usually limited by the lungs—not by the
legs, the arms, or even the mind. As anyone who engages in regular
exercise knows, the feeling of intense breathlessness during sporting
activity dictates exercise intensity far more than muscle fatigue. The
foundation of enjoying and improving physical exercise, therefore, is to
ensure that breathing is optimally efficient. 
Chronic Overbreathing 
Scientific research, as well as the experience of thousands of people I have
worked with, has shown me the vital importance of learning how to breathe
correctly. The problem is that correct breathing, which should be everyone’s
birthright, has become extremely challenging in our modern society. We
assume that the body reflexively knows how much air it needs at all times,
but unfortunately this is not the case. Over the centuries we have altered our
environment so dramatically that many of us have forgotten our innate way
of breathing. The process of breathing has been warped by chronic stress,
sedentary lifestyles, unhealthy diets, overheated homes, and lack of fitness.
All of these contribute to poor breathing habits. These in turn contribute to
lethargy, weight gain, sleeping problems, respiratory conditions, and heart
disease.
Our ancestors lived on a natural diet in a far less competitive
environment and physically worked hard, a lifestyle conducive to
maintaining an efficient breathing pattern. Compare that to modern-day
living, in which we spend hours slouched at a desk on computers and
talking on phones, surviving on a rushed lunch of convenience food, trying
to manage a seemingly neverending series of tasks and financial
obligations.
Modern living gradually increases the amount of air we breathe, and
while getting more oxygen into our lungs might seem like a good idea, it is
in fact light breathing that is a testament to good health and fitness. Think
--- END PAGE 10 ---

--- PAGE 11 ---
of an overweight tourist and an Olympian both arriving for the Summer
Games. As they picked up their luggage and carried it up a flight of stairs,
whom would you expect to be huffing and puffing? Certainly not the
Olympian.
The biggest obstacle to your health and fitness is a rarely identified
problem: chronic overbreathing . We can breathe two to three times more air
than required without knowing it. To help determine if you are
overbreathing, see how many of these questions you answer “yes” to:
• Do you sometimes breathe through your mouth as you go about
your daily activities?
• Do you breathe through your mouth during deep sleep? (If you
are not sure, do you wake up with a dry mouth in the
morning?)
• Do you snore or hold your breath during sleep?
• Can you visibly notice your breathing during rest? To find out,
take a look at your breathing right now. Spend a minute
observing the movements of your chest or abdomen as you take
each breath. The more movement you see, the heavier you
breathe.
• When you observe your breathing, do you see more movements
from the chest than from the abdomen?
• Do you regularly sigh throughout the day? (While one sigh
every now and again is not an issue, regular sighing is enough
to maintain chronic overbreathing.)
• Do you sometimes hear your breathing during rest?
• Do you experience symptoms resulting from habitual
overbreathing, such as nasal congestion, tightening of the
airways, fatigue, dizziness, or light-headedness?
--- END PAGE 11 ---

--- PAGE 12 ---
Answering yes to some or all of the questions above suggests a
tendency to overbreathe. These traits are typical of what happens when the
amount of air we breathe is greater than what we need. Just as we have an
optimal quantity of water and food to consume each day, we also have an
optimal quantity of air to breathe. And just as eating too much can be
damaging to our health, so can overbreathing.
The unconscious habit of overbreathing has hit epidemic proportions all
across the industrialized world, and it’s highly detrimental to our health.
Chronic overbreathing leads to loss of health, poor fitness, and
compromised performance and also contributes to many ailments including
anxiety, asthma, fatigue, insomnia, heart problems, and even obesity. It may
seem strange that such a disparate range of complaints can be caused by or
worsened by overbreathing, but the breath of life influences literally every
aspect of our health.
The purpose of this book is to return you to how you were meant to live
and breathe. I will teach you simple methods that will counteract bad
breathing habits, unearthing a new well of cardiovascular fitness that will
improve your overall health and well-being. Serious athletes will achieve
new levels of performance, fitness enthusiasts will unleash untapped
potential, and those who are still trying to manage their health will
overcome barriers to a more healthful lifestyle.
But, as with all conditions, to arrive at the remedy it’s crucial to first
understand the ailment.
It is how you breathe during your daily life that determines how you
breathe during physical exercise. Breathing too much air every minute,
every hour, every day translates into excessive breathlessness during
exercise. If our breathing is off during rest, it would be unreasonable to
expect it to automatically correct itself during physical exercise. The
seemingly innocuous tendency to breathe through the mouth during the day
or night and breathe noticeably during rest means you will be more
breathless during training and often limits your capacity to go faster and
farther.
These poor breathing habits can be the difference between a healthy and
vibrant life and an ill and feeble one. Overbreathing causes the narrowing of
airways, limiting your body’s ability to oxygenate, and the constriction of
blood vessels, leading to reduced blood flow to the heart and other organs
--- END PAGE 12 ---

--- PAGE 13 ---
and muscles. These systemic impacts affect your health profoundly,
whether you’re a professional athlete or your main exercise is walking up
the stairs of your house. Great sports careers can plateau or even be cut
short by an athlete’s overbreathing. The lungs let the individual down, and
—no matter how strong the rest of the body is—unnecessary, excess breaths
take their toll. As most athletes know, our lungs give out long before our
arms and legs.
It all comes down to our need for that invisible yet vital basis for human
life: oxygen. Here’s the paradox: The amount of oxygen your muscles,
organs, and tissues are able to use is not entirely dependent on the amount
of oxygen in your blood. Our red blood cells are saturated with between 95
and 99 percent oxygen, and that’s plenty for even the most strenuous
exercise. (A few of my clients with serious pulmonary disease have a lower
oxygen saturation level, but this is very rare.) What determines how much
of this oxygen your body can use is actually the amount of carbon dioxide
in your blood. You may remember from biology class that we breathe in
oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide, also called CO2. Most people learn
that carbon dioxide is just a waste gas that we exhale from our lungs, but it
is not a waste gas. It is the key variable that allows the release of oxygen
from the red blood cells to be metabolized by the body. This is called the
Bohr Effect. Understanding and utilizing this physiological principle will
allow you to stop overbreathing.
Discovered over a hundred years ago, the Bohr Effect explains the
release of oxygen to working muscles and organs. Most people don’t realize
that the amount of carbon dioxide present in our blood cells determines how
much oxygen we can use. The crux of it is this: How we breathe determines
the levels of carbon dioxide present in our blood. When we breathe
correctly, we have a sufficient amount of carbon dioxide, and our breathing
is quiet, controlled, and rhythmic. If we are overbreathing, our breathing is
heavy, more intense, and erratic, and we exhale too much carbon dioxide,
leaving our body literally gasping for oxygen.
It’s very intuitive: If we breathe better, increasing the amount of carbon
dioxide inside us, then we can deliver more oxygen to our muscles and
organs, including the heart and brain, and thus heighten our physical
--- END PAGE 13 ---

--- PAGE 14 ---
capacity. All we’re really doing is assisting the body in working the way it
was meant to work in the first place. 
Bringing the Mountain to You 
To understand how part two of the Oxygen Advantage works, let’s look at
an example most of us are familiar with: high-altitude training, a technique
often used by elite athletes to improve their cardiovascular fitness and to
improve their endurance. High-altitude training first came to the attention of
coaches and athletes during the 1968 Summer Olympics, held in Mexico
City at a height of 2,300 meters above sea level. Many competing athletes
found that when they returned to sea level, their performance surpassed
their previous personal best, prompting coaches to question whether
athletes might perform better if they live or train at high altitude.
At high altitude the air is thin, which results in reduced atmospheric
pressure of oxygen. The body adapts to this environment by increasing the
number of red blood cells. Think of red blood cells as your very own
Popeye’s spinach, only they come from your body instead of out of a can.
Upping the presence of red blood cells translates into improved oxygen
delivery to the muscles, a reduction of lactic acid buildup, and stronger
overall performance, including longer endurance and a lower risk of
inflammation and injury. But of course the catch is that high-altitude
training is not available to most of us—which brings me to the goal of this
book.
You don’t need to go to the mountain. The mountain can come to you.
I will show you how to make this happen through simple techniques
that in effect take you up a mile high. By learning how to simulate high-
altitude training, you will increase the oxygen-carrying capacity of your
bloodstream, allowing your red blood cells to fuel new capabilities.
Additionally, it will help you to sustain sharper psychological focus during
physical activity as you become less conscious of the act of breathing. This
will free you to devote more attention to maintaining proper form while
exercising or formulating strategy in a competitive sport.
If you reduce your breathing and properly regulate the amount of air
you take in, you will teach your body to breathe more efficiently, and you
--- END PAGE 14 ---

--- PAGE 15 ---
will become healthier. No matter what your athletic baseline is to begin
with, better breathing will revolutionize your fitness, your endurance, and
your performance. I know this for a fact because I have experienced it
myself. I was once a chronic overbreather.
Back in 1997 I was an executive in the corporate world, but since
childhood I had experienced poor health as a result of asthma. My identity
was based on everything that I wasn’t. I wasn’t fit, I wasn’t healthy, and I
wasn’t confident. I looked desperately for a solution to my health problems.
Then I found it.
My life changed forever when I discovered the work of the late Dr.
Konstantin Buteyko, a brilliant Russian physician who conducted
groundbreaking research to determine the optimal breathing for astronauts
during the Soviet Space Race. The Cold War had trapped his pioneering
methods on the other side of the Iron Curtain, but, starting in the 1990s,
they began to be known in the rest of the world. Using breathing exercises
based on Buteyko’s teachings, I successfully reversed my own sleep-
disordered breathing and chronic asthma, fully recovering from the
conditions I had suffered from my whole life. Inspired, I left my corporate
job and trained directly under Dr. Buteyko. Thanks to his work, my life
underwent a profound transformation. When you experience something like
that, it’s impossible not to want to share it. In my case, sharing it has
become my passion and my profession.
Over the last thirteen years I have built on Dr. Buteyko’s innovative
approach and developed the Oxygen Advantage program not only for
significantly improving asthma control but also for helping to improve
anyone’s health and fitness. I have worked with more than five thousand
individuals, running the gamut from lifelong couch potatoes to ripped-ab
Olympians.
I’d like to tell you three stories about people whose lives radically
changed because they learned how to stop overbreathing. One is a
competitive athlete, one is a newly converted fitness junkie, and one was
just trying to lose weight and to become a little healthier. 
Breathing Excessively
--- END PAGE 15 ---

--- PAGE 16 ---
In the Croke Park arena in Dublin, where I’m from, more than eighty
thousand fans regularly crowd into the stadium to watch their favorite
football teams compete. Every game feels like Super Bowl Sunday at “the
Croker.” Irish football is more than a sporting event—it’s a passion, a way
of life, and a source of national pride. While the players are considered
semiprofessional, management spends considerable sums of money on the
latest sports technology for the team members and closely monitors their
lifestyle and physiological parameters, 24-7. If a player eats a french fry
late at night, management knows.
I met David when he was a rising star at Croke Park. He was twenty
years old and trained five days a week with his team. He was in excellent
physical shape, but he frequently succumbed to breathlessness and
experienced nasal congestion and coughing. There was nothing more
exhilarating for David than to play in front of a packed stadium, but after
every game he was dogged by a barking cough, and his lungs felt like they
were full of junk. He worked hard at his training and even harder at hiding
his symptoms from his coaches and their electronic monitors. Finally David
paid a visit to his doctor and was prescribed medication, which helped
slightly, but he still struggled to keep up with his fellow players and still
worried that he would be dropped from the team if his coaches found out
about his difficulties.
When I first started working with David, he displayed all the
characteristics of a person who was breathing far more than his body
required. He breathed heavily and through his mouth, even while resting.
He was getting oxygen into his lungs but too much, and he wasn’t self-
regulating in the way that was natural—and indispensable—for a
competitive athlete. Through bad habits accumulated over the years, his
body was out of sync with his breath, and he had become unable to meet his
own needs for CO2.
I went through my program with David, and he practiced the exercises
exactly as described in this book: reduced breathing, breath holding during
training, and keeping his mouth closed at night to train him to breathe
through his nose. Today, David is one of the star players on his team and no
longer has to hide his breathlessness from his coach. But he still has to hide
his love of french fries.
--- END PAGE 16 ---

--- PAGE 17 ---
Like David, many competitive athletes breathe excessively, regardless
of how many years they have spent training. For some, no matter how hard
they train, they will never attain their ideal fitness. In addition, in order to
maintain their fitness, they will need to train more than their peers. The first
time athletes hear of the effects of chronic overbreathing it can take a little
while to sink in, although often it comes as a revelation, answering
questions that have been at the backs of their minds for years and giving
them a whole new understanding of their training. By incorporating simple
practices into your existing training program, you can enjoy a more intense
workout without putting extra strain on your lungs. One factor that
differentiates elite athletes from others is their ability to exercise at a higher
intensity with reduced breathlessness. This book will help you to
understand the factors that allow oxygen to be released to organs and
working muscles, enabling you to improve running economy (lowering of
energy expended during running) and increase “VO2 max” (the maximum
capacity of the body to transport and use oxygen).
Throughout the years I have witnessed miraculous results with all types
of athletes, including rugby players, soccer players, runners, cyclists,
swimmers, and Olympic competitors. So many of these athletes suffered
from excessive breathlessness, weak diaphragms, and inefficient breathing,
and the difference efficient breathing brought to their athletic ability has
been nothing short of amazing to witness. Developing body strength while
ignoring breathing efficiency is counterproductive, and this book will show
you how to build your respiratory stamina alongside any athletic training
program. 
Harnessing Explosive Athletic Potential 
While David’s story is powerful, don’t think that better breathing
techniques only benefit elite athletes. They can be just as transformative for
“normal” people and, in fact, are often more so. Take the case of Doug.
Doug is a high-powered American professional in his midforties. Since
childhood he battled asthma, and he never considered himself an athlete.
Doug’s brother, on the other hand, was the jock. When they were kids they
would go to the park, where his brother played basketball with their dad
--- END PAGE 17 ---

--- PAGE 18 ---
while Doug just watched. Doug always felt like there was something wrong
with his body. He did manage to row crew in college for a year, trying to
follow in his father’s footsteps, but after each training run, his lungs would
scream for mercy. His aerobic capacity—or lack thereof—limited him,
keeping an athletic lifestyle out of reach. But finally, when his father started
to become frail, he resolved to take action so that he would be around for
his own kids and grandkids.
Doug started running, but he fell into his habitual gasping for breath
after just a handful of steps. He realized he needed to rebuild his
cardiovascular fitness from the ground up, and that’s when he contacted me.
By incorporating the simple program described in this book into a busy
work and family life, he started making progress. From being able to run
only ten feet with his mouth closed, he progressed to running a 10K in a
few months, then a half-marathon after a few more, and finally the Big Sur
marathon less than a year after we began working together.
Doug needed to let go of lifelong breathing habits. Overbreathing
distorted his self-understanding and turned him into someone who he
wasn’t. I needed to convey to Doug that inheriting the genetic
predisposition toward asthma didn’t mean he was resigned to a life of
breathing problems. Asthma has been around for thousands of years, with
records dating back as far as ancient Egypt. However, it has become much
more prevalent since the 1980s, and considering that our gene pool doesn’t
change in forty years, it is necessary to look at lifestyle and address the
impact that this has on our breathing. Currently almost one in ten adults and
children have asthma, and if you add the number who have cyclist’s cough,
exercise-induced asthma, or other lung-limiting conditions, the number
skyrockets.
Over the years, I have worked with thousands of people like Doug who
have been diagnosed with asthma, and it’s nearly always the same story:
Explosive athletic potential is limited by a condition they don’t think they
can ever overcome. By not addressing the root problem, enthusiasts like
Doug often devote their formidable willpower to training practices that
inevitably lead them back to square one. It doesn’t have to be this way. At
first it may seem counterintuitive to think that implementing simple
techniques over a short period of time can reverse decades of limitations,
but that’s how transformative correcting breathing is. With breath-holding
--- END PAGE 18 ---

--- PAGE 19 ---
exercises that unblock the nose and combat wheezing or coughing,
nonprofessional athletes—even those with asthma—can lift their passions
to an entirely new level.
You may not have major athletic goals. Some of us just want to get to a
weight that makes us feel good when we look in the mirror. For many
people struggling to attain this sense of satisfaction, the barrier is standing
right there—not in front of them, but inside them, in the quantity of air they
are taking in. Without correct breathing, it’s like walking up a down
escalator—you get nowhere. 
Feeling Defeated 
There wasn’t a diet Donna hadn’t tried. You’ve heard of them all: low-carb,
South Beach, The Zone, Weight Watchers, Jenny Craig, Mediterranean,
Atkins, Slim-Fast. You name it, she had been on it. Her medicine cabinet
was filled with fat burners, carb blockers, and a host of appetite
suppressants. For twenty-five years she had believed that with each new
diet she would finally lose the extra forty pounds she carried, finally be able
to step outside in something other than black, form-hiding clothing, and
finally reclaim the health she enjoyed when she was younger. But after the
initial enthusiasm of beginning a new diet faded, the weight she lost would
return and a profound sense of failure would set in.
When Donna came to see me, she was defeated. She had spent
thousands of dollars to slim down again and again, but she was still forty
pounds overweight—and still miserable. She had tried just as many exercise
programs as diets, but always ended up quitting because she ran out of
breath after minimal exertion. As is the case for so many people, oxygen
felt like an opponent rather than an ally. The sensation of intense
breathlessness limited her physical endurance far more than muscle fatigue.
“I can’t exercise because I’m too heavy,” Donna said. “And I can’t lose
weight because I can’t exercise.” During the few times that Donna did visit
the gym, she felt totally self-conscious and out of place. She panted on the
treadmill while beautifully sculpted bodies decked out in form-fitting
clothing jogged effortlessly on either side of her, adding another blow to her
self-confidence.
--- END PAGE 19 ---

--- PAGE 20 ---
It was a vicious cycle, but one I had seen many times before. Her body
wasn’t properly metabolizing oxygen. Donna needed a simple routine that
wouldn’t put excess stress on her body and breathing, but would give her
fast, concrete results to keep her motivated and boost her confidence. I gave
her simple breathing exercises and encouraged her to practice breathing
through her nose while watching television or working at her desk.
In two weeks, Donna lost six pounds. She didn’t modify her diet, but
her breath-reduction exercises gave a kick-start to the oxygen levels in her
blood, which caused her body to process foods more efficiently and
naturally supressed her appetite. She benefited from one of the most
startling aspects of my program: Substantial gains can be accomplished
while literally sitting on the couch. Once you see this progress, however, the
last thing you’ll want to do is keep sitting.
Today Donna has lost thirty pounds, and, more important, she finds it
much easier to keep them off. My work with her and so many other people
in similar situations has nothing to do with what to eat or not eat. It’s
critical to take a step back from the table as well as the scale in order to get
a big-picture view of the problem. Weight loss only occurs when the
amount of calories we burn is greater than those we consume, and our
breathing has a direct bearing on this process. By focusing on not just how
much we eat but how much we breathe, we cause our consumption-to-
burning ratio to even out. With properly oxygenated cells, our bodies
operate more efficiently, even—or especially—in passive activities like
sitting. A desire for more water and less processed food naturally follows.
This is why diet work is not a part of this book. The only guidance I give to
people like Donna is to eat when hungry and stop when satisfied, allowing
self-control to come from the inside. Putting better breathing at the center of
your health plan makes you look and feel better.
The Oxygen Advantage program detailed in this book is the culmination
of my work with thousands of people like David, Doug, and Donna. It
empowers people, regardless of their activity level, to improve their health,
fitness, and performance—without training more or taking any drug or
supplement. The program also provides readers with the ability to easily
and accurately measure advances and ensures that exercise is done safely,
reducing the risk of injury. Lastly, the Oxygen Advantage program can be
--- END PAGE 20 ---

--- PAGE 21 ---
tailored to anyone and any lifestyle, enabling you to seamlessly incorporate
it into your daily obligations and exercise routine.
The chapters to come will provide knowledge and practical breathing
techniques so that you can optimize oxygen release at a cellular level. The
simple practices I will explain, while unknown to most athletes, have been
utilized since ancient times to great effect. All you need to apply them is a
straightforward understanding of how your breathing affects the
oxygenation of your body
Part I of this book, The Secret of Breath, explains in greater detail the
function of oxygen and CO2 in your body and helps you to evaluate how fit
you actually are. You’ll learn about the importance of nose breathing over
mouth breathing, as well as the first key technique that will begin to reverse
overbreathing. I will also teach you about the ancient breathing secrets that
have been used for centuries.
In Part II, The Secret of Fitness, you will learn about red blood cells and
how utilizing them the way Olympic athletes do will carry you into a new
realm of fitness. This section also introduces you to simulated high-altitude
training and teaches you how to find “the zone” mentally as well as
physically.
Part III, The Secret of Health, explores how better breathing naturally
leads to weight loss and reduces the risk of sports-related injuries. It also
explains the relationship between oxygenation and improved heart function.
And for people prone to asthma, it gives you the tools to eliminate exercise-
induced asthma.
Part IV takes everything you’ve learned and shows you how to
construct your own personal Oxygen Advantage program. This section is
geared toward specific groups based on their health and fitness. Breathing is
generally an involuntary activity that we engage in unconsciously and
rarely think about, but it’s there always, every single moment we’re alive,
either helping us forward or holding us back. The point of this book is to
elevate your awareness of how you can harness your breath to reclaim your
body’s natural ability to breathe in a way that will help you to achieve
lifelong health and fitness, whether you are running to catch up with your
kids or running to win a gold medal. My promise is that by applying the
concepts and simple exercises in this book, each and every person, whether
--- END PAGE 21 ---

--- PAGE 22 ---
they consider themselves an athlete or not, will be able to attain tangible
and profound improvements to their health, fitness, and performance within
just a few weeks. Isn’t it time you did more—conditioning, winning, living
—with less effort?
--- END PAGE 22 ---

--- PAGE 23 ---
PART I 
The Secret of Breath
--- END PAGE 23 ---

--- PAGE 24 ---
CHAPTER 1 
The Oxygen Paradox
S port has always been the great love of Don Gordon’s life. He loved
everything about it—the sweat, the competition, the adversity, the triumph.
Growing up, he attended many races and football games with his father,
watching his favorite competitors and aspiring to be just like them. Nothing
compared to the atmosphere of a good game: the excitement of the fans, the
shouts of encouragement (or profanities, according to the progress of the
game), and always the belief and the hope that one day he would be just
like the athletes he idolized.
As a teenager, cycling was Don’s sport. He spent hours training on his
bike, but he could never quite keep up with his fellow cyclists. He tired
quickly and more often than not found himself breathless, watching from a
distance as his friends rode their bikes farther and longer than he ever
could. As time passed Don reluctantly gave up his dream of competing like
the athletes he so admired as a boy. He finally accepted that there was no
place for him in the world of competitive cycling.
Twenty years later Don had become director of European operations in
a leading American technology firm. While on a trip to Europe, he
happened across my Oxygen Advantage program. Because Don had tried so
many things before, he was skeptical, but decided to give it a shot. He got
in touch with me, and in our first session together I gave him the crash
course I gave you in the introduction to this book. He had never considered
the relationship between physical capacity and correct breathing, but with a
new understanding of the potential of improved body oxygenation, Don
began practicing the exercises I gave him. Within days he felt better and
had greater energy than ever before. Flash-forward to today: Don has been
--- END PAGE 24 ---

--- PAGE 25 ---
free of wheezing, allergies, and medications for more than seven years. He
is also now a competitive long-distance cycler, and in his most recent race
he finished first in his age division. And here’s the best part: At the age of
fifty-eight, he had the twenty-ninth-fastest overall time across a wide field
of 320 competitors, including exceedingly fit twenty- to thirty-year-olds. He
has finally come to resemble the athletes he so looked up to as a boy.
Getting his breathing right was the key to changing everything for Don.
Breathing is natural and involuntary. We don’t have to remember to breathe
in and out. If we did, either we would have to devote all of our time and
energy to it, or we would have stopped living a long time ago. But while
breathing is our most instinctive act, many factors of modern life negatively
affect our breathing—and worse still, we’re highly misinformed about how
our breathing affects our bodies during physical exertion. During a
presentation to a group of runners who were due to compete in the Dublin
city marathon the next day, I posed this question: “Who here believes that
taking a large breath into the lungs during rest will increase oxygen content
of the blood?” Without hesitation, 95 percent of the runners raised their
hands. They were wrong, but they aren’t alone—this belief is widespread in
the world of sports and fitness. But taking a large breath into the lungs
during rest will not increase oxygen content. It is exactly the wrong thing to
do if you seek greater endurance.
Based on this misconception, many athletes adopt the practice of
intentionally taking deep breaths during rest and training, and especially
when their bodies are overtaxed. By doing so, however, they in fact limit
and sometimes even diminish their performance.
As I will explain, however, it is possible to reverse these negative
influences of modern life and to condition our body to breathe healthy
amounts of air during resting periods. By doing so, we ensure that the right
amount of oxygen is powering our muscles, lungs, and heart. This will lead
to reduced breathlessness during physical exercise, which in turn will make
improved fitness more attainable. Better breathing is the gateway to a new
realm of health. 
Breathe Right to Maximize Oxygenation of Your Brain, Heart,
and Other Working Muscles
--- END PAGE 25 ---

--- PAGE 26 ---
Before you start the Oxygen Advantage exercises, it is important for you to
have a basic understanding of the respiratory system and the role of carbon
dioxide in your body. If you would like to bypass the science, you can go
straight to chapter 2, but the more you know, the more you can work with
your body and not against it. 
The Respiratory System 
Your respiratory system comprises the parts of your body that deliver
oxygen from the atmosphere to your cells and tissues and transport the
carbon dioxide produced in your tissues back into the atmosphere.
Your respiratory system contains everything you need to adequately
oxygenate your body for exercise and high-performance sports . . . so long
as you allow it to function properly. When we breathe, air enters the body
and flows down the windpipe (trachea), which then divides into two
branches called bronchi: One branch leads to the right lung, the other to the
left. Within your lungs, the bronchi further subdivide into smaller branches
called bronchioles, and eventually into a multitude of small air sacs called 
alveoli . To visualize this complex system, imagine an upside-down tree.
Your trachea is the trunk, and the bronchi form two large branches at the top
of it, from which the smaller branches of the bronchioles grow. At the end
of these branches are the “leaves”—the round sacs of the alveoli, which
transport oxygen into the blood. It is quite a striking example of
evolutionary balance and beauty that the trees around us that give off
oxygen and the trees in our lungs that absorb it share a similar structure.
--- END PAGE 26 ---

--- PAGE 27 ---
The lungs contain approximately 300 million alveoli, each of which is
surrounded by tiny blood vessels called capillaries . To put this immense
number in context, the area of contact between your alveoli and blood
capillaries is equivalent to the size of a tennis court. This large,
impressively contained surface provides the potential for an extremely
efficient transfer of oxygen to the blood.
As I’ve explained, oxygen is the fuel that muscles need to work
efficiently. It is, however, a common misconception that breathing in a
larger volume of air increases the oxygenation of the blood. It is
physiologically impossible to increase the oxygen saturation of the blood in
this way, because the blood is almost always already fully saturated. It
would be like pouring more water into a glass that is already filled to the
brim. But what is oxygen saturation exactly, and how does it relate to
properly oxygenating our muscles?
Oxygen saturation (SpO2) is the percentage of oxygen-carrying red
blood cells (hemoglobin molecules) containing oxygen within the blood.
During periods of rest the standard breathing volume for a healthy person is
between 4 and 6 liters of air per minute, which results in almost complete
oxygen saturation of 95 to 99 percent. Because oxygen is continually
--- END PAGE 27 ---

--- PAGE 28 ---
diffusing from the blood into the cells, 100 percent saturation is not always
feasible. An oxygen saturation of 100 percent would suggest that the bond
between red blood cells and oxygen molecules is too strong, reducing the
blood cells’ ability to deliver oxygen to muscles, organs, and tissues. We
need the blood to release oxygen, not hold on to it. The human body
actually carries a surplus of oxygen in the blood—75 percent is exhaled
during rest and as much as 25 percent is exhaled during physical exercise.
Increasing oxygen saturation to 100 percent has no added benefits.
The idea of taking bigger breaths to take in more oxygen is akin to
telling an individual who is already eating enough food to provide their
daily caloric needs that they need to eat more. Many of my students initially
have a hard time grasping this. For years they have been indoctrinated with
the “benefits” of taking deep breaths by well-meaning stress counselors,
yoga practitioners, physiotherapists, and sports coaches, not to mention the
Western media. And it’s easy to see why this belief is perpetuated: Taking a
large breath can actually feel good, even if it can actually be bad for you.
Just as a cat enjoys a good stretch following a midday nap, taking a big
breath into the lungs stretches the upper part of the body, allowing a feeling
of relaxation to follow. But this leads many to believe that with breathing,
bigger is better. 
Regulation of Breathing 
There are two main aspects to the way you breathe: the rate or number of
breaths you take in the space of 1 minute and the volume or amount of air
drawn into your lungs with each breath. Although the two are separate, one
generally influences the other.
The volume of each breath of air we inhale and exhale is measured in
liters, and measurements are usually taken over 1 minute. In conventional
medicine the accepted number of breaths a healthy person takes during that
minute is 10 to 12, with each breath drawing in a volume of 500 milliliters
of air, for a total volume of 5 to 6 liters. To visualize this amount of air,
imagine how much air would be contained in about three empty 2-liter soft
drink bottles. If a person is breathing at a higher rate—at 20 breaths per
minute, for example—then the volume will also be higher. But
--- END PAGE 28 ---

--- PAGE 29 ---
overbreathing doesn’t just come from an elevated rate. A lower rate can
have the same effect if the individual is taking in too much air with each
breath; 10 large breaths of 1,000 milliliters would also be evidence of
overbreathing. In the next chapter, you will be able to measure your own
relative breathing volume using a breath-hold test called the Body Oxygen
Level Test, or BOLT.
So how do we ensure that we breathe correctly so as to make optimal
use of our amazing respiratory system? As odd as this may seem, it’s not
oxygen that exerts the primary influence on your breathing efficiency, but
carbon dioxide.
The rate and volume of breathing is determined by receptors in the brain
that work in a way similar to a thermostat regulating the heating system in a
home. However, instead of monitoring fluctuations in temperature, these
receptors monitor the concentration of carbon dioxide and oxygen in your
blood, along with the acidity or pH level. When levels of carbon dioxide
increase above a certain amount, these sensitive receptors stimulate
breathing in order to get rid of the excess gas. In other words, the primary
stimulus to breathe is to eliminate excess carbon dioxide from the body.
Carbon dioxide is an end product of the natural process of breaking
down the fats and carbohydrates we eat. CO2 is returned from the tissues
and cells to the lungs via blood vessels, and any excess is exhaled.
Crucially, however, part of your body’s quotient of carbon dioxide is
retained when you exhale. Correct breathing both relies on and results in the
right amount of carbon dioxide being retained in your lungs. Understanding
this is just as important for serious athletes as it is for anyone interested in
basic fitness or in weight management.
Think of it this way: CO2 is the doorway that lets oxygen reach our
muscles. If the door is only partially open, only some of the oxygen at our
disposal passes through, and we find ourselves gasping during exercise,
often with our limbs cramping. If, on the other hand, the door is wide open,
oxygen flows through the doorway and we can sustain physical activity
longer and at a higher intensity. But to understand how our breathing works
we must dig a bit deeper into the crucial role carbon dioxide plays in
making it as efficient as possible.
--- END PAGE 29 ---

--- PAGE 30 ---
Chronic hyperventilation or overbreathing simply means the habit of
breathing a volume of air greater than that which your body requires. It
does not necessarily manifest as dramatic symptoms, such as the panting a
person might experience during a panic attack. When we breathe in excess
of what we require, too much carbon dioxide is exhaled from the lungs and,
hence, is removed from the blood. It forces that door to a more closed
position, making it harder for oxygen to pass through. Breathing too much
for short periods of time is not a significant problem, as no permanent
change in the body occurs. However, when we breathe too much over an
extended period of days to weeks, a biochemical change takes place inside
us that results in an increased sensitivity or lower tolerance to carbon
dioxide. With this lower set point, breathing volume remains above normal
as the receptors in the brain continuously stimulate breathing in order to get
rid of carbon dioxide that is perceived to be in excess of the receptor’s
programmed limits. The result is the habit of chronic overbreathing or
chronic hyperventilation, with all its negative manifestations. In other
words, certain circumstances can train our body to breathe in such a way
that goes against its own interests. To counteract these bad habits, you must
retrain yourself to breathe better.
I often ask my groups of students this question: “Who feels that they are
more tired than they should be?” Usually about 80 percent raise their hands.
My job is to help them understand why. With the aid of a pulse oximeter, I
have measured the oxygen saturation of thousands of people, and the vast
majority display normal blood oxygen saturations of between 95 and 99
percent.* Why would this be? Their blood oxygen saturations are normal,
yet they constantly feel tired. The problem is not a lack of oxygen in the
blood, but that not enough oxygen is being released from the blood to
tissues and organs, including the brain, resulting in feelings of lethargy and
exhaustion. This happens because too much carbon dioxide has been
expelled from the body. As we shall see further on, habitual overbreathing
influences the release of oxygen from red blood cells, the consequences of
which can affect day-to-day well-being as well as performance during
exercise. This ties back to the Bohr Effect, which I touched on in the
introduction and will expand on in a few pages.
--- END PAGE 30 ---

--- PAGE 31 ---
One’s breathing volume can be two or three times the required amount
without it being overtly noticeable. Once the pattern of overbreathing is
established, it is often maintained by an occasional deep breath or sigh.
When such a habit becomes ingrained both mentally and physically, you
will breathe in excess of what is required every minute, every hour, and
every day. This subtle alteration to your body’s natural functioning can
hinder you greatly. And it doesn’t just happen while we’re conscious; many
people sleep with their mouth open, and whether they realize it or not, this
drags down their physical and mental energy.
So why is it that the benefits of light breathing are relatively unknown?
It is difficult to know the exact answer, although a number of points are
worth bearing in mind. The first is that air is weightless and therefore
difficult to measure, and breathing can change quickly and effortlessly
during the measuring process. The second is that doctors learn how oxygen
is released from the red blood cells early on in their studies—the Bohr
Effect is described in most basic medical school physiology textbooks—so
it is possible that this information is simply forgotten by the time of
graduation. Another reason may be that overbreathing affects each person
individually, resulting in a wide variety of problems that may not
necessarily appear to be connected, from cardiovascular, respiratory, and
gastrointestinal issues to general exhaustion. To add even more confusion,
not everyone who overbreathes will develop obvious symptoms, as the
effects of hyperventilation depend on genetic predisposition.
Finally, given the lack of awareness of the relationship between
breathing volume and health, so many chronic overbreathers have learned
to tolerate the stunted levels of energy and fitness incorrect breathing leaves
them with in day-to-day life. But shaking ourselves out of this complacent
attitude toward our breath and putting it at the center of our health often
produces more dramatic changes than any diet.
So how can we regulate the amount of air we breathe in order to
optimize our fitness and athletic performance? As you know by now, the
vital ingredient is carbon dioxide. 
Carbon Dioxide: Not Just a Waste of Gas
--- END PAGE 31 ---

--- PAGE 32 ---
The concentration of carbon dioxide in the earth’s atmosphere is very low,
which means that we don’t carry it into our lungs when we breathe. Instead
we produce it in tissue cells during the process of converting food and
oxygen into energy. Maintaining a correct breathing volume ensures that the
ideal amount of carbon dioxide remains in the lungs, blood, tissues, and
cells.
Carbon dioxide performs a number of vital functions in the human
body, including:
• Offloading of oxygen from the blood to be used by the cells.
• The dilation of the smooth muscle in the walls of the airways
and blood vessels
• The regulation of blood pH. 
Delivery of Oxygen from the Blood to the Muscles and Organs 
Hemoglobin is a protein found in the blood, and one of its functions is to
carry oxygen from the lungs to the tissues and cells. A fundamental element
of the Oxygen Advantage technique is to understand the Bohr Effect—the
way in which oxygen is released from hemoglobin and delivered to the
muscles and organs. This process forms the core of unlocking your body’s
true fitness potential, allowing you to raise your game and achieve the
results you really want.
The Bohr Effect was discovered in 1904 by the Danish physiologist
Christian Bohr (father of Niels Bohr, the Nobel Prize–winning physicist—
and footballer). In the words of Christian Bohr, “The carbon dioxide
pressure of the blood is to be regarded as an important factor in the inner
respiratory metabolism. If one uses carbon dioxide in appropriate amounts,
the oxygen that was taken up can be used more effectively throughout the
body.”
The crucial point to remember is that hemoglobin releases oxygen when
in the presence of carbon dioxide . When we overbreathe, too much carbon
dioxide is washed from the lungs, blood, tissues, and cells. This condition is
called hypocapnia, causing the hemoglobin to hold on to oxygen, resulting
in reduced oxygen release and therefore reduced oxygen delivery to tissues
--- END PAGE 32 ---

--- PAGE 33 ---
and organs. With less oxygen delivered to the muscles, they cannot work as
effectively as we might like them to. As counterintuitive as it may seem, the
urge to take bigger, deeper breaths when we hit the wall during exercise
does not provide the muscles with more oxygen but effectively reduces
oxygenation even further. In contrast, when breathing volume remains
nearer to correct levels, the pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood is
higher, loosening the bond between hemoglobin and oxygen and facilitating
the delivery of oxygen to the muscles and organs. John West, author of 
Respiratory Physiology, tells us that “an exercising muscle is hot and
generates carbon dioxide, and it benefits from increased unloading of O2
[oxygen] from its capillaries.” The better we can fuel our muscles with
oxygen during activity, the longer and harder they can work. In light of the
Bohr Effect, overbreathing limits the release of oxygen from the blood, and
in turn affects how well our muscles are able to work. 
Dilation and Constriction of Airways and Blood Vessels 
Breathing too much can also cause reduced blood flow. For the vast
majority of people, 2 minutes of heavy breathing is enough to reduce blood
circulation throughout the body, including the brain, which can cause a
feeling of dizziness and light-headedness. In general, blood flow to the
brain reduces proportionately to each reduction in carbon dioxide. A study
by Dr. Daniel M. Gibbs, which was published in the American Journal of
Psychiatry to assess arterial constriction induced by excessive breathing,
found that the diameter of blood vessels reduced in some individuals by as
much as 50 percent. Based on the formula πr2, which measures the area of a
circle, blood flow decreases by a factor of four. This shows you how
radically overbreathing can affect your blood flow.
Most people will have experienced constriction of blood flow to the
brain resulting from overbreathing. It doesn’t take very long to feel the
onset of dizziness from taking a few big breaths in and out through the
mouth. Similarly, many individuals who sleep with their mouths open may
find it difficult to get going in the morning. However long they sleep, they
are still tired and groggy for the first few hours after waking. It is well
documented that habitual mouth breathing during waking and sleeping
--- END PAGE 33 ---

--- PAGE 34 ---
hours results in fatigue, poor concentration, reduced productivity, and a bad
mood. Hardly an ideal recipe for quality living or a productive exercise
program.
The same can also be true of individuals whose occupation involves
considerable talking, such as schoolteachers or salespeople. People in these
professions are often all too aware of how tired they feel after a day of
work, but the exhaustion that follows endless business meetings is not
necessarily due to mental or physical effort—more likely it is a result of the
effects of elevated breathing levels during excessive talking. It is normal for
breathing to increase during physical exercise as the body demands more
oxygen to convert food into energy. However, in the case of talking,
breathing increases without an actual need for more oxygen, causing a
disturbance to blood gases and reducing blood flow.
Depending on genetic predisposition to asthma, the loss of carbon
dioxide in the blood can also cause the smooth muscles of the airways to
constrict, resulting in wheezing and breathlessness. However, an increase of
carbon dioxide opens up the airways to allow a better oxygen transfer to
take place and has been shown to improve breathing for persons diagnosed
with asthma. But at the end of the day, we’re all operating on the same
spectrum, with good breathing at one end and bad breathing on the other.
It’s not just people with asthma who benefit from less constricted airways.
The feeling of chest tightness, excessive breathlessness, cough, and the
inability to take a satisfying breath is experienced by many athletes,
including those without a prior history of asthma, but can be eliminated by
simply improving the way you breathe. 
The Regulation of Blood pH 
In addition to determining how much oxygen is released into your tissues
and cells, carbon dioxide also plays a central role in regulating the pH of the
bloodstream: how acidic or alkaline your blood is. Normal pH in the blood
is 7.365, and this level must remain within a tightly defined range or the
body is forced to compensate. For example, when the blood’s pH becomes
more alkaline, breathing reduces to allow carbon dioxide levels to rise and
restore pH. Conversely, if the pH of the blood is too acidic (as it is when
--- END PAGE 34 ---

--- PAGE 35 ---
you overconsume processed foods), breathing increases in order to offload
carbon dioxide as acid, allowing pH to normalize. Maintaining normal
blood pH is vital to our survival. If pH is too acidic and drops below 6.8, or
too alkaline and rises above 7.8, the result can be fatal. This is because pH
levels directly affect the ability of our internal organs and metabolism to
function. 
Scientific evidence clearly shows that carbon dioxide is an essential
element not just in regulating our breathing, optimizing blood flow, and
releasing oxygen to the muscles, but also maintaining correct pH levels. In
short, our body’s relationship with carbon dioxide determines how healthy
we can be, affecting nearly every aspect of how our body functions. Better
breathing allows carbon dioxide to ensure that all the interlocking parts of
our system work together in harmony, allowing us to achieve our maximum
potential in sporting performance, endurance, and strength.
Without the requisite amount of CO2 in the blood, blood vessels
constrict and hemoglobin cannot release oxygen into the bloodstream;
without the requisite amount of oxygen, working muscles do not perform as
effectively as they should. We become breathless, or hit a wall in our
capabilities. It becomes a cycle: It’s not just the breathless exertion that
leads to panting. It’s the panting that leads to breathless exertion. In the
chapters to come, you’ll learn how to break this cycle and build a new,
positive one.
Eliminating overbreathing is the key to harnessing the potential of the
CO2 you already have inside you. Knowing how your respiratory system
--- END PAGE 35 ---

--- PAGE 36 ---
works is the first step in this empowering process, as it was for Alison, an
amateur athlete who was an avid cyclist.
I met Alison when she was thirty-seven years old, and she had been
cycling seriously since her late teens. She trained two to three times each
week without fail, cycling up to 37 miles during each session. Cycling
allowed Alison to have her own time, to leave her thoughts and worries
behind, and to get out into nature and feel the breeze on her face.
Despite her years of regular training, Alison was experiencing excessive
breathlessness and a desperate need for air even while cycling at a moderate
pace. During her long rides, she often experienced light-headedness and
nausea, requiring her to get off her bike and wait for a few minutes by the
side of the road to recover. Sometimes this problem was so severe that she
felt like throwing up or fainting. Given her dedication to her training, she
didn’t understand why she wasn’t in better condition, like her more fit
cycling companions.
These bouts of nauseous dizziness continued, so Alison visited her
doctor and then a specialist. They both ruled out asthma and any heart
problems, giving her a clean bill of health. But the problem didn’t resolve
itself, and Alison’s anxiety grew. She knew something was wrong, even
though the medical tests and examinations revealed nothing.
A local sports coach put Alison in touch with me, and I immediately
recognized signs of habitual mouth breathing, including excessive breathing
movements from the upper chest. She sighed regularly and often felt short
of air. Her bad breathing occurred not just while exercising, but in her
everyday life, so she had created a self-reinforcing cycle that severely
limited her abilities. While most health professionals would not give a
moment’s thought to Alison’s breath, I was in no doubt that better breathing
was the answer to her problem.
Alison was enormously relieved when I made her aware of her
overbreathing habit as the root of her symptoms. She understood
straightaway that if she was breathing too much during her everyday
activities, then it stood to reason that her breathing would increase
proportionately during sports, leading to excessive breathlessness. As is the
case with many people, and not just athletes like Alison, overbreathing had
thrown off her whole system. By losing the carbon dioxide her body so
badly needed in order to send oxygen to her heart, other muscles, lungs, and
--- END PAGE 36 ---

--- PAGE 37 ---
head, she had hamstrung her own abilities. The breathlessness caused by
mouth breathing had created a vicious cycle in which Alison felt the need to
take in larger breaths to cope, resulting in a breathing volume that was even
further increased.
Following two weeks of practicing the various exercises in this book,
Alison reduced her breathlessness, and her nausea and fainting stopped. Her
fitness levels and health also improved remarkably; she felt calmer, slept
better, and had more energy throughout the day. Of course, not everyone
with overbreathing experiences blackouts, as the effects of overbreathing
will depend on genetic predisposition (which we’ll discuss in chapter 13),
but in all cases there will be some negative symptoms to be found—often
unexplainable by doctors and specialists, as was the case with Alison. As
the late chest physician Claude Lum explained, breathing too much
“presents a collection of bizarre and often apparently unrelated symptoms,
which may affect any part of the body, and any organ or any system.” It’s
crucial to identify overbreathing as soon as possible, so as not to arrive at
the extreme symptons Alison found herself battling.
In the next chapter we will look at a very simple way to measure our
tolerance to carbon dioxide and relative breathing volume, and what this
means to our health and sports performance. Finally, and more important,
we will begin to learn the first steps to improving body oxygenation.
--- END PAGE 37 ---

--- PAGE 38 ---
CHAPTER 2 
How Fit Are You Really?
The Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT)
I f you took a moderately paced run alongside an elite athlete, you would
expect that his breathing would be light, rhythmic, easy, and effortless. You
certainly wouldn’t expect him to be huffing and puffing like a steam train.
In fact, studies have shown that athletes experience up to 60 percent less
breathlessness than untrained people when performing the same amount of
exercise.
It is this feeling of intense breathlessness during exercise that often
limits our ability to go faster and farther, and lighter breathing can be
extremely advantageous to improving your performance. Being able to
perform physical exercise with easy, slow breathing is not only a mark of
good fitness; it is also healthier and safer.
During strenuous physical exercise, the consumption of oxygen
increases, leading to a slightly reduced concentration of O2 in the blood. At
the same time, increased muscle activity and metabolic rate produces more
carbon dioxide, causing an increased concentration of CO2 in the blood.
As we have already explored, each breath we take is influenced by the
continuing pressure of carbon dioxide (and to a lesser extent by the pressure
of oxygen) within arterial blood vessels. When there is an increase of
carbon dioxide and a decrease of oxygen, breathing is stimulated.
A very simple way to experience the effect carbon dioxide has on our
stimulus to breathe is as follows: Gently exhale through your nose and
pinch your nose with your fingers to hold your breath. As you hold your
breath, carbon dioxide accumulates in the blood, and after a short while the
--- END PAGE 38 ---

--- PAGE 39 ---
receptors in the brain and neck signal the breathing muscles to resume
breathing to get rid of the excess. You will begin to feel these signals in the
form of contractions of the muscles in your neck and stomach, along with
an urge to take in air. Let go of your nose and resume breathing through the
nose when you feel the first messages of your body telling you to take a
breath. It’s important to bear in mind at this point that the purpose of
breathing is to get rid of the excess carbon dioxide, and not to get rid of as
much as possible. Overbreathing for a period of days and weeks, however,
removes more carbon dioxide than is necessary, increasing the sensitivity of
the brain’s receptors.
The sensitivity of your receptors to carbon dioxide and oxygen will
have implications for the way your body copes with physical exercise.
When your breathing receptors have a strong response to carbon dioxide
and reduced pressure of oxygen in the blood, your breathing will be intense
and heavy. Your body will have to work much harder to maintain this
increased breathing volume, but because overbreathing causes carbon
dioxide levels to drop, less oxygen will be delivered to working muscles.
The result? Overexertion, a disappointing performance, and possible injury.
Conversely, having a greater tolerance to carbon dioxide not only
reduces breathlessness but also allows for much more effective delivery of
oxygen to your working muscles during exercise. When breathing receptors
are less sensitive to carbon dioxide levels, you will experience a reduction
in breathlessness as your body is able to work harder with far less effort;
breathing will be lighter during both rest and physical exercise. Efficient
breathing means that fewer free radicals are produced, reducing the risk of
inflammation, tissue damage, and injury.
Free radicals (or oxidants) are formed when the oxygen we breathe is
converted into energy. During exercise, breathing markedly increases,
resulting in an increased production of free radicals. Free radicals are a part
of normal bodily function and are only of concern when there is an
imbalance between these oxidants and the antioxidants that neutralize them.
Oxidative stress occurs when there are too many free radicals in your
system; left unchecked by antioxidants, free radicals attack other cells,
causing inflammation, muscular fatigue, and overtraining.
It has been said that one of the main differences between endurance
athletes and nonathletes is their response to low pressures of oxygen
--- END PAGE 39 ---

--- PAGE 40 ---
(hypoxia) and higher levels of carbon dioxide (hypercapnia). In other
words, endurance athletes are able to tolerate a greater concentration of
carbon dioxide and lower concentration of oxygen in the blood during
exercise. Intense physical exercise results in increased consumption of
oxygen and increased production of carbon dioxide, so it is vitally
important that athletes are able to cope well with changes to these gases.
In order to attain outstanding performance during sports, it is essential
that your breathing does not react too strongly to increased concentrations
of carbon dioxide and decreased concentrations of oxygen. Over time,
intense physical training will help to condition the body to better tolerate
these changes, but a more effective method can be found in the pages of this
book. The breathing exercises outlined in the Oxygen Advantage program
can easily be incorporated into any form of exercise, no matter what your
fitness level and even if you are laid up with an injury. You can even
improve your fitness using a simple 10-minute exercise while sitting down. 
Increasing VO 2 Max 
A performance-related term you need to know is maximal oxygen uptake,
or VO2 max. This simply refers to the maximum capacity of your body to
transport and utilize oxygen in 1 minute during maximal or exhaustive
exercise. VO2 max is one factor that can determine an athlete’s capacity to
sustain physical exercise and is considered to be the best indicator of
cardiorespiratory endurance and aerobic fitness. In sports that require
exceptional endurance, such as cycling, rowing, swimming, and running,
world-class athletes typically have a high VO2 max. Furthermore, the goal
of most endurance programs is to increase VO2 max.
Studies have shown that athletic ability to perform during increased
carbon dioxide and reduced oxygen pressure corresponds to maximal
oxygen uptake. In other words, the ability to tolerate higher concentrations
of carbon dioxide in the blood means a higher VO2 max can be achieved,
culminating in better delivery and utilization of oxygen by the working
muscles.
--- END PAGE 40 ---

--- PAGE 41 ---
Without a doubt, regular physical training, correctly applied, helps to
reduce the body’s response to carbon dioxide, enabling greater exercise
intensity and improving VO2 max. During physical exercise, increased
metabolic activity produces higher levels of carbon dioxide than normal.
Over time, these raised CO2 levels condition the breathing receptors, which
results in easier, lighter breathing during exercise and better oxygenation of
the muscles. Being able to deliver oxygen more efficiently during high-
intensity exercise leads to a higher VO2 max—something most athletes
strive toward during their regular training.
In chapter 7 you will learn how to simulate high-altitude training. When
the breath is held, oxygen saturation in the blood decreases, leading to
increased production of red blood cells to offset the drop. Since red blood
cells carry oxygen, having a greater quantity in your blood will also lead to
an increase in aerobic capacity and VO2 max. Along with VO2 max,
another performance measurement that is highly regarded by athletic
coaches is running economy. This is defined by the amount of energy or
oxygen consumed while running at a speed that is less than maximum pace.
Typically, the less energy required to run at a given pace, the better—if your
body is able to use oxygen efficiently, it is indicative of a high running
economy.
There is a strong association between running economy and distance
running performance in elite runners, where running economy is regarded
as a better predictor of performance than VO2 max. For this reason, sports
scientists, coaches, and athletes are keen to apply techniques that can
improve running economy, such as strength training and high-altitude
training. However, a third and far more widely accessible method of
boosting running economy is to practice breath-hold techniques, which
have been proven to improve respiratory muscle strength and endurance.
Researchers investigating reduced breathing found that running economy
could be improved by a remarkable 6 percent following a brief course of
breath-hold training.
At this point you might be thinking that if physical training conditions
the body to tolerate higher concentrations of carbon dioxide and lower
oxygen, then why go to the bother of practicing this program? Good
--- END PAGE 41 ---

--- PAGE 42 ---
question, but in our modern world, it is literally impossible to isolate
ourselves from the factors that negatively affect breathing, and even many
highly conditioned athletes breathe too heavily during rest; their inhalations
and exhalations are noticeable and often from the upper chest. They may
perform brilliantly, but they could be performing even better.
It would be disingenuous to expect breathing to be efficient during sport
if breathing during times of rest is inefficient. If your breathing is wrong
during the normal course of your day, how can it be right during the hour or
two spent doing exercise? It just does not work that way. The Oxygen
Advantage program focuses on retraining us in the way we breathe during
rest and low-intensity exercise as well as moderate to high-intensity
activity. This method helps to create good habits and brings lifelong
benefits to your breathing, no matter what your level of fitness or your
preferred sport.
In the next section you can determine your sensitivity to carbon dioxide
using the Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT), which measures the length of a
comfortable breath hold. First you will learn your current condition, then
you’ll learn how the Oxygen Advantage can help you improve your sleep,
concentration, and energy levels; attain a calmer disposition; reduce
breathlessness during physical exertion; and increase that ever-coveted VO2
max. 
The Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT) 
As far back as 1975, researchers noted that the length of time of a
comfortable breath hold served as a simple test to determine relative
breathing volume during rest and breathlessness during physical exercise.
The Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT) is a very useful and accurate tool for
determining this relative breathing volume. BOLT is simple, safe, involves
no sophisticated equipment, and can be applied at any time. BOLT differs
from other breath-hold tests because it represents the length of time until
the first definite desire to breathe. Holding the breath until you feel the first
natural desire to breathe provides useful information on how soon the first
sensations of breathlessness take place and is a very useful tool for the
evaluation of breathlessness. Other breath-hold tests tend to focus on the
--- END PAGE 42 ---

--- PAGE 43 ---
maximum time you can hold your breath, but this measurement is not
objective as it can be influenced by willpower and determination.
Athletes possess bucketloads of willpower and determination, so there
is no doubt that many of us will be tempted to measure our BOLT score by
holding the breath for as long as possible. But if you are serious about
improving your breathing efficiency and VO2 max using the breath-hold
exercises in this book, I urge you to follow the instructions carefully and
measure your BOLT correctly—by holding your breath only until the first
distinct urge to breathe is felt.
In short, the lower the BOLT score, the greater the breathing volume,
and the greater your breathing volume, the more breathlessness you will
experience during exercise.
To obtain an accurate measurement, it’s best to rest for 10 minutes
before measuring your BOLT score. Read the instructions carefully first and
have a timer on hand. You can measure your BOLT now: 
1. Take a normal breath in through your nose and allow a normal
breath out through your nose. 
2. Hold your nose with your fingers to prevent air from entering
your lungs. 
3. Time the number of seconds until you feel the first definite
desire to breathe, or the first stresses of your body urging you
to breathe. These sensations may include the need to swallow
or a constriction of the airways. You may also feel the first
involuntary contractions of your breathing muscles in your
abdomen or throat as the body gives the message to resume
breathing. ( Note that BOLT is not a measurement of how long
--- END PAGE 43 ---

--- PAGE 44 ---
you can hold your breath but simply the time it takes for your
body to react to a lack of air. ) 
4. Release your nose, stop the timer, and breathe in through your
nose. Your inhalation at the end of the breath hold should be
calm. 
5. Resume normal breathing.
Please be aware of the following important points when measuring your
BOLT score:
• The breath is taken after a gentle exhalation.
• The breath is held until the breathing muscles first begin to
move. You are not measuring the maximum time that you can
hold your breath.
• If you do not feel the first involuntary movements of your
breathing muscles, then release your nose when you feel the
first definite urge or first distinct stress to resume breathing.
• The BOLT is not an exercise to correct your breathing.
• Remember that measuring your BOLT involves holding your
breath only until you feel the first involuntary movements of
your breathing muscles. If you need to take a big breath at the
end of the breath hold, then you have held your breath for too
long. 
How the Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT) Works 
When you hold your breath, you prevent oxygen from entering your lungs
and prevent carbon dioxide from being expelled into the atmosphere. As the
breath hold continues, carbon dioxide accumulates in the lungs and blood
while oxygen levels slightly decrease. Since carbon dioxide is the primary
--- END PAGE 44 ---

--- PAGE 45 ---
stimulus for breathing, the length of your breath-hold time is influenced by
how much carbon dioxide you are able to tolerate, or your ventilatory
response to carbon dioxide.
A strong ventilatory response to carbon dioxide means that your
threshold will be reached sooner, resulting in a lower breath-hold time.
Conversely, a good tolerance and reduced ventilatory response to carbon
dioxide results in a higher breath-hold time.
When your BOLT score is lower, your breathing receptors are especially
sensitive to carbon dioxide, and your breathing volume will be greater as
the lungs work to remove any carbon dioxide in excess of programmed
levels. However, when you have a normal tolerance to carbon dioxide and a
higher BOLT score, you will be able to maintain calm breathing during rest
and lighter breathing during physical exercise.
You may find that the first time you measure your BOLT score, you are
surprised that your score is lower than expected—but remember that even
elite athletes can have a low BOLT score! The good news is that your
BOLT score can easily be increased with a series of simple breathing
exercises incorporated into your existing way of life or exercise regimen. A
common starting BOLT score for an individual who exercises regularly at a
moderate intensity will be approximately 20 seconds. If your BOLT score is
below 20 seconds, depending on genetic predisposition, you will probably
find you experience a blocked nose, coughing, wheezing, disrupted sleep,
snoring, fatigue, and excessive breathlessness during physical exercise.
Each time that your BOLT score increases by 5 seconds, you will feel
better, with more energy and reduced breathlessness during physical
exercise. The aim of the Oxygen Advantage program is to increase your
BOLT score to 40 seconds, and this can be realistically achieved.
Improving your BOLT score is an important key to attaining greater
physical endurance. As we have already seen, having an improved tolerance
to carbon dioxide means you are able to achieve a higher VO2 max and
improved performance. The Oxygen Advantage program is all about
increasing your BOLT score and maximizing your potential! 
How Your BOLT Score Relates to Breathlessness During
Sports
--- END PAGE 45 ---

--- PAGE 46 ---
The ideal BOLT score for a healthy individual is 40 seconds. In the book
entitled Exercise Physiology: Nutrition, Energy, and Human Performance 
by William McArdle and colleagues, the authors observe: “If a person
breath holds after a normal exhalation, it takes approximately 40 seconds
before the urge to breathe increases enough to initiate inspiration.”
What is accepted in theory is not always evident in practice. The truth is
that the vast majority of individuals, including athletes, have a comfortable
breath-hold time of about 20 seconds, often less. However, to achieve your
full potential, a BOLT score of 40 seconds should be the goal.
Breath-hold measurements have also been used to study the onset and
endurance of breathlessness (dyspnea) and asthma symptoms. The result
that comes up again and again is that the lower the breath-hold time, the
greater the likelihood of breathlessness, coughing, and wheezing during
both rest and exercise.
Over the past thirteen years I have worked with thousands of children
and adults with asthma. Although breath-hold time is not generally used by
doctors to evaluate asthma severity, it is an excellent measurement to
evaluate respiratory condition and symptoms such as coughing, wheezing,
chest tightness, breathlessness, and exercise-induced asthma. If you
experience breathlessness or asthma symptoms when you exercise, you may
find that your athletic performance is limited and hampered by your
condition. By implementing the Oxygen Advantage program and tracking
your progress with your BOLT score, you will be able to quickly and easily
improve your performance and eliminate symptoms of exercise-induced
asthma. The overall goal of the Oxygen Advantage program is to increase
your BOLT score to over 40 seconds, but every time you improve your
BOLT score by 5 seconds you will find that symptoms such as coughing,
wheezing, chest tightness, and breathlessness reduce drastically. More on
eliminating exercise-induced asthma can be found in chapter 12. 
BOLT Score and Breathing Volume 
At this point, it can be useful to perform the following experiment:
• Sit down with a pen and paper.
--- END PAGE 46 ---

--- PAGE 47 ---
• Bring your attention to your breathing and follow both the rate
and depth of each breath.
• As you observe your breathing, draw the rate and depth across
the sheet of paper.
• Do this for about half a minute or so, then check how your
drawing relates to your BOLT score and the illustrations on the
following page.
The following image is an example of the relationship between
breathing volume and a BOLT score of 10 seconds. 
When a BOLT score is 10 seconds, breathing is noisy, loud, irregular,
large, heavy, erratic, and effortful, with no natural pauses between breaths.
If your BOLT score is 10 seconds or less, you will often experience a
hunger for air, even when you are just sitting down. Habitual upper-chest
breathing and mouth breathing is also expected. The number of breaths
during rest per minute can be anything from 15 to 30 breaths.
--- END PAGE 47 ---

--- PAGE 48 ---
When a BOLT score is 20 seconds, breathing is heavy but regular. Both
the rate and size of each breath is less than when a BOLT score is 10
seconds. A natural pause of between 1 and 2 seconds occurs at the end of
each exhalation. The number of breaths per minute during rest will vary
from between 15 and 20 moderately sized breaths. 
When a BOLT score is 30 seconds, breathing is calm, gentle, soft,
effortless, and quiet. The rate and size of each breath continue to reduce as a
BOLT score increases. The natural pause between each breath lengthens.
The number of breaths during rest per minute will be about 10 to 15
minimal breaths.
--- END PAGE 48 ---

--- PAGE 49 ---
When a BOLT score is 40 seconds, breathing is effortless, calm, gentle,
quiet, soft, and minimal. At a BOLT score of 40 seconds, it is difficult to
see breathing movements. The natural pause between each breath is
generally about 4 to 5 seconds. The number of breaths during rest per
minute varies from 6 to 10 minimal breaths. 
BOLT and Sports Performance 
During physical exercise, breathing volume increases, but so too does
production of carbon dioxide. When your BOLT score is higher than 30
seconds, there is a reasonable match between the production of carbon
dioxide from increased muscle movement and the elimination of it by
breathing. A BOLT score of between 20 and 30 seconds indicates that there
is room for improvement. However, a problem arises when a BOLT score is
less than 20 seconds, as excessive breathing will eliminate more carbon
dioxide than the amount that is produced through exercise, leading to a net
loss of CO2, reduced oxygen delivery, and constriction of blood vessels and
airways. The result is poor sports performance and a variety of negative
implications for your overall health.
A general rule for the relationship between BOLT scores and breathing
volume is as follows: The lower the BOLT score, the poorer the match
between breathing volume and metabolic activity, hence the need to control
breathing during rest and physical exercise. The closer the BOLT score is to
40 seconds, the better the match between breathing volume and metabolic
requirements. When your breathing volume matches the amount of carbon
--- END PAGE 49 ---

--- PAGE 50 ---
dioxide produced, it will be much easier to exercise at a higher intensity
while still retaining a calm and even breathing pattern.
As it can be difficult for children and teenagers to correctly apply the
BOLT, progress can be measured by counting how many paces that they are
able to hold their breath while walking. This is explained in more detail in
the Oxygen Advantage program for children and teenagers on page 286.
At the beginning of this chapter I made the claim that Oxygen
Advantage breathing exercises—even those that are practiced while sitting
down—are guaranteed to increase your BOLT score. People with a BOLT
score of less than 15 seconds are often put off from doing physical exercise
due to excessive breathlessness. However, by starting with gentle reduced
breathing exercises that can be performed while sitting down or walking
slowly, even those with low BOLT scores can significantly improve their
endurance and breathing efficiency in the space of just a few weeks. Once
your BOLT score is greater than 20 seconds, you will be able to partake in
physical exercise and continue to improve your score with more advanced
breathing exercises.
Any athlete can learn the tools to tap into the body’s own natural
resources in order to train faster, exercise more intensively, and enjoy better
improvements to his or her health. And if you are a coach, knowing the
BOLT score of each of your players will help you to provide feedback on
their ability to perform. As they say, knowledge is power; understanding
your body’s athletic capabilities will enable you to push harder and compete
to the best of your abilities. 
Three Steps to Increasing Your BOLT Score 
The exercises in this book will guide you through each stage of your
journey to improved breathing, fitness, and endurance. Below is a brief
guide to each of the three steps to increasing your BOLT score: 
1. Stop Losses of Carbon Dioxide 
• Breathe through your nose, day and night.
--- END PAGE 50 ---

--- PAGE 51 ---
• Stop sighing; instead, swallow or suppress the sigh. One sigh
taken every few minutes is enough to maintain chronic
overbreathing, so it is necessary to counteract the sigh by
swallowing or holding the breath. If you notice your sighs only
after they have taken place, then hold your breath for 10 to 15
seconds to help compensate for the loss of carbon dioxide.
• Avoid taking big breaths when yawning or talking. Individuals
with a low BOLT score are often tired, and yawn frequently
throughout the day. Try not to take in a large breath during a
yawn. Likewise, individuals who talk for a living need to be
aware that their breathing should not be heard during talking. If
you find that you can hear your breathing during talking, then it
is better to slow down the speed of your talking, use shorter
sentences, and take a gentle breath through your nose between
each sentence.
• Observe your breathing throughout the day. Good breathing
during rest should not be seen or heard. 
2. Improve Tolerance of Carbon Dioxide 
This is where you practice exercises designed to reduce your breathing
volume toward normal. They will bring a feeling of relaxation to your body
and encourage your breathing to slow down and become calmer. The
objective is to create a tolerable need or hunger for air. A sustained need for
air over the course of 10 to 12 minutes resets the receptors in the brain to
tolerate a higher concentration of carbon dioxide.
Steps 1 and 2 are necessary to increase BOLT score from 10 to 20
seconds. 
3. Simulate High-Altitude Training 
During physical exertion, as discussed, breathing volume increases
along with metabolic activity, which generates carbon dioxide. Breathing
less than you feel you need to during physical training is an excellent
--- END PAGE 51 ---

--- PAGE 52 ---
method of conditioning the body to tolerate a higher concentration of
carbon dioxide, while at the same time subjecting the body to a reduced
concentration of oxygen.
The benefit of implementing Oxygen Advantage breathing techniques
during physical exercise is that a stronger air shortage can be created than at
rest. A strong air shortage is necessary to increase your BOLT score from
20 to 40 seconds.
Please note the following important points about increasing your BOLT
score:
• You will feel better each time your BOLT score increases by 5
seconds.
• The general progression is for a BOLT score to increase by 3 to
4 seconds during the first 2 to 3 weeks. When your BOLT score
reaches 20 seconds, it is normal for the progression of your
BOLT increase to slow down. It is not uncommon for a BOLT
score to remain “stuck” at 20 seconds for 8 to 10 weeks. In
order to increase a BOLT score from 20 to 40 seconds, it is
necessary to perform physical exercise while incorporating the
techniques in this book. Be determined, and don’t lose heart if
your BOLT score is stubborn or lessens temporarily!
Meanwhile, you’ll enjoy the benefits you’ve already gained
from getting to 20 seconds in the first place.
• The causes for slow BOLT score progress include lifestyle
factors, such as stress and excessive talking, and sickness. The
severity and duration of a health condition will dictate the rate
of your BOLT progress, but whatever your current state of
health, there are always exercises that can be performed to keep
you moving forward. It is worth persevering, as there are many
health benefits related to even a slight improvement to your
BOLT score.
• The most accurate BOLT score is taken first thing after waking.
This BOLT measurement is more accurate because you cannot
--- END PAGE 52 ---

--- PAGE 53 ---
influence your breathing during sleep, and therefore an early
morning score will be based on your breathing volume as
naturally set by your respiratory center.
• Your goal is to maintain a morning BOLT score of 40 seconds
for a period of 6 months. As modern living can negatively
affect BOLT scores, it is necessary to pay attention to breathing
throughout the day, ensuring it is light and through the nose,
and to incorporate the Oxygen Advantage program into your
physical exercise and way of life. This will help you maintain a
high BOLT score.
Below are suggested exercises as based on your BOLT score (a more
detailed program is available on page 267): 
BOLT score of 10 seconds or under: 
• Breathing Recovery Exercise to unblock the nose
• Nose-breathe at all times
• Avoiding sighing and taking big breaths
• Breathe Light to Breathe Right during rest
• Breathing Recovery Exercise 
BOLT score of 10 to 20 seconds: 
• Nose unblocking exercise
• Nose-breathe at all times
• Avoiding sighing and taking big breaths
• Breathe Light to Breathe Right during rest and physical
exercise 
BOLT score of 20 to 30 seconds: 
• Nose unblocking exercise
• Nose-breathe at all times
--- END PAGE 53 ---

--- PAGE 54 ---
• Breathe Light to Breathe Right during rest and physical
exercise
• Simulate High-Altitude Training during a fast walk or jog 
BOLT score of 30 seconds or greater: 
• Nose-breathe at all times
• Breathe Light to Breathe Right during rest and physical
exercise
• Simulate High-Altitude Training during jogging or running
• Advanced Simulation of High-Altitude Training
To reiterate: If you have any health problems or a BOLT score shorter
than 10 seconds, please do not attempt breath holds involving a strong need
for air, as the resultant loss of control of your breathing may aggravate your
condition. Please do not attempt the nose unblocking exercise or any of the
exercises to simulate high-altitude training unless you have a BOLT score
longer than 10 seconds. It is also advised to have a BOLT score of at least
20 seconds before attempting breath holding during jogging or running. 
Body Detoxification 
When you undergo the Oxygen Advantage program, you may experience a
body detoxification. The extent of the detoxification will depend on your
BOLT score and state of health. In general, the higher your BOLT score and
the healthier you are, the less likely you will experience a detoxification.
On the other hand, if you have a low BOLT result and have been feeling
unwell for years, you are much more likely to experience a detoxification.
Remember that changing your breathing volume toward normal improves
blood flow and oxygenation of all tissues and organs. With better-
functioning organs and systems, waste products are expelled more readily.
It is great news if you do experience a detoxification, as it shows your
health is improving, and you should clearly feel the benefits. Generally,
cleansing reactions are mild and last from several hours to one or two days.
Typical detoxification symptoms may include:
--- END PAGE 54 ---

--- PAGE 55 ---
• Increased demand for water
• Loss of appetite
• Bad taste in the mouth
• Increased moodiness
• Short-term headache
• Increased secretions of mucus from the lungs by people with
asthma
• Head cold with runny nose, especially during physical exercise
• Diarrhea
An integral part of detoxification is a reduced appetite for food, so it’s
important to only eat when hungry. To help reduce the intensity and
duration of any cleansing reactions, drink warm water regularly throughout
the day and continue with reduced breathing exercises.
In the next section we will begin the first step to improving your BOLT
score: nasal breathing. We will look at the functions of the nose, how to
decongest it, and learn what nasal breathing offers for health, sports . . . and
in the bedroom.
--- END PAGE 55 ---

--- PAGE 56 ---
CHAPTER 3 
Noses Are for Breathing,
Mouths Are for Eating
I n order to address breathing volume and increase BOLT score, the first
step is to go back to basics and learn to breathe through the nose both day
and night. As any child is aware, our nose is made for breathing, the mouth
for eating. You were born breathing through your nose, and it has been our
primary conduit for breathing for hundreds of thousands of years.
It was only when our ancient ancestors were in dangerous situations that
they reverted to mouth breathing to take in greater volumes of air in
preparation for intense physical activity.
It is for this reason that mouth breathing is synonymous with
emergency, activating the same fight-or-flight response that our ancestors
experienced but these days usually without the accompanying physical
exercise to allow our operating systems to revert to normal. From the
perspective of breathing physiology, mouth breathing activates use of the
upper chest, while nasal breathing results in abdominal breathing. You can
verify the difference by sitting in front of a mirror and placing one hand on
your chest and one hand above your navel. Once settled, take a moderate-
size breath in through your mouth and note the movements of your hands.
Next, compare your breathing movements to a similar size breath drawn in
through your nose.
Upper-chest breathing is more likely to be associated with a stress
response, while nasal breathing helps ensure regular, calm, steady breathing
using the diaphragm. The common misconception of taking a “deep” breath
is to puff out the chest and raise the shoulders, but this is neither deep nor
beneficial to oxygenating the body. To help deal with stress, the instruction
--- END PAGE 56 ---

--- PAGE 57 ---
to take a deep breath is actually correct, but a truly deep breath is
abdominal, gentle and quiet; the exact opposite of the big breaths usually
taken in an attempt to calm down.
Mouth breathing activates the upper chest, involves larger breaths, and
may cause reduced oxygen uptake in the arterial blood. It is no wonder that
habitual mouth breathers often suffer from poor energy, a lack of
concentration, and moodiness. We all know the stereotype of the mouth
breather, portrayed by moviemakers from Hollywood to Bollywood as an
idiot. But in case you think I am being unduly critical, I was a mouth
breather for more than twenty years, so I know all too well the effects.
Furthermore, every time I look in the mirror I see the results from my years
of mouth breathing. Dentists and orthodontists have also documented these
profound facial changes as a result of habitual mouth breathing: narrow
jaws, crooked teeth, sunken cheekbones, and smaller nasal cavities. While
orthodontic treatment and the wearing of braces are epidemic among
modern-day teenagers, it was normal for our ancestors to have wide faces
with perfectly shaped teeth.
In the 1930s, a dentist by the name of Dr. Weston Price investigated the
cause of facial changes and crooked teeth in various countries and
civilizations. One of his observations while visiting Gaelic people living on
the Hebridean islands off the coast of Scotland was that children became
mouth breathers after parents switched from their natural diet of seafood
and oatmeal to the modernized diet of “angel food cake, white bread and
many white flour commodities, marmalade, canned vegetables, sweetened
fruit juices, jams, and confections.”
Dr. Price’s discovery illustrates the link between modern diet and
chronic hyperventilation. Processed foods are mucus and acid forming.
Throughout evolution, our diet consisted of 95 percent alkaline-forming and
5 percent acid-forming foods. Nowadays the reverse is true: Our diet is 95
percent acid- and 5 percent alkaline-forming foods. Acid-forming foods—
such as processed products, dairy, meat, bread, sugar, coffee, and tea—
stimulate breathing. A natural response to experiencing a greater demand to
breathe is to open the mouth to take in more air. Over time, the brain adjusts
to this larger intake of air, and overbreathing becomes a habit.
On the other hand, alkaline-forming foods such as fruit and vegetables,
along with plain water, are easy for the body to process; they are
--- END PAGE 57 ---

--- PAGE 58 ---
“breathing-friendly” foods. But while these types of foods are highly
beneficial, I’m not saying you need to become a vegetarian. Protein is an
essential part of a healthy diet, and meat provides a natural, nutrient-rich
source. The most important change is to get rid of processed foods in your
diet. They may take up the most space in our supermarkets, but they are
effectively suitable food for no one.
The nose is one of the most important organs in the human body. In his
nineteenth-century travels in North America, the artist George Catlin
noticed that the Native American mothers paid a lot of attention to their
infants’ breathing. If at any time the baby opened its mouth to breathe, the
mother would gently press the baby’s lips together to ensure continued
nasal breathing. Catlin also noted that the rate of sickness and illness among
the native Indian people was very low in comparison with European
settlers. In his aptly titled 1882 book Shut Your Mouth and Save Your Life, 
Catlin wrote, “When I have seen a poor Indian woman in the wilderness,
lowering her infant from the breast, and pressing its lips together as it falls
asleep . . . I have said to myself, ‘Glorious education! Such a mother
deserves to be the nurse of Emperors.’” In comparison, Catlin described
how the babies of the European settlers slept with their mouths open,
gasping for breath in stuffy, hot, and unventilated rooms.
Nasal breathing is often an integral part of an animal’s survival or
hunting techniques. The cheetah, which is considered the fastest land
animal on earth, is capable of accelerating from 0 to 60 miles per hour in
just 3 seconds. Most high-performance cars cannot accelerate so quickly,
with the notable exception of the Bugatti Veyron, which will set you back a
million dollars to experience the natural acceleration of a cheetah. With
such incredible efficiency and speed, it doesn’t take long for the cheetah to
catch up with its prey, but maintaining nasal breathing is especially
advantageous during the chase, ensuring that its victim is the first to run out
of air.
The dog is probably the best-known example of an animal that
periodically breathes through its mouth—dogs can commonly be seen
panting on a hot day or after a long walk to help cool themselves down. But
at all other times a dog will breathe through its nose, only using its mouth
for eating, drinking, and barking. Nature has ensured that the vast majority
of land mammals breathe through their noses by positioning the windpipe
--- END PAGE 58 ---

--- PAGE 59 ---
so that the back of the nose leads directly to the lungs. In other words, it is
not easy for most animals to breathe through their mouths.
The same is true for humans at birth, but after a few months the
windpipe drops down to just below the back of the tongue in order to allow
the baby to breathe through both its mouth and nose. Charles Darwin was
puzzled by this adaptation in humans: how, unlike most animals, the
openings for carrying food to the stomach and air to the lungs are placed
side by side. This parallel position seems fairly impractical, as it increases
the risk of food going down the wrong way, requiring the development of a
complicated swallowing mechanism. The cause for this is likely to do with
our ability to speak and to enable us to swim, since both actions require
voluntary control over breathing. Had Darwin investigated the negative
impact of mouth breathing in human beings, however, I have no doubt that
he would have considered the ability to mouth breathe to be a far worse
flaw in the evolution of our species than the risk of choking while eating.
The rest of the animal kingdom relies on nasal breathing for survival,
and mouth breathing usually only occurs as an adaptation within a species.
Birds, for example, are predominantly nose breathers, aside from diving
birds such as penguins, pelicans, or gannets. Generally, when an animal
breathes through its mouth it is a sign of sickness, injury, or distress. Guinea
pigs and rabbits will continue to breathe through their noses even under
heavy exertion and will only breathe through their mouths if they have
developed a breathing abnormality. The same goes for all farm animals,
including the cow, sheep, donkey, goat, and horse. Mouth breathing in these
animals would be a clear signal to a farmer or pet owner that there is
something wrong. Experience tells the farmer that when a cow or sheep
stands motionless with its neck extended and mouth open, it is very sick—
time to call the vet.
When it comes to the importance of breathing through the nose, there is
no distinction between prey and predator. Nasal breathing is especially
advantageous for horses and deer, since it allows them to graze and breathe
at the same time, while their sense of smell alerts them of approaching
predators. I, on the other hand, as a habitual mouth breather, was
admonished as a child for chewing with my mouth open—much to the
dismay of my well-mannered table companions. Unlike the horse, I could
not eat and breathe through my nose at the same time. And, unlike the
--- END PAGE 59 ---

--- PAGE 60 ---
horse, I found myself completely out of breath after attempting even light
exercise—meanwhile, spend a day at the horse track and you will witness
these majestic animals running at speeds of up to thirty miles per hour while
maintaining nose breathing.
To get an idea of the size of the nasal cavity, run your tongue from the
front of the roof of your mouth right back as far as it will go. You may be
surprised to learn that the roof of the mouth is in fact the floor of the nose!
The nose you see on your face comprises approximately 30 percent of its
volume. It is the tip of the iceberg, so to speak, with the remaining 70
percent of the nasal cavity set deep within the skull. Nature is intelligent
and does not waste space; evolution has determined the importance of the
nose by the amount of space it occupies within the skull.
As air enters through the nose, it is swirled through scrolled, spongy
bones called turbinates, which condition and guide inhaled air into a steady,
regular pattern. The internal nose, with its cul de sacs, valves, and
turbinates, regulates the direction and velocity of the air to maximize
exposure to a network of small arteries and veins and to the mucous blanket
in order to warm, humidify, and sterilize the air before it is drawn to the
lungs. The late Dr. Maurice Cottle, who founded the American Rhinologic
Society in 1954, stated that the nose performs at least thirty functions, all of
which are important supplements to the roles played by the lungs, heart, and
other organs. The large amount of space in the skull devoted to the nasal
cavity provides an indication of the importance of the functions of the nose.
To attain a higher BOLT score and improved sports performance, it is
imperative that nasal breathing is practiced at all times during rest. If your
BOLT score is less than 20 seconds, the only way to avoid overbreathing
during exercise is to breathe through the nose at all times, even while
training. An exception to nasal breathing can be made for a short period of
time during intensive physical exercise, but this kind of training should only
be attempted when your BOLT score is greater than 20 seconds. 
The Nose—A Most Important Organ 
In the yoga book The Science of Breath, written over a century ago, Yogi
Ramacharaka said this about nostril versus mouth breathing: “One of the
--- END PAGE 60 ---

--- PAGE 61 ---
first lessons in the Yogi Science of Breath is to learn how to breathe through
the nostrils, and to overcome the common practice of mouth breathing.” It
seems that little has changed over the past hundred years—if anything, the
prevalence of mouth breathing has increased. Extolling the benefits of nasal
breathing, Yogi Ramacharaka surmises that “many of the diseases to which
civilized man is subject are undoubtedly caused by this common habit of
mouth breathing.” Below is a brief list of the functions of nasal breathing:
• Nose breathing imposes approximately 50 percent more
resistance to the airstream in normal individuals than does
mouth breathing, resulting in 10 to 20 percent more O2 uptake.
• Nasal breathing warms and humidifies incoming air. (Air
entering the nose at 42.8 ̊F/6 ̊C will be warmed to 86 ̊F/30 ̊C
by the time it touches the back of the throat, and a cozy
98.6 ̊F/37 ̊C—body temperature—upon reaching its final
destination, the lungs.)
• Nasal breathing removes a significant amount of germs and
bacteria from the air you breathe in.
• Nasal breathing during physical exercise allows for a work
intensity great enough to produce an aerobic training effect as
based on heart rate and percentage of VO2 max.
• As discussed in the next section, the nose is a reservoir for
nitric oxide, an essential gas for the maintenance of good
health.
Now compare the benefits above with the effects of mouth breathing:
• Mouth-breathing children are at greater risk of developing
forward head posture, and reduced respiratory strength.
• Breathing through the mouth contributes to general dehydration
(mouth breathing during sleep results in waking up with a dry
--- END PAGE 61 ---

--- PAGE 62 ---
mouth).
• A dry mouth also increases acidification of the mouth and
results in more dental cavities and gum disease.
• Mouth breathing causes bad breath due to altered bacterial
flora.
• Breathing through the mouth has been proven to significantly
increase the number of occurrences of snoring and obstructive
sleep apnea. 
The Nose: A Great Source for Nitric Oxide 
Until the 1980s the gas nitric oxide (NO) was considered a toxic substance,
causing smog and producing harmful effects in the environment. When the
first article appeared discussing the importance of nitric oxide, the scientific
community found it difficult to conceive that a gas so toxic outside of the
body could play such a highly important role within it. And although nitric
oxide is a relative newcomer to the field of medicine, there are now over
one hundred thousand research papers devoted to this gas, providing an
insight into how it has captured the attention of doctors and scientists alike.
In 1992, nitric oxide was proclaimed Molecule of the Year by the
journal Science and was described as a startlingly simple molecule that
unites neuroscience, physiology, and immunology and revises scientists’
understanding of how cells communicate and defend themselves.
In 1998, Robert F. Furchgott, Louis J. Ignarro, and Ferid Murad were
awarded the Nobel Prize for their discovery that the gas nitric oxide is an
important signaling molecule in the cardiovascular system. When I first
began to read about the benefits of nitric oxide, I was astounded as to how
one simple gas could influence all major systems and organs, help keep us
free from disease including cancer, promote a longer life, and even perform
better in bed.
Strangely, despite these life-changing attributes, it seems that few
people outside of the field of medicine are aware of this gas and its
tremendous benefits to health. Of the hundreds of people I have spoken to
--- END PAGE 62 ---

--- PAGE 63 ---
with high blood pressure, poor cardiovascular health, asthma, and other
ailments, not one of them was aware of the importance of nitric oxide.
When it comes to nasal breathing and breath-hold exercises, nitric oxide
plays an important role. Nitric oxide is produced inside the nasal cavity and
the lining of the thousands of miles of blood vessels throughout the body.
Scientific findings have shown that this extraordinary molecule is
released in the nasal airways and transferred to the lower airways and lungs
through nasal breathing. In the respected medical journal Thorax, 
researchers Jon Lundberg and Eddie Weitzberg from the world-famous
Karolinska Institute in Sweden state, “Nitric oxide (NO) is released in the
nasal airways in humans. During inspiration through the nose, this NO will
follow the airstream to the lower airways and the lungs.”
Recognizing the importance of the role of nitric oxide in oxygenation of
the body, Dr. Mehmet Oz recommends inhaling from the diaphragm as it
“brings nitric oxide from the back of your nose and your sinuses into your
lungs. This short-lived gas dilates the air passages in your lungs and does
the same to the blood vessels.”
Nasal breathing is imperative for harnessing the benefits of nitric oxide,
working hand in hand with abdominal breathing and helping to maximize
body oxygenation. Think of the nose as a reservoir: Each time we breathe
gently and slowly through the nose, we carry this mighty molecule into the
lungs and blood, where it can do its work throughout the body. Mouth
breathing bypasses this special gas, missing out on the important
advantages that nitric oxide provides for general well-being.
Nitric oxide plays an important role in vasoregulation (the opening and
closing of blood vessels), homeostasis (the way in which the body
maintains a state of stable physiological balance in order to stay alive),
neurotransmission (the messaging system within the brain), immune
defense, and respiration. It helps to prevent high blood pressure, lower
cholesterol, keep the arteries young and flexible, and prevent the clogging
of arteries with plaque and clots. All these benefits reduce your risk of heart
attack and stroke—two of the top three killers in America.
As we age, blood vessels lose flexibility and reduce blood circulation
throughout the body. It is no coincidence, therefore, that as men grow older,
conditions related to reduced blood flow—including erectile dysfunction—
become more prevalent. The potency of nitric oxide in opening blood
--- END PAGE 63 ---

--- PAGE 64 ---
vessels becomes clear when you realize that this simple gas plays a
significant role in erection of the penis. This discovery, in fact, led to the
production in 1998 of Viagra, a very popular drug that received thousands
of hours of free media time and generated sales of billions of dollars for the
manufacturer, Pfizer.
There are many causes of habitual mouth breathing, including swelling
of the tissue in the nose to form nasal polyps. In a study of a group of thirty-
three men with nasal polyps, the authors found that erectile dysfunction was
significantly higher in this group. Furthermore, when the men underwent
surgery to remove the polyps and allow restoration of nose breathing,
erectile dysfunction was significantly ameliorated.
And women can benefit from nitric oxide in this way too, as the gas
plays a similar role in the female genitalia, helping to increase libido. Could
it be that nose breathers have more desire and better sex lives than mouth
breathers?
In addition to improving your sex life, this unique gas also acts as a
defense mechanism against microorganisms through its antiviral and
antimicrobial activity, potentially reducing the risk of illness and improving
overall health.
Most important for athletes wishing to optimize their sports
performance, nitric oxide plays a central role in dilating the smooth muscle
layer embedded in the airways. Open airways allow for a better transfer of
oxygen to and from the lungs during exercise, while tight airways create an
uncomfortable and inefficient experience that ultimately affects
performance.
The production of nitric oxide in the nasal sinuses can be increased by
simply humming. In an article published in the American Journal of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Doctors Weitzberg and Lundberg
described how humming increased nitric oxide up to fifteenfold in
comparison with quiet exhalation. They concluded that humming causes a
dramatic increase in sinus ventilation and nasal nitric oxide release.
With this knowledge, it comes as no surprise that humming is also
practiced during certain meditation techniques. The breathwork technique
called Brahmari involves slow, deep breaths through the nose, humming on
each exhalation to generate a sound similar to a bee buzzing, and while the
exact science may have been a mystery to the creators of this meditation
--- END PAGE 64 ---

--- PAGE 65 ---
method, the associated feeling of calmness of the mind is a clear indication
of its benefit. 
Nose Unblocking Exercise 
Breathing through the mouth causes blood vessels in the nose to become
inflamed and enlarged. This, along with an increased secretion of mucus,
creates the uncomfortable feeling of nasal stuffiness. When the nose
becomes blocked it is much more difficult to breathe through it, thus
perpetuating the habit of breathing through the mouth. Continued mouth
breathing results in a more permanent state of nasal congestion, thus
completing the vicious circle.
Nasal obstruction is one of the main symptoms of rhinitis and affects
many people throughout the Western world on a daily basis. The most
common treatments include the avoidance of triggers (such as pollen) and
the use of decongestants, nasal steroid sprays, antihistimines, or allergy
shots, but while these offer symptomatic benefits, they are effective only as
long as treatment continues.
A number of years ago, ear, nose, and throat specialist Professor John
Fenton from the University of Limerick took an interest in my work after
his patients reported a significant reduction in their nasal symptoms
following attendance of my course. At his behest, a study was
commissioned to further investigate the effects of reduced breathing. The
results were an amazing 70 percent reduction of symptoms such as nasal
stuffiness, poor sense of smell, snoring, trouble breathing through the nose,
trouble sleeping, and having to breathe through the mouth.
On the following page is one of the exercises that I taught to
participants in the study. (Please do not practice this exercise if your BOLT
score is less than 10 seconds, or if you have high blood pressure or other
cardiovascular issues, diabetes, or pregnancy, or have any other serious
health concerns.) Like all breathing exercises, the Nose Unblocking
Exercise should not be practiced right after eating.
--- END PAGE 65 ---

--- PAGE 66 ---
Nose Unblocking Exercise 
• Take a small, silent breath in through your nose and a small,
silent breath out through your nose.
• Pinch your nose with your fingers to hold your breath.
• Walk as many paces as possible with your breath held. Try to
build up a medium to strong air shortage, without overdoing it.
• When you resume breathing, do so only through your nose. Try
to calm your breathing immediately.
• After resuming your breathing, your first breath will probably
be bigger than normal. Make sure that you calm your breathing
as soon as possible by suppressing your second and third
breaths.
• You should be able to recover normal breathing within 2 or 3
breaths. If your breathing is erratic or heavier than usual, you
have held your breath for too long.
• Wait 1 or 2 minutes before repeating the breath hold.
--- END PAGE 66 ---

--- PAGE 67 ---
• In order to prepare yourself for the longer breath holds, go easy
for the first few repetitions, increasing your paces each time.
• Repeat for a total of 6 breath holds, creating a fairly strong need
for air.
Generally, this exercise will unblock the nose, even if you have a head
cold. However, as soon as the effects of the breath hold wear off, the nose
will likely feel blocked again. By gradually increasing the number of steps
you can take with your breath held, you will find the results continue to
improve. When you are able to walk a total of 80 paces with the breath
held, your nose will remain decongested. Eighty paces is actually a very
achievable goal, and you can expect to progress by an additional ten paces
per week.
Each week I teach this exercise to groups of five- to ten-year-old
children, many of whom have pretty serious breathing difficulties. Within 2
or 3 weeks, most children are able to walk 60 paces with their breath held,
with some children quickly achieving up to 80 paces. Try it yourself, and
see how you do.
If you regularly suffer from nasal congestion, you should soon find it
much easier to breathe through your nose by practicing this exercise. No
longer will you require over-the-counter nasal decongestants,
antihistamines, or nasal steroids!
By holding your breath, you sharply increase the concentration of nitric
oxide in your nasal cavity, resulting in dilation of the nasal passages and
smooth, easy nasal breathing once more.
As you move on to the breathing exercises in the next chapter, your
ability to hold your breath will improve, resulting in even greater nasal
freedom. 
Nasal Breathing at Night 
The ideal amount of sleep required each night varies from person to person.
The late British prime minister Margaret Thatcher was said to get by on just
four hours sleep, but most of us need seven or eight hours of good-quality
--- END PAGE 67 ---

--- PAGE 68 ---
sleep to set us right for the day. If we struggle to get to sleep, or if sleep is
interrupted by snoring or sleep apnea, it can be particularly hard to get up
the following morning, and a lack of sleep can severely affect
concentration, mood, and even the most basic of activities. Even if we seem
to sleep soundly the whole night through, the quality of sleep can be
reduced by mouth breathing and heavy breathing, meaning we still wake up
with a dry mouth and a feeling of lethargy.
Fifty-year-old Annette described to me how she rarely slept eight hours
continuously. Since her children were very young, her usual sleep pattern
had involved lying awake for several hours in an effort to try to fall asleep,
followed by a few hours of light sleep, waking again around 3 A.M . The next
two hours were usually spent trying to fall asleep again, resulting in
frustration and exhaustion when she finally had to get up for her day’s
work.
Just like Annette, for many years I too woke up tired and lethargic,
suffering from poor concentration throughout the day. The key to improving
the quality of my sleep was incredibly simple: All I had to do was to learn
to keep my mouth closed during sleep. Because we are unaware of how we
breathe at night, the only sure way to ensure nasal breathing is to wear light
paper tape across the lips to prevent the mouth from falling open. And this
is exactly what I instructed Annette to do. If you feel uncomfortable about
using the paper tape at night, a stop snoring strap is a good alternative and
helps to keep the lower jaw from dropping during sleep. Stop snoring straps
are commonly used by people with obstructive sleep apnea and can be
purchased from OxygenAdvantage.com.
Taping the mouth at night ensures the benefits of good breathing during
sleep, allowing you to fall asleep more quickly, stay asleep longer, and
wake feeling energized. The tape that I have found most suitable, as it is
simple to use, hypoallergenic, and light, is 3M Micropore tape, which can
be bought from most drugstores. To help make the tape easier to remove in
the morning, gently press the tape against the back of your hand a couple of
times to remove some of the glue before applying the tape to your face. All
you need to do is tear off about 4 inches/10 cm of tape, fold a tab over at
both ends to make removal easier in the morning, dry your lips, close your
mouth, and gently place the tape horizontally over the lips.
--- END PAGE 68 ---

--- PAGE 69 ---
At first, Annette was slightly nervous about using the tape, though she
was keen to try anything that might help her sleep and increase her energy
levels. Initially, she found taping her mouth to be uncomfortable, and
noticed that her breathing increased due to anxiety when she used it.
However, over the next few days she practiced wearing the tape for short
periods of 20 minutes while she went about her normal activities at home.
This helped to acclimatize her to breathing through her nose and to
overcome any fears about wearing the tape at night.
Once she was used to the feeling of taping her mouth closed, Annette
was determined to use the technique to improve her sleep quality. She went
to bed at her usual time and was surprised to find the tape to be a comfort.
As soon as she placed the tape on her mouth, it was almost like a signal to
fall asleep—which she did. That night, Annette slept more deeply than
usual, and even though she woke up without the tape on the first two days,
she felt more rested. On her third day, she went to bed wearing the tape at
10 P.M. and slept like a baby until 9:53 A.M . Annette excitedly told me that it
was the first time in years that she’d had a proper night’s sleep, and she was
amazed to feel so alert and energized when she woke up.
Over the years, I have introduced this taping method to thousands of
people with incredible results. Unless you breathe calmly through your nose
at night, you have no idea what it feels like to have a great night’s sleep.
Taping the mouth at night is a simple but very effective technique, and
while it may sound a little strange, it is well worth getting used to.
Continue to wear the tape until you have managed to change to
breathing through your nose at night. How long this takes will vary from
person to person, but in general wearing the tape for a period of around
three months is sufficient to restore nasal breathing during sleep. Breathing
through your nose will result in a naturally moist mouth when you wake up.
If your mouth is dry upon waking, you know that your mouth was open
during sleep. When a child has one eye with weaker vision, the treatment
often recommended is to temporarily cover the good eye with a patch to
train the brain to strengthen the weaker eye and restore normal vision. In
the same way, wearing tape across the lips during sleep or when alone in
your house during the day gradually trains the body to adapt to nasal
breathing both day and night. Spending a guaranteed eight hours breathing
--- END PAGE 69 ---

--- PAGE 70 ---
through your nose while you sleep is an opportune way to reeducate your
respiratory center to adjust to a more normal breathing volume.
--- END PAGE 70 ---

--- PAGE 71 ---
CHAPTER 4 
Breathe Light to Breathe Right
F or thousands of years, masters of the ancient arts of yoga, tai chi, and
qigong have espoused the importance of quiet, gentle, and light breathing. I
recently had the pleasure of meeting tai chi Master Jennifer Lee in London.
Master Lee has reached the rank of Seventh Dan and was awarded gold in
ten categories during the international 2009 Wushu Championships held in
Hong Kong and Hainan, China. As the two of us talked, Master Lee
described the similarities between her work and mine. She explained that
during tai chi tournaments, judges pay particular attention to whether they
can notice the breathing of competitors, with points being deducted when
breathing is evident.
Without knowing why, other than the fact that it has been passed down
from generation to generation, Master Lee practices a breathing exercise
that is very similar to the reduced breathing exercise we will explore further
on. It is no coincidence that Master Lee’s breathing was textbook perfect. It
was abdominal, effortless, and almost invisible to the eye. I have watched
many people breathe—thousands, in fact—and without doubt, Master Lee
displayed the most perfect breathing I have ever seen.
Well-known qigong and tai chi Master Chris Pei explains how breathing
is at the very core of the Chinese concept of chi ( qi ): “Generally speaking,
there are three levels of breathing. The first one is to breathe softly, so that a
person standing next to you does not hear you breathing. The second level
is to breathe softly so that you do not hear yourself breathing. And the third
level is to breathe softly so that you do not feel yourself breathing.”
This philosophy of effortless breathing is echoed by authentic teachers
of Indian yoga and traditional Chinese medicine. I use the word authentic in
--- END PAGE 71 ---

--- PAGE 72 ---
order to differentiate practitioners who have a deep knowledge of breathing
and how it affects physiology from those who don’t. Unlike many modern
Western teachers of yoga, who instruct students to breathe hard in order to
remove toxins from the body, authentic teachers know that when it comes to
breathing, less is more. The traditional Chinese philosophy of Taoism
succinctly describes ideal breathing as “so smooth that the fine hairs within
the nostrils remain motionless.” True health and inner peace occurs when
breathing is quiet, effortless, soft, through the nose, abdominal, rhythmic,
and gently paused on the exhale. This is how human beings naturally
breathed until modern life changed everything.
The comedian Lavell Crawford—who is, admittedly, quite a large man
—got a laugh from his audience while telling the story of a young boy who
stopped him in the street to ask: “You are so big—how many stomachs do
you have?” This inquiry was quickly followed by, “Why are you breathing
so hard, you got asthma or something?” While the kid’s manners left
something to be desired—a fact that Crawford observed in his act—he got
it right when he recognized the problematic nature of noticeable breathing.
The commonly used practice of taking big breaths is based on the
misconception that taking in more air will increase the oxygen levels of the
blood. However, since arterial blood is already almost fully saturated with
oxygen (between 95 percent and 99 percent) during normal, healthy
breathing, “big” breathing is rendered totally unnecessary.
Authentic teachers are not adding anything new. Instead, they are
helping to counteract the negative effects imposed on breathing by
processed foods, stress, excessive talking, stuffy air, and the false belief of
the benefits of taking big breaths. Authentic professional yoga practitioners
will have developed a high tolerance to carbon dioxide through their
practice—sometimes to the point of being able to sustain one calm breath
per minute for a whole hour! This impressive breathing efficiency implies
quiet, gentle breathing and a high BOLT score. This is exactly the goal of
the Oxygen Advantage program: to bring your breathing back to basics and
to incorporate the wisdom and time-tested principles of ancient man that are
enshrined by authentic teachers. 
What Is a Deep Breath? Unveiling the Myth
--- END PAGE 72 ---

--- PAGE 73 ---
Sometimes the same word can conjure up different meanings for different
people. Take the word deep as an example: “deep” can be defined as a
measurement that “extends far from the top,” but this explanation is not
always clear-cut. The bottom of the deep end of a swimming pool is
obviously farther from the surface of the water than the bottom of the
shallow end, but when the word deep is used in the context of taking a deep
breath, it can be open to many different interpretations. Such an instruction
is commonly given by stress counselors, yoga practitioners, and sports
coaches, resulting in the student taking a big breath of fresh air into the
lungs, but often this is done through an open mouth while activating the
upper chest. Such breathing is both big and shallow, but not deep. This type
of breathing is entirely the wrong thing to do if your objective is to deliver
more oxygen throughout the body.
If we use the definition of “extending far from the top” in the context of
deep breathing, the “top” will refer to the top of the lungs or the upper
chest. A deep breath, therefore, means to breathe down into the full depth of
the lungs. It also means using the main breathing muscle, the diaphragm,
which separates the chest from the abdomen. During rest, healthy animals
and babies naturally take deep, silent breaths. With each inhalation and
exhalation the abdomen gently expands and contracts. There is no effort
involved; the breath is silent, regular, and, more important, through the
nose. If you want to learn what constitutes good breathing, observe the
breathing of a baby or a healthy pet, whose breathing has not been altered
by the effects of modern lifestyles.
--- END PAGE 73 ---

--- PAGE 74 ---
Bell jar experiment showing “how we breathe” 
The bell jar diagram above illustrates the relationship between the
movement of the diaphragm and movement of the abdomen. As you
breathe, your abdomen moves in the opposite direction. The reason why the
abdomen moves outward with the in-breath is because the diaphragm
pushes downward, exerting gentle force on the abdomen. As you exhale,
the diaphragm moves upward, taking pressure off the abdomen and moving
the abdomen inward.
To bring air down into the depths of the lungs, it is not actually
necessary to take a big breath, as even the quietest of breaths will activate
the diaphragm. When you are practicing abdominal nasal breathing, you
should not be able to see or hear your breath during rest. In contrast,
overbreathing through the mouth, in an attempt to take a “deep” breath, will
be clearly audible and cause the chest to rise and fall, but will still not
manage to draw the breath deeply into the lungs. 
The Diaphragm
--- END PAGE 74 ---

--- PAGE 75 ---
The diaphragm is a dome-shaped sheet of muscle that separates the thorax
(which houses the heart and lungs) from the abdomen (which houses the
intestines, stomach, liver, and kidneys). The diaphragm serves as our main
breathing muscle and, if used correctly, it provides deep and efficient
breathing. Poor breathing habits do not take full advantage of the
diaphragm and instead encourage inefficient overbreathing from the upper
chest. To determine where your diaphragm is located, place your hands just
at the base of your rib cage and follow your ribs from the front of your body
to the sides. A good rule of thumb is that the diaphragm is located about
four buttons down on your shirt. 
Breathing in (inhaling)—abdomen gently moves outward
--- END PAGE 75 ---

--- PAGE 76 ---
Breathing out (exhaling)—abdomen gently moves inward
Abdominal breathing is more efficient simply because of the shape of
the lungs. Since they are narrow at the top and wider at the bottom, the
amount of blood flow in the lower lobes of the lungs is greater than in the
upper lobes. The fast upper-chest breathing of people who chronically
hyperventilate does not take advantage of the lower parts of the lungs,
limiting the amount of oxygen that can be transferred to the blood and
resulting in a greater loss of CO2. Not only this, but upper-chest breathing
activates the fight-or-flight response, which raises stress levels and
produces even heavier breathing.
Observe your own breathing when you are stressed, or watch the
breathing of anxious relatives, friends, or colleagues—you will see that this
type of breathing is generally located in the upper chest and goes at a rate
that is faster than normal. When we are stressed we tend to overbreathe and
resort to breathing through the mouth. Stressed breathing is faster than
normal, audible, produces visible movements, and often involves sighs.
Many people habitually breathe in this manner every minute of every hour
of every day, holding them in a perpetual state of fight-or-flight with
adrenaline levels high. The work of even the best stress counselors,
psychologists, or psychotherapists will be limited unless they first help their
patients to address their dysfunctional breathing. When oxygen delivery to
--- END PAGE 76 ---

--- PAGE 77 ---
the brain is reduced, no amount of talking and reasoning is going to correct
this deficiency. Stressed and anxious patients can only make the progress
they really need when their bad breathing habits are addressed.
On the other hand, healthy individuals who are relaxed and relatively
free from stress will exhibit breathing that is abdominal: slow, gentle, calm,
regular, relatively unnoticeable, silent, and through the nose. To achieve this
type of breathing and reduce the negative effects of stressed overbreathing,
it is important to activate the body’s parasympathetic nervous system to
elicit the relaxation response. To do this, you will need to adjust your
breathing habits in order to properly use your diaphragm. Avoid sighing,
panting, and breathing through the mouth, and become accustomed to slow,
gentle, relaxed, calm, and quiet breathing through the nose. This is how we
should breathe during rest every minute of every hour of every day. Within
a very short time you will find that you feel calmer and more energetic and
are able to sleep better. The positive effects of abdominal breathing will
continue to transform every aspect of your health, including your sports
performance.
Another advantage of abdominal breathing is that it assists with
lymphatic drainage. The lymphatic system is effectively the body’s
sewerage system, draining away waste materials and excess fluid. As the
lymphatic system does not have a heart to pump the waste throughout the
body, it is reliant on the motions of the muscles, including the diaphragm.
During abdominal breathing, lymph is sucked through the bloodstream,
neutralizing and destroying dead cells, reducing fluid retention, and
improving detoxification of the body.
By utilizing the natural benefits of abdominal breathing you will
improve the quality of your blood flow, increase delivery of oxygen to
working muscles, and reduce the symptoms of anxiety associated with
overbreathing. Returning your breathing habits to the natural and efficient
methods you were born with will also allow you to enjoy better health and
maximize the potential of your sports or exercise performance. Use the
following exercise to encourage abdominal breathing during rest and sports
until it again becomes second nature. As the objective of the Oxygen
Advantage program is to restore light, abdominal breathing with a high
BOLT score, the exercise below forms the foundation upon which
remaining exercises are practiced.
--- END PAGE 77 ---

--- PAGE 78 ---
Breathe Light to Breathe Right 
( A more advanced version of this exercise can be found in Part IV: Your
Oxygen Advantage Program under Breathe Light to Breathe Right
(Advanced Method). )
During the process of breathing, oxygen is drawn into the lungs and
excess carbon dioxide is exhaled. The respiratory center located in the brain
continuously monitors blood pH, carbon dioxide, and to a lesser extent
oxygen. When the level of carbon dioxide in the blood increases above
programmed levels, the respiratory center transmits impulses that tell the
respiratory muscles to breathe in order to remove the excess gas. When we
breathe too much over a period of hours to days, as in the case of chronic
stress, the respiratory center adjusts to a lower tolerance of carbon dioxide.
Having a lower than normal tolerance to carbon dioxide results in the
respiratory center increasing the rate of impulses to the respiratory muscles.
The result is habitual overbreathing and excess breathlessness during
physical exercise.
You are practicing this exercise correctly when you slow down and
reduce your breathing sufficiently to create a tolerable need for air. The
need for air signifies an accumulation of arterial carbon dioxide, the goal of
which is to reset the respiratory center’s tolerance to this gas. To assist with
this, it is very helpful to exert gentle pressure against your chest and
abdomen with your hands. Try to maintain the need for air for the duration
of 4 to 5 minutes.
To practice this exercise, it can be very helpful to sit in front of a mirror
to observe and follow your breathing movements.
• Sit up straight. Allow your shoulders to relax. Imagine a piece
of string gently holding you up from the top of the back of your
head. At the same time, feel the space between your ribs
gradually widening.
• Place one hand on your chest and one hand just above your
navel.
--- END PAGE 78 ---

--- PAGE 79 ---
• Feel your abdomen gently moving outward as you inhale and
gently moving inward as you exhale.
• As you breathe, exert gentle pressure with your hands against
your abdomen and chest. This should create resistance to your
breathing.
• Breathe against your hands, concentrating on making the size of
each breath smaller.
• With each breath, take in less air than you would like to. Make
the in-breath smaller or shorter.
• Gently slow down and reduce your breathing movements until
you feel a tolerable hunger for air.
• Breathe out with a relaxed exhalation. Allow the natural
elasticity of your lungs and diaphragm to play their role in each
exhalation. Imagine a balloon slowly and gently deflating of its
own accord.
• When the in-breath becomes smaller and the out-breath is
relaxed, visible breathing movements will be reduced. You may
be able to notice this in a mirror. 
By using a simple exercise like this, you can reduce your breathing
movements by 20 to 30 percent. If your stomach muscles start to contract or
--- END PAGE 79 ---

--- PAGE 80 ---
jerk or feel tense, or if your breathing rhythm becomes disrupted or out of
control, then the air shortage is too intense. In this situation, abandon the
exercise for 15 seconds or so and return to it when the air shortage has
disappeared.
At first, you may only be able to maintain an air shortage for 20 seconds
before the urge to breathe is too strong. With practice, you will be able to
maintain an air shortage for longer periods. Remember, you are trying to
create an air shortage that is tolerable but not stressful. Aim to maintain this
tolerable “air hunger” for 3 to 5 minutes at a time. Practicing 2 sets of 5-
minute exercises is enough to help you reset your breathing center and
improve your body’s tolerance for carbon dioxide.
When you practice Breathing Light, the accumulation of carbon dioxide
in the blood will result in certain physiological changes in the body. These
include:
• A feeling of increased warmth resulting from the dilation of
blood vessels
• A rosy red color coming into the face
• Increased production of watery saliva in the mouth, which is an
indication that your body is going into relaxation mode and
activating the parasympathetic nervous system
All of these changes are normal and should not cause discomfort.
However, if you experience dizziness or anxiety while practicing an
Oxygen Advantage exercise, then it is better to refrain from doing this
exercise and contact an Oxygen Advantage practitioner who can establish
that you are doing the exercise correctly. For a list of practitioners, please
visit OxygenAdvantage.com. 
Timing Your Breathing: A Fundamental Error 
You may have noticed that while we attempt to reset breathing volume
toward normal, there is no suggestion of changing the number of breaths
--- END PAGE 80 ---

--- PAGE 81 ---
per minute, or to time the length of each breath. This is deliberate—using
time to measure the size of a breath is a fundamental error. Modern Western
society seeks to quantify everything in terms of measurement, including our
breathing, but when it comes to retraining poor breathing habits, it is not the
timing that needs to be focused on. Altering the number of breaths per
minute or counting the size of each breath in seconds has taken root in
many breathing techniques but actually has little or no effect in addressing
poor breathing habits.
For example, telling someone to inhale for 2 seconds and exhale for 3
seconds does not provide guidance on whether they should take in a very
gentle breath or a huge inhalation of air. The volume of a gentle breath
would be far less than the volume of a large breath, and since we are
concerned mainly with volume and reducing it toward normal, counting the
length of a breath using seconds does not work. The following illustration
shows two different breaths, each with an inhalation length of 2 seconds
and an exhalation of 3 seconds. Note the difference in the amount of air
taken into the lungs by each breath, despite them being the same length:
--- END PAGE 81 ---

--- PAGE 82 ---
Similarly, is it not possible to address poor breathing habits by changing
the number of breaths per minute. Take, for example, an individual who
breathes 20 breaths per minute, with each breath consisting of 500ml of air.
This breathing pattern provides a total volume of 10 liters per minute. And,
since 10 liters of air per minute is too much, the individual may be
mistakenly instructed to remedy this by reducing the number of breaths per
minute from 20 to 10. However, changing the number of breaths in this way
will simply result in each breath doubling in size to compensate for the
reduction of breathing rate. There will be no change to breathing volume
and the individual’s symptoms will persist.
There is only one way to change your breathing volume and rate, and
that is by slowing down and diminishing the size of each breath in order to
create a shortage of air. In time, as breathing volume changes toward
normal, you will obtain a higher BOLT measurement and the number of
breaths you take per minute will automatically reduce. To reiterate, it is
impossible to change breathing volume by altering breathing rate, but the
--- END PAGE 82 ---

--- PAGE 83 ---
best way to naturally alter your breathing rate is to reduce your breathing
volume. As your BOLT increases, not only will the size of each breath
decrease, but so too will the number of breaths taken per minute.
Learning and applying the above exercise to your daily breathing will
provide an excellent foundation on which to build a more efficient
breathing technique during sports. Just as if you were building the house of
your dreams, the most crucial aspect is the foundation. There is no point
building a beautiful structure on top of a weak foundation. To do so would
be futile, as the building would topple soon after it was built. The same rule
applies with addressing your breathing volume. Breathing Light to Breathe
Right is the foundation on top of which we simulate high-altitude training
during many sports activities, as you will see in the following chapters.
Take your time to become familiar with the techniques of abdominal
breathing and reduced breathing before you move on.
--- END PAGE 83 ---

--- PAGE 84 ---
CHAPTER 5 
Secrets of Ancient Tribes
I n 1974, twenty-one-year-old Tom Piszkin was attending the University of
California at Berkeley. He was a runner and worked part-time in the
sporting goods department at Montgomery Ward in Oakland. On October
24 he finished his shift and made his way to a bus stop near the Oakland
Coliseum, known as one of the tougher parts of town. Soon after, Tom was
confronted by four young men who demanded he give them everything he
had. Three of the four youths drew handguns and pressed them against
Tom’s head, chest, and leg. In shock, when Tom stood up to take his wallet
from his pocket, he was shot point-blank in the middle of the chest by a .38
special. The bullet bore through Tom’s sternum and entered his left lung.
Tom recalls that, surprisingly, the shot didn’t cause him a lot of pain.
Following an operation to remove the lead fragments, Tom was
discharged from the hospital and resumed running within a month, but
recovering from such a traumatic experience was slow and arduous. Tom’s
journey to restore his lung capacity took over a decade as he continued to
fall short of his expectations, despite working hard at his fitness routine.
Above all else, Tom wanted to regain the level of athletic fitness he enjoyed
before he was shot and was determined to figure out a way to limit his heart
rate during his workout sessions. Intuitively, he figured that by reducing the
stress on his body during exercise, he would be able to improve his overall
fitness and endurance. Tom theorized that it would help to restrict his
breathing in order to maintain a steady and manageable exercise intensity
—“like a governor on a lawn mower engine”—a solution that was also
much cheaper than buying a heart rate monitor.
--- END PAGE 84 ---

--- PAGE 85 ---
Tom soon realized that if he couldn’t sustain his pace while breathing
exclusively through his nose during training, then he was working too hard
and going too fast. At first, he found breathing through his nose during
physical training a little challenging, but soon discovered that nasal
breathing could more easily be maintained by placing tape over his mouth.
Not only did Tom tape his mouth during training, he also did it during sleep
to ensure that he continued nasal breathing during the night. One year after
beginning his reduced breathing training, Tom went for a lung capacity test.
His results showed that he was at 130 percent capacity for his weight and
age.
Tom has since dedicated his life to his two passions of sports and
inventing. He is currently a triathlon coach at the University of California at
San Diego and creator of TitanFlex bikes. He is also certified as a USA
Olympic Triathlon coach. After thirteen years of serving at the leadership
level in the Triathlon Club of San Diego, he was inducted into their hall of
fame.
Switching to nasal breathing after spending years mouth breathing
requires courage and commitment. Sometimes it is necessary to take one
step back to move two forward if you want to truly improve your
performance.
If you observe your teammates or competitors during physical exercise,
you will no doubt notice that most will be breathing through their mouths.
A question I often hear is: “If nasal breathing is so good, then why do most
elite athletes breathe through their mouths and not their noses?” A simple
answer is that Western breathing habits have become so far removed from
what they should be that mouth breathing has become the norm.
Our ancestors used their noses to breathe during physical exercise, as do
present-day indigenous tribes, including the Tarahumara, the famed running
tribe of Northern Mexico. When researchers studied the nasal-breathing
Tarahumara tribe over the course of a 26-mile run, they were astounded to
find that their average heart rate was a surprisingly low 130 beats per
minute. Compare this with the normal average heart rate of a Western
marathon runner, which lies between 160 and 180 beats per minute, and you
can see how nasal breathing allows for a calm and sustained breathing
pattern even when engaging in intense physical exercise (more on this in
chapter 11). Breathing through the mouth is a relatively modern
--- END PAGE 85 ---

--- PAGE 86 ---
phenomenon and does nothing to improve performance—in fact, it impedes
it.
Harvard-educated anthropologist Wade Davis has devoted much of his
life’s work to the study of indigenous cultures, especially in North and
South America. To date, he has lived with fifteen groups of indigenous
people, including tribal hunters of the Amazon whose senses are so attuned
that they can smell the urine of an animal from forty paces and determine
whether it is from a male or female.
While staying with the tribe, Davis, who is also a triathlete, was allowed
to accompany them on hunting expeditions. Hunts began in the morning at
a pace alternating between a jog and a run. As soon as they picked up the
trail of an animal, the hunters switched to running in order to catch up.
When the animal became aware of the hunters, it would speed away, but
they would continue to follow in close pursuit. The hunters were persistent,
increasing their pace so as to give their prey little time to rest, and each time
they lost sight of it they would continue on doggedly until they tracked it
down again. This pattern could continue over many hours, possibly even
days, but the hunters’ tenacity would eventually pay off and the animal
would collapse from exhaustion, enabling them to capture it at close range.
While Davis had a hard time keeping up with the hunters’ pace, what was
most impressive to him was that they never opened their mouths to breathe.
Just like our ancestors, present-day indigenous tribes are able to run at a
high intensity with their mouths closed over a relatively long duration of
time, a feat that civilized man seems to have forgotten. It is time to go back
to basics.
Initially, breathing through the nose might feel strange during exercise,
especially if you are used to breathing through your mouth. But remember
that the nose is made for breathing, and nasal breathing ensures a number of
benefits that are essential not only for good health but for improved sports
performance, including:
• Filtering, warming, and humidifying air before it is drawn into
the lungs
• Reducing the heart rate
• Bringing nitric oxide into the lungs to open airways and blood
vessels
--- END PAGE 86 ---

--- PAGE 87 ---
• Better oxygen delivery throughout the body
• Reduced lactic acid as more oxygen is delivered to working
muscles
The pace at which you are able to exercise during a half hour of training
while breathing through your nose will depend on your BOLT score. Below
are some guidelines that are influenced by your nostril and airway size. For
example, an athlete with large nostrils will experience less resistance to
breathing, enabling exercise at a higher intensity with his or her mouth
closed. Here is a general guideline of exercise ability (with the mouth
closed) according to BOLT score:
• If your BOLT score is 5 seconds, your ability to walk is
seriously hampered. Climbing one flight of stairs will be
challenging, requiring you to stop every 3 or 4 steps in order to
take a rest.
• If your BOLT score is 10 seconds, you will be able to walk
slowly.
• If your BOLT score is 20 seconds, you will be able to walk
quickly or jog lightly.
• If your BOLT score is 30 seconds, you will be able to jog at a
medium to fast pace.
• If your BOLT score is 40 seconds, you will be able to run
quickly.
By increasing your BOLT score, no matter the size of your airways, you
will experience lighter breathing and be able to train at a higher pace, for
longer distances, while breathing through the nose. Your fitness levels will
soon increase well beyond what they were before, and nasal breathing will
become much easier during exercise. Within 6 to 8 weeks your BOLT
measurement should increase by 10 to 15 seconds, resulting in a significant
improvement to your fitness.
--- END PAGE 87 ---

--- PAGE 88 ---
Dr. Bill Hang is an orthodontist from California. For the past few
decades he has examined the mouths and airways of thousands of patients.
What differentiates Dr. Hang from many traditional orthodontists is that
when he considers the alignment of the teeth, he also gives attention to the
resultant effect on the jaws, the width of the face, and size of airways. In
fact, I have yet to meet an individual with such a fascination for airway
size.
While we need to be efficient with our use of oxygen, it is also
imperative that the size of our airways enables air to flow freely to and from
the lungs. If children or teenagers spend five or ten years with their mouths
hanging open, their faces will become narrow, their jaws will not develop
correctly, and their airway sizes will be reduced. Nasal breathing during the
formative years is absolutely essential to help ensure correct development
of the face, jaws, and airways. In chapter 13, we will look more closely at
the role breathing plays in the development of the face and the need for
orthodontic treatment.
I first met Dr. Hang in 2009, when we were both scheduled to give a
talk to a study group of myofunctional therapists. As it turned out, we had
the same aim in mind: to explore how breathing and resting tongue posture
affects sleep, sports, and health. I spoke about the benefits of nasal
breathing, while Dr. Hang spoke about airway size and the benefits of
having a good facial structure for sports performance. When the airways are
too narrow, our ability to perform physical exercise is hampered. Imagine
completing a marathon while breathing through airways the size of a very
narrow straw—no matter how well trained you are, how fit, how
determined, if your airways are constricted you will not be able to take in
enough air to properly oxygenate your body.
That day Dr. Hang told me that he had been running for forty-two years
and had completed nineteen marathons with his “mouth open like a dog.”
Following our meeting, he changed to breathing through his nose during
training and taped his mouth closed every night to ensure nasal breathing
while he slept. Initially he found that his nose would run constantly during
exercise, requiring him to blow his nose every few hundred yards. This is a
common experience for most people adjusting to nasal breathing as the
airways clear and breathing volume increases, but it is a minor
--- END PAGE 88 ---

--- PAGE 89 ---
inconvenience that will clear up within a few weeks. Like any organ or
muscle, the nose needs to get used to being used more during sports.
Six months later, Bill completed the Pasadena Marathon and finished
second in his age group. Not only this, but he kept his lips together every
step of the way except during a couple of long hills when he allowed his
mouth to drop open occasionally. No mean feat for a sixty-year-old! Now,
each Sunday, he completes a two-hour run and continues to nasal breathe in
order to maintain and ideally improve his fitness. Twenty minutes into his
run, when he is good and warm, he is able to get up to a good speed while
retaining a slow, regular breathing pattern—much improved from his
previous method of panting through the mouth, expending maximum
energy as he ran. 
Train Your Body to Do More with Less 
To reap the most benefit from your physical training, you need to train your
body to do more with less. To do this, you will need to reduce your air
intake. Incorporating this concept into your training will result in improved
breathing economy and an increase in your athletic performance, along with
reduced breathlessness and lactic acid during competition. More important,
you will not need to push your body beyond its limits, reducing your risk of
injury, cardiovascular and respiratory problems, and other health concerns.
Nasal breathing during physical training ensures that you do not push
yourself beyond what your body is capable of doing.
During physical exercise, there are three ways to reduce air intake: 
1. Relax your body and take less air into your lungs. 
2. Increase exercise intensity while nasal breathing. 
3. Practice breath holding during exercise.
When you first switch to nasal breathing you may find that your ability
to train at maximum pace is impeded. Breathing through the nostrils creates
resistance and adds an extra load that is likely to slow your performance for
the first few weeks. However, with continued practice and by increasing
--- END PAGE 89 ---

--- PAGE 90 ---
your BOLT score you will soon find that your performance surpasses
previous levels.
Competitive athletes who regularly take part in high-intensity training
will need to alternate nasal breathing with mouth breathing for an overall
improvement to breathing patterns. High-intensity training helps to prevent
muscle deconditioning and will require an athlete to periodically breathe
through his or her mouth. This is to be expected and can be combined with
nasal breathing to attain the best results. For less-than-maximum intensity
training, and at all other times, nasal breathing should be employed. For
example, competitive athletes may spend 70 percent of their training with
the mouth closed, harnessing the benefits of nasal breathing and adding an
extra load to their training to increase BOLT score. They may also devote a
smaller portion of training to working at an all-out pace in order to maintain
muscle condition, for which brief periods of mouth breathing will be
required.
During competition there is no need to intentionally take bigger breaths,
nor is there a requirement to breathe less. Instead, bring a feeling of
relaxation to your body and breathe as you feel necessary. However, breath-
holding exercises during your warm-up can be very advantageous, as can
practicing breathing recovery during your cooldown. Competition isn’t the
ideal time to focus on how well or how poorly you are breathing, as your
full concentration should be devoted to the game or race. The best way to
improve breathing for competition is to improve your everyday breathing,
and the key to this is obtaining a higher BOLT score.
Recreational athletes who are not taking part in competition or high-
intensity exercise, however, are far better off maintaining nasal breathing at
all times. While reducing your breathing during physical exercise, try not to
overdo it. If you find that your need for air is so great that you need to open
your mouth, simply slow down and allow your breathing to calm once
more. 
Unveiling the Warm-Up 
The vast majority of sports coaches are in agreement that warming up
before exercise is vitally important. During physical exercise the body
--- END PAGE 90 ---

--- PAGE 91 ---
requires greater blood flow to tissues and muscles than during rest. The
objective of a warm-up is to increase blood flow and prepare the body for
more intense physical exercise, thus reducing the incidence of sports-related
injuries and improving overall performance.
It takes time for the body to warm up, but when it does, your body is
able to function more effectively during exercise. When your body is
warmed up prior to exercise, the following benefits can be maximized:
• The production of more carbon dioxide—improving the release
of oxygen from the blood to tissues and organs—increasing
VO2 max, improving endurance, and reducing the risk of
injury
• The opening of blood vessels and airways—allowing for better
blood flow and easy breathing
In practice, however, many athletes do not warm up sufficiently. Many
spend, at most, 2 to 3 minutes warming up by doing a light jog before
intensifying their exercise. This is simply a case of going too fast, too soon.
Aisling plays soccer for one of the better amateur football teams in
Ireland. She has reached a high level of fitness and is a newcomer to the
Oxygen Advantage exercises. Despite her excellent fitness, she often finds
that she feels quite breathless during the first 10 to 20 minutes of a game,
while at the end of the game she feels as if she could go on playing forever.
This is a common complaint within the world of sport, and usually comes
down to a lack of warm-up. The best way to avoid early breathlessness
during exercise is to increase your BOLT score and spend more time
warming up with nasal breathing.
For people like Aisling, who find it hard to get going when they
exercise, at least 10 minutes should be spent warming up before physical
activity, especially during cold weather, as it can take the body up to 30
minutes to function at its best. In order to devote all your energy to a game,
your body should reach peak form early on rather than somewhere during
the second half. By skipping an adequate warm-up—either through
impatience or because you believe it’s not necessary—you are cheating
yourself out of performing at your full capability.
--- END PAGE 91 ---

--- PAGE 92 ---
To maximize the benefits of your warm-up, combine movement with
relaxation techniques and breath holds, as described below. 
Oxygen Advantage Warm-Up 
• Begin walking at a pace that is comfortable for you.
• During your warm-up, try to breathe regularly and calmly
through your nose, using your diaphragm to maintain a gentle
and relaxed breathing technique.
• Feel your abdomen gently moving outward as you inhale and
gently moving inward as you exhale.
• As you walk, allow a feeling of relaxation to spread throughout
your body. Silently encourage the area around your chest and
abdomen to relax (you will find that any tension can be
released by silently telling that area of the body to relax). Feel
your body relax and become soft. Body relaxation during
physical exercise helps to ensure steady, calm, and regular
breathing.
• After 1 minute or so of walking at a fairly good pace, exhale
normally through your nose and pinch your nose with your
fingers to hold the breath. (If you are in a public place, you
might prefer to hold the breath without holding your nose.)
• While holding your breath, walk for 10 to 30 paces, or until you
feel a moderate need to breathe. When you feel this hunger for
air, let go of your nose and resume breathing through your
nose.
• Continue walking for 10 minutes, performing a breath hold
every minute or so.
Creating an air shortage by holding the breath during your warm-up is
vitally important to cause an accumulation of carbon dioxide in the blood
--- END PAGE 92 ---

--- PAGE 93 ---
before physical exercise commences.
Your breathing will naturally increase when you exercise more
intensely, but without a corresponding increase in the production of CO2,
the result will be a net loss of carbon dioxide. This loss can lead to reduced
oxygen delivery to working muscles and the constriction of airways and
blood vessels. Not surprisingly, most asthma attacks and breathing
difficulties occur during the first 10 minutes of physical exercise.
In order to avoid exercise-induced asthma, there are three simple
guidelines: 
1. Attain a high BOLT score 
2. Nasal breathe 
3. Warm up 
Breathe Light to Breathe Right—Jogging, Running, or Any
Other Activity 
After a 10-minute warm-up of walking using relaxation and breath holds,
you can increase your pace to a jog or run. Start off easy and follow your
breathing, continuing to breathe through the nose. While jogging or
running, it is necessary to keep your breathing regular and under control. If
you find it too difficult to run with your mouth closed, it simply means that
your pace is too fast at that moment. Slow down or even walk a little until
you recover, always breathing in and out through the nose, especially if
your BOLT score is less than 20 seconds.
You can check whether you are pushing yourself too hard during
physical exercise by exhaling normally and holding your breath for 5
seconds. When you resume breathing through the nose, your breathing
should remain controlled. If you find that you lose control of your
breathing, you are pushing yourself too hard.
No matter what type of exercise you prefer, make sure that you watch
your breath and become aware of your inner body. Silently repeat the word 
relax to help release the tension around your abdomen. Bring your entire
attention from your mind into your body. Become one with your run or
exercise, merging body, mind, and activity together. Move with every cell
--- END PAGE 93 ---

--- PAGE 94 ---
of your body, from the top of your head to the tips of your toes. Doing so
will give your training, your sport, and your competition the attention they
deserve. When engaged in an activity, there is no point to just going through
the motions. One needs to become the activity.
As you run, feel each gentle connection between your feet and the
ground as you propel yourself forward. Avoid pounding the pavement as
this will lead to sore hips, sore joints, and possible injuries. Instead, bring a
feeling of lightness to your body, and visualize yourself barely touching the
ground as your run. Imagine yourself running over thin twigs, treading so
softly that they do not break, emulating the words of Chinese philosopher
Lao Tzu: “A good runner leaves no tracks.” Remember: light foot strikes, a
relaxed body, and regular, steady breathing. 
Ten or fifteen minutes into your run or other workout, you will probably
experience an endorphin high from your exercise. Allow your body to find
its perfect work rate by breathing through your nose in a steady and regular
fashion. There is no need whatsoever for a heart rate monitor to provide
feedback on training intensity. Instead, let your nose, your breathing
rhythm, and how you feel dictate your training intensity. Continue to
increase your pace to the point that you can maintain steady and regular
breathing through the nose. If your breathing rhythm becomes chaotic or it
is necessary to open your mouth to breathe, your exercise intensity is too
--- END PAGE 94 ---

--- PAGE 95 ---
much. If this happens, slow your pace to a walk for 2 to 3 minutes to allow
your breathing to recover. When you are able to breathe calmly through
your nose once more, you can resume your physical exercise.
As you continue your physical exercise, the increased generation of
carbon dioxide and heat will enhance the delivery of oxygen from the blood
to working muscles, as well as facilitating the dilation of airways and blood
vessels. Your body will be warm and sweating, your breathing will be faster
than normal but steady, and your head will be clear. If you keep your mouth
closed throughout your exercise, your breathing will recover quickly. 
Breathing Recovery Exercise 
Following physical exercise, cool down by walking for 3 to 5 minutes,
performing the following small breath holds: 
• Exhale as normal through the nose.
• Pinch your nose with your fingers to hold the breath for 2 to 5
seconds.
• Breathe normally through the nose for 10 seconds.
--- END PAGE 95 ---

--- PAGE 96 ---
• Repeat the first 3 steps throughout your cooldown.
• Resume regular breathing. 
How to Determine Whether You Have Exercised Correctly 
In addition to using breath holds to determine your training limits, you can
also use your BOLT score to see how efficient your breathing is during
physical exercise. Follow these steps to track your progress using your
BOLT score:
• Measure your BOLT score before training.
• Perform your physical exercise.
• Measure your BOLT score one hour after you finish training.
• If your BOLT score is higher after exercise than before, your
breathing is efficient during exercise.
• If your BOLT score is lower after exercise than before, your
breathing is inefficient during exercise. In this situation, it is
safer to slow down and ensure your breathing remains
controlled throughout exercise.
In 1999 Danny Dreyer and his wife, Katherine, introduced Chi-Running
to the athletic world, a fusion of running, walking, and the subtle inner
focus of tai chi. Having successfully completed forty ultramarathons since
1995, Danny has finished within the top three of his age group in all but one
competition. A firm exponent of nasal breathing, Danny advises the use of
nose breathing as a self-regulating mechanism, “because you won’t be able
to do it if you are either running too fast, not relaxed enough, or inefficient
in your movement.” Similar to the experience of most seasoned runners,
when Danny first began nose breathing he could only go for a minute or so
before he had to breathe through his mouth. However, as he became more
efficient and his breathing relaxed into his running form, he was able to
breathe through his nose for longer periods of time. Another reason for
--- END PAGE 96 ---

--- PAGE 97 ---
breathing through the nose, according to Danny, is that it allows air more
fully to be brought into the deeper parts of the lungs, enabling a better gas
exchange to take place.
See for yourself. Switch to breathing through your nose and you will
notice the benefits within a short space of time.
--- END PAGE 97 ---

--- PAGE 98 ---
PART II 
The Secret of Fitness
--- END PAGE 98 ---

--- PAGE 99 ---
CHAPTER 6 
Gaining the Edge—Naturally
A ccording to the United States Olympic Training Center, there is a
difference of less than 0.5 percent in the performance of Olympic athletes.
With such a narrow margin for success, it is essential for athletes and
coaches to look for new ways to attain a competitive edge. Since oxygen is
the fuel for working muscles, anything that increases body oxygenation
above normal levels will be of great benefit to an athlete’s performance, and
because oxygen is a natural and limitless resource, it is the ideal tool for
boosting performance legally.
One way of tapping into your own natural resources is to purposefully
subject the body to reduced oxygen intake for a short period of time. When
the human body is exposed to situations in which there are reduced oxygen
levels—such as high altitude, or by holding the breath—adaptations take
place that force the body to increase oxygenation of the blood. Even if you
are not a competitive athlete, using these techniques will allow you to get
the most out of your workout and accelerate whatever fitness program you
undertake. Who doesn’t want to do more with less effort?
While striving for improved performance, however, there will always be
athletes who choose to participate in illegal methods of blood doping, either
through blood transfusion or by taking a banned substance such as
erythropoietin (EPO), testosterone, or human growth hormone.
Blood transfusions are a testament to the drastic and illegal measures
that some athletes go to in order to gain the edge over their competitors. A
few weeks before competition, blood is extracted from the athlete’s body
and stored in a freezer or refrigerator. The body, sensing that blood levels
are lower than normal, will produce additional red blood cells to bridge the
--- END PAGE 99 ---

--- PAGE 100 ---
gap. Closer to the endurance event, typically between one and seven days,
the stored blood is reinfused into the body of the athlete. This addition of
blood increases quantities of red blood cells above normal levels, which in
turn increases VO2 max and enhances physical performance.
By the early 1990s EPO had become the banned substance of choice
amongst athletes seeking to increase their endurance performance. EPO is a
naturally occurring hormone produced in the kidneys that stimulates the
bone marrow to release more red blood cells into circulation. Because red
blood cells carry oxygen from the lungs to the muscles, having a higher
concentration in the circulation can greatly improve an athlete’s aerobic
capacity. EPO that is produced in a lab is almost identical to the naturally
occurring hormone that is produced in the body. For medical purposes, EPO
is prescribed to people with chronic kidney disease–induced anemia as their
condition results in a decrease in the amount of red blood cells in
circulation. However, soon after its inception, some members of the athletic
community realized that taking an artificial version of EPO improved sports
performance by increasing the oxygen-carrying capacity of the body.
The most notorious endurance event on earth for blood doping has to be
the Tour de France. Regarded as the most prestigious of all cycle races in
the world, and with places limited to around two hundred athletes,
participation in the Tour de France is the dream of any budding amateur or
professional cyclist. Not for the fainthearted, the event consists of a
grueling 2,200-mile cycle over twenty-two days, with some mountain
climbs lasting for twenty miles or more. Ever since its inception in 1903,
there have been allegations of cyclists resorting to various illegal techniques
to help them complete the event or improve their performance. Early
reports involved cyclists fueling their bodies with alcohol, stopping off at
various stages to load their pouches with wine, beer, or whatever else they
could get their hands on, more so to numb the pain to help finish the race
rather than improve athletic performance. However, in more recent decades,
competitors took greater risks to gain an edge.
A granite memorial to the renowned British cyclist Tom Simpson stands
on the spot where he collapsed and died during the 1967 Tour de France.
The epitaph reads: OLYMPIC MEDALIST, WORLD CHAMPION, BRITISH SPORTING
AMBASSADOR . At twenty-nine, Simpson was regarded as one of the all-time
--- END PAGE 100 ---

--- PAGE 101 ---
best British cyclists. During the race, as the route made its way through the
Alps, Simpson fell ill with diarrhea and stomach pains.
In the searing heat, close to the summit of Mont Ventoux, Simpson fell.
With a determined effort to continue, he ordered onlookers to “put me back
on my bike,” and continued to ride 500 yards farther before collapsing
again. Despite efforts by a nurse to resuscitate him, he was pronounced
dead after being airlifted by helicopter to the hospital. Simpson’s
postmortem revealed amphetamines in his system. Later, investigators
would discover more evidence of the drugs in his hotel room and the
pockets of his jersey.
In later years, methods of doping became more sophisticated. Tyler
Hamilton, who was the now-disgraced former champion Lance Armstrong’s
teammate, described how he got goose bumps as blood, fresh from the
refrigerator, entered his veins. In his book, The Secret Race, Hamilton
claims that Armstrong also had a blood transfusion to improve his
performance, and that during the 1998 Tour de France the riders were
followed on a motorbike by an accomplice carrying fresh vials of EPO. “To
Lance’s way of thinking, doping is a fact of life, like oxygen or gravity,”
Hamilton wrote.
Lance Armstrong’s fall from grace came on October 10, 2010, when the
U.S. Anti-Doping Agency (USADA) released a statement concluding that
the “evidence shows beyond any doubt that the U.S. Postal Service Pro
Cycling Team [Lance Armstrong’s team] ran the most sophisticated,
professionalized, and successful doping program that sport has ever seen.”
Summed up in the statement was the courage of eleven of Armstrong’s
former teammates who participated in the doping conspiracy but assisted
the agency in its investigation in order to “help young athletes have hope
that they are not put in the position they were.”
In January 2013, in a no-holds-barred interview with Oprah Winfrey,
Armstrong admitted to taking banned substances, including EPO,
testosterone, human growth hormone, and cortisone, and confessed to blood
doping and blood transfusions to enhance his cycling performance. When
Winfrey asked if he had used illegal substances or doping methods during
all seven of his Tour de France victories, the crushing answer was “yes.”
Preparation to compete in the Tour de France often takes place at a
young age. From their early teens, cyclists sacrifice their social lives and
--- END PAGE 101 ---

--- PAGE 102 ---
spare time to cycling and training to build strength, stamina, and endurance.
I would like you to put yourself in this situation for a moment. Imagine that
for years you have devoted every waking hour to training, living, and
dreaming cycling. After a roller-coaster few years, you are finally good
enough to take part in your greatest aspiration: the Tour de France. But soon
within your first season, your colleagues present you with two options:
Either blood dope and have some chance of competing on a level playing
field, or choose not to blood dope and return home, leaving your dreams
behind. This is likely the scenario that faced many cycling greats, including
Tyler Hamilton, Floyd Landis, Bjarne Riis, and Marco Pantani, who wanted
nothing more than to compete in the sport they loved . While many cyclists
reluctantly gave into the temptation, others chose to abandon their chance at
the Tour de France. Stephen Swart grew up on New Zealand’s North Island,
and in his junior racing days both he and his brother were very successful
cyclists. Swart cycled alongside Lance Armstrong in 1994 and 1995, but at
age thirty he walked away from cycling completely and was later vilified by
his fellow cyclists for “spitting in the soup” after he broke the code of
silence about doping within the sport. Looking back, Swart said he felt
cheated in a way, wishing he had never been put in the position to dope. His
natural ability was undermined by the doping culture that surrounded him.
For many years, winning the Tour de France seemed to be as much about
whose doctor prescribed the best cocktail of banned substances than the
athletic prowess of the competitors.
Since the sporting world has come under increased attention from
investigative journalists—including David Walsh, chief sportswriter with
the London Sunday Times , and Paul Kimmage, former professional cyclist
and award-winning sports journalist—dealing with cheating has now risen
to the top of the agenda for many sporting authorities. Kimmage, who spent
the past few decades exposing the doping culture in the Tour de France,
commented: “I’ve always understood the pressure to dope. I’ve always
understood the temptation to dope, and I understand because I’ve been
there. The perception of the Tour de France now from the public is that it’s
rotten, they all dope, and that saddens me because it shouldn’t have
happened.”
Fortunately for the future of sports, the culture is slowly changing, and
the majority of athletes do not partake in the unethical practice of blood
--- END PAGE 102 ---

--- PAGE 103 ---
doping. Instead, they choose naturally beneficial activities such as high-
altitude training or other techniques designed to increase the body’s ability
to carry more oxygen.
The main purpose of altitude training and the Oxygen Advantage
techniques outlined in this book is to increase red blood cell count. By
practicing the breath-hold exercises outlined in this book, the kidneys
increase production of EPO and the spleen releases red blood cells into the
blood circulation. Both of these effects increase the oxygen-carrying
capacity of the blood above normal levels, giving an athlete a competitive
edge without the risks and ethical issues of illegal doping. A higher
concentration of red blood cells can benefit your sporting performance in
several ways, including:
• Improving the oxygen-carrying capacity of your blood
• Increasing your VO2 max
• Extending your endurance potential
Maximal oxygen uptake, or VO2 max, refers to the maximum capacity
of an individual’s body to transport and utilize oxygen during 1 minute of
exhaustive exercise. The V refers to volume, the O2 to oxygen, and max to
the maximum capacity of your body. Your VO2 max is measured by the
amount of oxygen that is used during 1 minute of exercise per kilogram of
body weight. VO2 max is a factor that can determine an athlete’s capacity
to sustain physical exercise, and is considered to be the best indicator of
cardiorespiratory endurance and aerobic fitness. In sports that require
exceptional endurance, such as cycling, rowing, swimming, and running,
world-class athletes typically have a high VO2 max. The goal of most
endurance programs is to increase an individual’s VO2 max, and this can be
achieved by improving the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood.
The rest of this chapter explores several different training regimens
along with their effects on VO2 max and the oxygen-carrying capacity of
the blood. In order to understand how and why these techniques work, it is
useful to know the following basic information about the composition of
your blood and some common terms that we will be referring to regularly.
--- END PAGE 103 ---

--- PAGE 104 ---
Blood is made up of three parts: oxygen-carrying red cells, white blood
cells, and plasma. Hemoglobin is a protein found within the red cells. One
of the functions of hemoglobin is to carry oxygen from the lungs to the
cells, tissues, and organs of the body, where it is released in order to burn
nutrients for the production of energy. Once oxygen has been released, the
resultant carbon dioxide is collected by hemoglobin and returned to the
lungs, which exhale the excess.
Levels of hemoglobin will vary from person to person, but the
following figures provide a general guide for normal results:
Male: 13.8 to 17.2 gm/dL
Female: 12.1 to 15.1 gm/dL
(gm/dL = grams per deciliter) 
Hematocrit refers to the percentage of red blood cells in the blood.
Under normal conditions, hematocrit will relate closely to the concentration
of hemoglobin in the blood. Hematocrit is usually found to be 40.7 to 50.3
percent for males and 36.1 to 44.3 percent for females.
Another measurement relevant to Oxygen Advantage techniques is the
oxygen saturation percentage of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin has a maximum
oxygen-carrying capacity, and oxygen saturation simply means how much
of that capacity is filled with oxygen. Normal arterial oxygen saturation is
between 95 and 99 percent.
In the following sections we look at research that investigates
supplementary training programs, including high-altitude training, high-
intensity exercise, and simulation of high altitude by breath holding, and
compare how these techniques can improve oxygen-carrying capacity and
athletic performance naturally. 
The Merits of High-Altitude Training 
Traditional altitude training methods involve living and training at a high
altitude, forcing the body to adapt to exercising with less oxygen and
therefore increasing the blood’s oxygen-carrying capacity. Athletes still use
this technique today, particularly those who live at high altitudes such as
Kenyan and Ethiopian runners. However, there is a significant drawback to
training at high altitude, since exercising in such an atmosphere increases
--- END PAGE 104 ---

--- PAGE 105 ---
resistance, which can prevent an athlete from achieving his or her
maximum work rate. This reduction in exercise intensity can result in
muscle deconditioning.
To limit the detraining effects of working at high altitude while still
maintaining the benefits, Dr. Benjamin Levine and Dr. James Stray-
Gundersen from the University of Texas in Dallas developed the “live high
and train low” model in the 1990s. This model requires an athlete to live at
a moderate altitude of 2,500 meters but to train at an altitude lower than
1,500 meters. The premise of the method is to enable athletes to benefit
from the positive physiological changes associated with living at a high
altitude while enabling them to train at their maximum work rate.
Levine and Stray-Gundersen conducted a study of thirty-nine male and
female collegiate distance runners who were evenly matched in fitness
level. Each runner was assigned to one of three groups: 
1. Live low (150 meters) and train low (150 meters) 
2. Live high (2,500 meters) and train low (1,250 meters) 
3. Live high (2,500 meters) and train high (2,500 meters)
Results for the second group, “live high and train low,” showed a 9
percent improvement in red blood cell volume and a 5 percent improvement
in maximal oxygen uptake (VO2 max). The improvement in maximal
oxygen uptake was in direct proportion to increased red cell mass volume.
This translated to an impressive performance improvement of 13.4 seconds
in a 5,000-meter run.
After returning to sea level, the “live high and train low” group was the
only one to demonstrate significant improvements in both VO2 max and
5,000-meter run time. These improvements were attributed to the athletes’
acclimatization to altitude while maintaining the velocity of their sea-level
training, most likely also accounting for the increase in their VO2 max.
Another study replicated these results using national team distance
runners. Following 27 days of training at an altitude of 2,500 meters,
participants achieved an improvement of 1.1 percent in a 3,000-meter time
trial. Although a 1.1 percent improvement in performance may not seem to
be a large effect, at an elite level, races are won or lost by small fractions of
--- END PAGE 105 ---

--- PAGE 106 ---
a percent. Furthermore, the increase in running performance was
accompanied by a 3 percent improvement in maximal oxygen uptake.
The United States national team for long track speed skating utilized the
“live high, train low” model to prepare for the 2002 Winter Olympics in
Salt Lake City. That year they enjoyed unprecedented success, with six
athletes winning eight medals (three of which were gold) and two world
records broken. During the 2006 Torino Olympics, the U.S. long track
speed skaters who continued to employ the “live high, train low” model
brought home three gold, three silver, and one bronze medal. 
The Merits of High-Intensity Training 
Another training method that receives considerable attention from athletes
and coaches is high-intensity training. The fundamental principle of high-
intensity training is to exercise in short, intense bursts, performing at
maximum work rate—a technique that is certainly not for the fainthearted.
Numerous studies have investigated the different responses from training at
different intensities, and in comparison to moderate exercise, high-intensity
training provides greater improvements to both aerobic and anaerobic
capacity. Aerobic exercise is related to endurance and ensures that the body
is supplied with enough oxygen to continue to perform. Anaerobic exercise
means “without oxygen” and is more concerned with speed, power, and
strength, leading to improved performance in a shorter space of time.
Japanese scientist Izumi Tabata and colleagues at the National Institute
of Fitness and Sports in Japan conducted a study of two training
experiments to compare moderate- to high-intensity training. The high-
intensity group participated in the method known as Tabata training, in
which athletes give their full effort at an exhausting work rate for periods of
just 20 seconds at a time. The authors of the study concluded that although
moderate-intensity aerobic training improved aerobic power, high-intensity
intermittent training improved both anaerobic and aerobic performance.
In another study, Stephen Bailey and colleagues from the University of
Exeter in the UK compared a high-intensity sprint training program with
low-intensity endurance training, measuring VO2 uptake and muscle
deoxygenation. Posttrial results showed that the high-intensity group
--- END PAGE 106 ---

--- PAGE 107 ---
experienced faster VO2 kinetics and an increased tolerance of high-
intensity exercise. This means that the athletes experienced faster oxygen
uptake when transitioning between rest and exercise, allowing them to
perform at a higher standard more easily. This improved oxygenation of
active muscles also contributes to decreased recovery time following
exercise and a reduction in the production of lactic acid.
It seems clear, therefore, that high-intensity training offers several
positive benefits to athletes, including:
• Improved anaerobic and aerobic energy supplying systems,
allowing for greater endurance, strength, speed, and power
• Faster VO2 kinetics, allowing the blood to carry more oxygen
to the muscles
• Increased tolerance to high-intensity exercise
• Decreased recovery time from less than maximum exercise
• Reduced lactic acid buildup
• Improved oxygenation of active muscles, allowing you to
exercise harder and longer
In the next section we will examine how to produce the beneficial
effects of high-altitude and high-intensity training to increase exercise
performance. 
The Science of Simulating High-Altitude and High-Intensity
Exercise 
High-altitude training in real conditions is obviously more feasible for
athletes living in countries such as Kenya than those of us living in, say,
Ireland, where the low-lying terrain reaches no higher than 1,000 meters.
Similarly, high-intensity training may not be practical for some people, as it
--- END PAGE 107 ---

--- PAGE 108 ---
involves maximum physical effort and respiration until exhaustion. Some
people will find high-intensity exercise extremely uncomfortable or find
that they lose control of their breathing, which can lead to health concerns.
A practical alternative available to all athletes regardless of location and
fitness is to supplement regular training with breath-hold training. In the
following sections we will learn how breath-holding techniques allow us to
simulate many of the positive benefits of high-altitude and high-intensity
training, including:
• The release of red blood cells from the spleen, improving
aerobic performance
• The production of natural EPO
• A higher tolerance to carbon dioxide
• Reduced stress and fatigue of working muscles
• Improved psychological preparedness
• Improved recovery time
• Reduced lactic acid
• Improved swimming technique (as discussed later)
• The ability to maintain fitness during rest or injury
• Maintenance of these benefits without the need to travel to high
altitudes
For hundreds of thousands of years, breath holding was practiced
extensively by our ancestors for the purposes of foraging for food by diving
in a deep-water environment, and some evolutionary theorists even suggest
that it might have been responsible for a number of unique human features.
To this day, predominantly female Japanese pearl divers known as ama
--- END PAGE 108 ---

--- PAGE 109 ---
continue with the tradition of breath-hold diving—a practice thought to be
over two thousand years old.
The best-equipped natural diver is likely the Weddell seal, which can
remain submerged in water for up to two hours at a time. Although humans
do not have the same adaptive physiological response of the seal, we are
able to exhibit certain coping mechanisms in order to deal with a relative
lack of oxygen. Generally, most humans can hold their breath after an
inhalation for a maximum of up to about 50 seconds, with elite divers
achieving a static breath hold of between 8 minutes 23 seconds and 11
minutes 35 seconds.
A number of studies have sought to understand the significant role that
breath holding can play in adapting the body for increased oxygen delivery,
with researchers investigating the effects of breath-hold diving in native
divers, professional divers, and untrained divers.
The spleen is an organ that acts as a blood bank; when the body signals
an increased demand for oxygen, the spleen releases stores of red blood
cells. It therefore plays a very important role in regulating blood hematocrit
(the percentage of red blood cells in the blood), as well as hemoglobin
concentration.
Provoking the body to release additional red blood cells and increase the
concentration of hemoglobin in the blood improves the body’s ability to
deliver oxygen to working muscles during exercise. Breath-holding studies
involving volunteers whose spleens had been removed for medical reasons
demonstrate just how vital this organ is in changing the composition of the
blood. After a series of short breath-holding exercises, those with spleens
intact showed an increase in hematocrit and hemoglobin concentration of
6.4 percent and 3.3 percent respectively, while those without spleens
showed no alterations in blood composition at all. This means that after as
few as 5 breath holds, the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood can be
significantly improved with the help of the spleen.
This organ also influences how long a person can hold their breath for.
In one study, participants were able to achieve their longest breath hold on
their third attempt. Trained breath-hold divers peaked at a total of 143
seconds, untrained divers at 127 seconds, and splenectomized volunteers—
those who had previously had their spleens removed—achieved 74 seconds.
Not only that but spleen size decreased by a total of 20 percent in both
--- END PAGE 109 ---

--- PAGE 110 ---
breath-hold divers and the untrained volunteers, demonstrating a rapid
contraction of the spleen in response to the reduction of oxygen. What this
means is that breath-holding ability improves with repetition as the spleen
contracts, releasing additional red blood cells into circulation and
improving the oxygen-carrying capacity of the body. While these studies
generally include subjects holding their breath for as long as possible,
significant splenic contraction has been found to take place with even very
short breath holds of 30 seconds. However, the strongest contractions of the
spleen, and therefore the greatest changes to blood composition, are shown
following maximum breath holds.
Another useful piece of information gleaned from these studies is that it
is not necessary to be immersed in water to benefit from the effects of
breath-hold diving. There seems to be no discernible difference between the
increase of hematocrit and hemoglobin concentration in volunteers
practicing breath holds in and out of water. Since there is no visible increase
in the results of breath holding with the face immersed in water, it can be
concluded that it is the breath hold itself that stimulates splenic contraction.
In other words, it is not being underwater that causes the spleen to release
red blood cells into the circulation but the simple drop of oxygen pressure
in the blood resulting from holding of the breath. Therefore, the benefits of
breath holding are not limited to divers and swimmers. This is of particular
relevance to the Oxygen Advantage program, as our breath-hold exercises
are performed out of water.
The relevance of the above studies suggests that effects similar to those
achieved with high-altitude training can be obtained at sea level simply by
performing a series of breath holds. Stimulating the spleen to contract by
reducing the availability of oxygen causes an increase in hemoglobin and
hematocrit, which in turn increases the oxygen-carrying capacity of the
blood and improves aerobic ability.
The most appealing aspect of breath holding is that it is feasible for
most individuals and is not as taxing on the body as high-intensity exercise.
Performing just 3 to 5 breath holds of maximum duration can lead to a 2 to
4 percent increase in hemoglobin. This might not sound like much, but
where a fraction of a second can determine the difference between the
winner and the loser, every possible advantage counts.
--- END PAGE 110 ---

--- PAGE 111 ---
Why Oxygen Advantage Training Elicits an Even Stronger
Response 
In the studies investigating breath holds and splenic contractions discussed,
each breath hold was performed following an inhalation. You might be
wondering why Oxygen Advantage breath holds are performed after an
exhalation. Let me explain.
Performing a breath hold after an exhalation lowers the oxygen
saturation of the blood to simulate the effects of high-altitude training. I
have monitored the blood oxygen saturation of thousands of individuals as
they practice breath holds, and by far the greatest change to oxygen
saturation occurs after an exhalation. For most people, after four or five
days of practice, a drop of oxygen saturation below 94 percent can be
observed—a level comparative to the effects of living at an altitude of 2,500
to 4,000 meters.
Gently exhaling prior to holding the breath reduces air content in the
lungs, allowing a quicker buildup of carbon dioxide and eliciting a stronger
response. While this reduces the length of time for which you can hold your
breath, increased carbon dioxide has been shown to improve hemoglobin
concentration by around 10 percent compared to a breath hold with normal
carbon dioxide.
Higher levels of carbon dioxide in the blood can produce an even
greater contraction of the spleen, resulting in an increase in the release of
red blood cells and therefore the oxygenation of the blood.
Increased CO2 in the blood also causes a rightward shift of the
oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. As described by the Bohr Effect, an
increase in carbon dioxide decreases blood pH and causes oxygen to be
offloaded from hemoglobin to the tissues, further reducing blood oxygen
saturation.
Holding the breath on the exhale also capitalizes on the benefits of nitric
oxide by carrying the gas into the lungs rather than expelling it. By exhaling
and holding the breath, nitric oxide is able to pool in the nasal cavity so that
when breathing resumes, air laden with nitric oxide is inhaled into the
lungs.
--- END PAGE 111 ---

--- PAGE 112 ---
Increase Erythropoietin (EPO) Naturally 
As we have seen, erythropoietin, often known as EPO, is a hormone
secreted by the kidneys in response to reduced oxygen levels in the blood.
One of the functions of EPO is stimulating the maturation of red blood cells
in the bone marrow, thereby increasing oxygen delivery to muscles. Breath
holding is an effective way of stimulating the release of EPO, allowing you
to fuel your blood with increased levels of oxygen and enhance your sports
performance. The concentration of EPO can increase by as much as 24
percent when the body is subjected to lower oxygen levels using breath-
hold exercises.
A clear example of the relationship between breath holding and EPO
production can be found in those suffering from sleep apnea. Sleep apnea is
a condition involving involuntary holding of the breath after exhalation
during sleep. Depending on the severity, the sleeper may hold their breath
from 10 to 80 seconds, and this may occur up to 70 times an hour. During
sleep apnea, the oxygen saturation of the blood with oxygen can reduce
from normal levels of around 98 percent to as low as 50 percent. These
reduced oxygen levels can cause an increase in EPO of 20 percent.
Of course, there is quite a difference between the condition of sleep
apnea and the practice of breath holding to enhance sports performance.
However, it is interesting to note the effect of breath holding (both
voluntary and involuntary) on the production of natural EPO. Increasing
EPO levels allows the blood to deliver greater amounts of oxygen to the
muscles and is the natural equivalent of the illegal blood doping methods
discussed at the beginning of this chapter. The benefit of using breath
holding as a performance-enhancing exercise is that, unlike sleep apnea,
conscious breath holding allows you to keep complete control over the
frequency and duration of each hold. And, unlike blood doping, the EPO
you produce using simple breathing techniques is free, effective, and legal. 
The Importance of Movement for Simulating High-Altitude
Training
--- END PAGE 112 ---

--- PAGE 113 ---
During physical exercise or breath holding, a shortage of air is created. An
air shortage is best described as a hunger or desire to breathe, varying in
intensity from mild to moderate to strong. The intensity of air shortage will
differ depending on the exercise or situation. For example, while practicing
the exercises in this book, the air shortage during sitting should be mild or
tolerable whereas the air shortage during intense physical exercise can be
strong. A strong air shortage during physical exercise is beneficial during
training as it conditions the body to tolerate extreme demands, and is often
popular among athletes as it presents a new challenge to pit their willpower
and determination against.
A strong air shortage during physical exercise is more suitable for
athletes with a BOLT score of longer than 20 seconds. When your BOLT
score is shorter than 20 seconds, you must be careful not to hold the breath
for too long as it can cause a loss of control of your breathing. It is
important that you are always able to resume calm breathing following a
breath hold. The shorter the BOLT score, the easier it is to lose control of
your breathing.
Please note that when creating an intense air shortage you may develop
a headache as your blood oxygen saturation decreases, but this should
disappear after about 10 minutes of rest. Try to avoid overdoing the
exercises to the point that they bring on a headache. 
Breath Holding to Improve Respiratory Muscle Strength 
The respiratory center is located in the brainstem and continuously monitors
blood oxygen, carbon dioxide, and blood pH, using this information to
control the amount of air taken into the body. When the body requires a
breath of fresh air, the brain sends a message to the respiratory muscles,
telling them to breathe. The diaphragm, which is the main breathing
muscle, moves downward, creating negative pressure in the chest cavity,
resulting in an inhalation. Following inhalation, another message is sent for
the diaphragm to move back to its resting position, causing an exhalation.
When the breath is held following an exhalation, the intake of oxygen is
halted while carbon dioxide accumulates in the blood. During this pause,
oxygen cannot enter the lungs, and carbon dioxide cannot leave the
--- END PAGE 113 ---

--- PAGE 114 ---
bloodstream. The respiratory center, noticing the change to blood gases,
communicates to the diaphragm to resume breathing, and the diaphragm
contracts downward in an attempt to allow the body to breathe. However,
breathing cannot resume while the breath is held, and the brain begins to
send increasingly frequent messages to the diaphragm, causing its spasms to
intensify. You can experience this by simply holding your breath until you
feel a strong need to breathe. At first you will feel an isolated spasm of the
diaphragm, but this will soon be followed by more intense and quicker
spasms as the body attempts to resume breathing.
In essence, holding the breath until a medium to strong need for air
mobilizes the diaphragm, provides it with a workout and helps to strengthen
it. While there are many products on the market aimed at increasing
respiratory muscle strength, breath holding may be the easiest and most
natural as it can be employed at any time and actively directs attention to
the diaphragm. Improving respiratory muscle strength can be extremely
beneficial during exercise, especially when fatigue of the diaphragm may
determine exercise tolerance and endurance. 
Breath Holding to Reduce Lactic Acid 
Just as injury plays a role in limiting physical performance, mental and
physical fatigue can also prevent an athlete from pushing harder and faster.
As U.S. Army general George Patton wrote to his troops during World War
II: “Fatigue makes cowards of us all. Men in condition do not tire.” And he
was right; endurance is relative to how well the body is prepared, and the
onset of fatigue occurs when the body is pushed beyond the limits of
preparation.
Working a muscle without sufficient fuel generates lactic acid, and
while small amounts can be beneficial, acting as a temporary energy source,
a buildup of lactic acid creates a burning or cramping sensation in the
muscle that can slow down or even halt exercise completely.
Studies with athletes have demonstrated that breath holding after an
exhalation deliberately exposes the body to higher levels of acidity, thereby
improving tolerance and delaying the onset of fatigue during competition.
--- END PAGE 114 ---

--- PAGE 115 ---
In a team sport like football, where players are expected to maintain
form and concentration during 90 minutes of intense activity, the ability to
push through or avoid fatigue can be instrumental to a team’s success. I
recently worked with the Galway women’s football team, whose coach,
Don O’Riordan, was concerned that the players were tiring during the last
15 minutes of a game. When fatigue sets in, muscles tire, work rate slows,
and in some respects there is a loss of interest and focus—a situation almost
guaranteed to hand victory to the other side. Breaking through the barrier of
fatigue can be as much about psychological resilience as physiological
endurance, and breath-holding exercises offer a useful technique for
improving both.
In order to replicate the conditions of a game, the team’s training
usually lasted the length of a full match. Their training session consisted of
a warm-up and a 10-minute run followed by match practice and tactics. The
last 15 minutes included drills and interval training such as running back
and forth between cones set at different distances. To incorporate the
Oxygen Advantage program as seamlessly as possible into this type of
session, I made only modest changes to the existing routine so that the
players could adapt to new breathing techniques while maintaining their
current form. The result not only increased the effectiveness of the training,
but also the players’ endurance and performance during competition.
During the 10-minute run at the beginning of training, I instructed the
players to switch from their usual habit of breathing through their mouth to
running at a comfortable pace with their mouth closed. Every minute or so,
each player exhaled and held their breath until they felt a medium to strong
air shortage. No changes were made to the match practice portion of the
training session, as the introduction of nasal breathing adds an extra load to
the body that can initially slow down an athlete, and possibly lead to
deconditioning of leg strength. The better approach, therefore, was to
incorporate nasal breathing into the 10-minute run and the final 15 minutes
of interval training only.
Since the team had a tendency to experience fatigue during the
remaining 15 minutes of a game, introducing nasal breathing to the final
interval training session added an increased challenge. Running flat out
from cone to cone with the mouth closed is no mean feat, and although a
couple of the players experienced mild headaches during the first session,
--- END PAGE 115 ---

--- PAGE 116 ---
the team adapted to it easily. After a few more practice sessions, the players
had adapted well to the demands of nasal breathing, so I decided to
challenge them further by introducing breath-hold exercises. These
exercises (which can be found in the next chapter) subjected the players to
an even greater feeling of breathlessness and worked to further delay the
onset of fatigue. 
Bicarbonate of Soda—More Than Just a Cooking Ingredient! 
In a similar way that breath holding delays the onset of fatigue during
sports, countless studies have shown that taking the alkaline agent 
bicarbonate of soda reduces acidity in the blood to improve endurance. 
Who would have thought that a cooking ingredient found in almost every
kitchen cupboard in the Western world could also improve sports
performance? Not only that, but it is a very helpful tool to reduce your
breathing volume and increase your BOLT score.
Bicarbonate of soda is a salt that is found dissolved in many natural
mineral springs and is usually sold as baking soda, bread soda, or cooking
soda. This ingredient has a wide variety of uses ranging from baking to
brushing your teeth to cleaning your fridge.
Taken internally, bicarbonate of soda helps to maintain pH of the blood,
and it’s also the active ingredient in a number of over-the-counter antacid
medications. Dr. Joseph Mercola, a leading authority on natural health,
suggests taking bicarbonate of soda for the relief of a number of ailments,
including ulcer pain, insect bites, and gum disease.
The therapeutic potential of bicarbonate of soda may soon become more
widely known, since Dr. Mark Pagel from the University of Arizona Cancer
Center was recently awarded a grant of $2 million from the National
Institutes of Health to study the effectiveness of bicarbonate of soda therapy
in treating breast cancer.
Over the years many studies have demonstrated the benefits of
bicarbonate of soda as a method to help improve sports performance.
During high-intensity training, the availability of oxygen for working
muscles decreases, which causes an accumulation of acid, leading to muscle
fatigue. By ingesting bicarbonate of soda, you can help to maintain normal
--- END PAGE 116 ---

--- PAGE 117 ---
blood pH by decreasing lactic acid buildup during anaerobic exercise. This
alkaline soda neutralizes the acid that accumulates during high-intensity
training, resulting in greater endurance and power output.
Bicarbonate of soda can also have positive effects on maximum breath-
hold time. As noted throughout this book, improved breath-hold time has
positive implications for breathlessness during exercise and your ability to
improve your VO2 max. The ingestion of bicarbonate of soda prior to the
practice of breath-hold exercises has been shown to increase maximum
breath-hold time by up to 8.6 percent.
For swimmers, the addition of bicarbonate of soda has resulted in an
improvement of several seconds during test trials, as well as having
significant effects on resting blood pH. Researchers who have investigated
the effects of bicarbonate of soda on swimming performance have
concluded that the ingestion of bicarbonate of soda can act as an effective
buffer during high-intensity interval swimming and could be used to
increase training intensity and overall swimming performance. These
benefits have even been applied to boxers, leading to improved punch
efficacy!
What is consistent throughout all these studies is that the practice of
ingesting bicarbonate of soda before exercise successfully neutralizes acid
buildup in the blood. In terms of fitness and performance, this means:
• Improved endurance
• Increased maximum breath-hold time
• Reduced breathlessness
• Higher average power output
All in all, quite an impressive array of benefits from a household agent
that has no known side effects when taken in small doses! 
How to Take Bicarbonate of Soda 
I find the following recipe beneficial for improving breathing
habits and increasing breath-hold time, and I use it quite often.
Try it and take note of its effects on your exercise performance.
--- END PAGE 117 ---

--- PAGE 118 ---
You can take bicarbonate of soda an hour or so before
training. When you are used to taking it before training, you may
also wish to do so before a competition. But like anything else,
there is no point in overdoing it. As a precautionary measure,
please talk to your doctor before using this approach.
½ teaspoon bicarbonate of soda (also known as baking soda
or bread soda)
2 tablespoons apple cider vinegar 
1 . Put the bicarbonate of soda in a glass. 
2 . Add the apple cider vinegar and stir for about 1 minute, or
until the soda is thoroughly dissolved. 
3 . Drink the mixture. It will taste a little acidic.
It’s as simple as that. Alternatively, you can try drinking ordinary soda
water from the grocery store. While traditionally used as a mixer for
alcoholic beverages, the carbonation of the water can provide an added
effect.
If you drink soda water, please also make sure that you drink your
required intake of ordinary still water to ensure adequate hydration. The
color of your urine will allow you to determine when you are adequately
hydrated; drink enough plain water to ensure it is not too dark, but don’t
drink so much that your urine is completely clear throughout the day.
Drinking too much water is probably just as bad for you as drinking too
little. It is about getting the balance right! Until recently, water intoxication
or hyponatremia was a little-known and even less understood medical
condition. Most people understand that it is sensible to stay hydrated during
and after exercise, but when this advice is taken to excess and athletes
overdo it, dangerous side effects can result. Marathon runners are
particularly susceptible to drinking too much during training and
competition—whether water or sports drinks—and this excessive hydration
can cause the brain to swell as sodium levels decrease to critically low
levels. In a 2002 study of Boston Marathon runners, 13 percent of the
runners sampled showed low sodium levels, putting them at risk of serious
--- END PAGE 118 ---

--- PAGE 119 ---
or even fatal illness. In that very same marathon, twenty-eight-year-old
Cynthia Lucero collapsed and died. The state medical examiner’s office
concluded that the cause of death was a series of medical events brought on
by drinking too much fluid during the event. Commenting on the tragedy,
Dr. Arthur Siegel of McLean Hospital advised for athletes to weigh
themselves prior to a race and write their weight on their race bib. Then, if
runners felt unwell during the race, they could be weighed again and treated
for dehydration if it was found that their weight was down. If, however,
their weight had increased, it would mean that they were overhydrated and
that they should retire from the race and stop drinking. 
Breath Holding to Prepare for Ascent to High Altitude 
Every year, millions of sea-level residents make the journey to high
altitudes for recreational skiing and climbing, or for religious, spiritual, or
other purposes. Adventurers, climbers, walkers, and sports enthusiasts have
ventured to altitudes of over 1,500 meters for the challenge and thrill of the
mountains.
British adventurer Bear Grylls reached the summit of Mount Everest in
1998 at the age of twenty-three. In his book Facing Up, Grylls describes
how he trained for his ascent of Mount Everest by “swimming countless
lengths of the local pool—one underwater, then one on the surface, for
hours at a time. This boosts one’s ability to work without oxygen, making
the body more efficient.”
There is no doubt that Grylls’s training regimen helped his body to
acclimatize to the reduced partial pressure of oxygen he would experience
during his climb to the top of Mount Everest. Similar to swimming
repetitive underwater lengths of a pool, the exercises of the Oxygen
Advantage program that simulate high-altitude training can be very helpful
to prepare for an ascent to high altitude. More important, as these breath-
hold exercises are performed on land, they involve no risk of drowning!
Acclimatization refers to the adaptive changes that the body makes in
order to cope with reduced oxygen levels. Most people can ascend to 2,500
meters without difficulty, since oxygen availability is still sufficient at that
--- END PAGE 119 ---

--- PAGE 120 ---
altitude. However, at higher elevations the oxygen saturation in the blood
significantly decreases, making physical activity difficult to sustain.
As you ascend above 2,500 meters, your breathing will become heavier
to compensate for the reduced availability of oxygen. Although heavier
breathing brings greater quantities of oxygen to the lungs, it also increases
the loss of carbon dioxide. As discussed earlier, the loss of carbon dioxide
causes blood vessels to narrow and red blood cells to cling on to the oxygen
they carry, resulting in reduced oxygenation of tissues and organs.
Ironically, as the body breathes more intensely in an effort to take in more
oxygen, less is delivered. In a high-altitude environment, oxygenation is
more important than ever if altitude sickness is to be avoided.
Almost half of those who attempt to trek or climb to an altitude above
4,000 meters will develop one or two symptoms of mountain sickness after
a rapid ascent of more than 400 meters per day. Symptoms vary depending
on the individual’s physical condition and health and the speed of the climb.
Generally, symptoms are mild to moderate and may include:
• Headaches
• Fatigue
• Insomnia
• Loss of appetite
• Nausea or vomiting
• Rapid pulse
• Light-headedness
• Shortness of breath during exertion
A faster climb tends to increase the severity of these symptoms, and
may bring about additional symptoms, including:
• Tightening of the chest
• Confusion
• Coughing or coughing up blood
• A bluish discoloration of the skin
• Shortness of breath during rest
• An inability to walk in a straight line
--- END PAGE 120 ---

--- PAGE 121 ---
Increasing the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood is the most
important factor when adjusting to an increase in altitude, and breath-hold
training exercises are an ideal way to prepare in the weeks before ascent.
Spending two to three months performing 5 to 10 maximum breath holds
each day will condition the body to accept this intense feeling of
breathlessness as a familiar occurrence, potentially resulting in a reduced
response to this experience at higher altitude.
Finally, any individual who is serious about his climb should have a
basic understanding of how his breathing influences delivery of oxygen to
tissues and organs. I can only imagine the number of climbers who
intentionally make their breathing more intense to try to counteract the
feeling of breathlessness as they climb above 2,500 meters. By now you
will be acutely aware that this is exactly the wrong thing to do, and will
most likely result in more severe symptoms of altitude sickness. The right
thing to do would be to start off with a high BOLT score, to breathe through
the nose at all times, and to alter your pace to reduce the feeling of
breathlessness.
At least one study shows that breath-hold time is a very useful predictor
of mountain sickness and that the lower the breath-hold time, the greater the
likelihood of developing symptoms of altitude sickness. In fact, those with a
high breath-hold time and a high concentration of hemoglobin in the blood
will be better able to tolerate desaturation of oxygen.
Though the ideal BOLT score for each individual will vary, it is
reasonable to suggest that a BOLT score of 40 seconds would certainly
afford a greater protection from conditions of high altitude than a BOLT of
20 seconds or below. 
Prevent Dehydration with Nasal Breathing 
The air in mountainous regions and at higher altitudes is cooler and drier
than air at sea level. As you ascend to higher altitudes, the increased
sensation of breathlessness is likely to induce the switch to mouth
breathing. However, since one of the functions of the nose is to moisten and
warm incoming air, breathing through the mouth can lead to dehydration, as
considerable moisture is expended.
--- END PAGE 121 ---

--- PAGE 122 ---
Another factor is that during exhalation, mouth breathing is completely
ineffective in retaining moisture. To verify this, gently breathe out through
your mouth onto a glass and check the moisture left behind. Now do the
same thing, except exhale through your nose. You will find that the
moisture left on the glass following nasal exhalation is far less than the
moisture left from exhaling through the mouth.
This loss of fluid can contribute to moderate dehydration, resulting in
dryness of the lips, mouth, and throat. Other symptoms arising from
dehydration include headache, fatigue, and dizziness, which at high altitude
could easily be confused with mountain sickness. Heavy breathers and
mouth breathers will certainly experience a far greater loss of moisture than
those who have a normal breathing volume and who breathe through the
nose. Remember that there are no convenience stores at high altitude, so the
more moisture you can hold on to, the less you need to carry!
Finally, inhaling cold, dry air through the mouth can cause the airways
to narrow. As the airways constrict, the feeling is similar to breathing
through a narrow straw, and the result is often to breathe harder and faster
to compensate for the restricted airflow. This is a common occurrence
experienced by individuals with asthma and can cause even greater
dehydration and cooling of the airways, which may lead to even greater
respiratory problems.
In the next chapter we will learn exercises that simulate high-altitude
training in order to increase the oxygen-carrying capacity of your blood for
better sports performance, or to prepare for an ascent to high altitude.
--- END PAGE 122 ---

--- PAGE 123 ---
CHAPTER 7 
Bring the Mountain to You
W orld-renowned Brazilian track coach Valério Luiz de Oliveira used
breath-hold training techniques with Olympic athletes Joaquim Cruz and
Mary Decker, who between them set six world records in 800-meter to one-
mile distance running events in the 1970s and 1980s.
De Oliveira’s goal was to enable athletes to maintain form at the end of
an anaerobic race of 400–800m. Another aspect was to improve
psychological preparedness by allowing the athletes to maintain composure
during an oxygen-deprived state. One final factor was to train the runners
not to pay attention to their breathing, but instead to focus on tactical
maneuvers and running form. De Oliveira’s techniques were a case of
getting results first and figuring out the science later, but his theories
certainly proved to be right.
The method de Oliveira used with his athletes is as follows:
• Athletes run 200 meters on a straight course at near race pace,
holding the breath on an inhalation for the last 15 meters.
• After a partial rest of 30 seconds, this breath hold is repeated 3
more times.
• Athletes then spend 3 minutes recovering before repeating.
• In total, the athletes perform 3 sets of 4 breath holds.
According to de Oliveira, “Everybody’s capable of holding their breath
for a very long time. But you’ve got to do three of these sets. By the final
--- END PAGE 123 ---

--- PAGE 124 ---
set, you’re going to become very, very tired. It’s hard to hold your breath at
that point. But if you use my drill, you will see results.”
De Oliveira uses another exercise in which his 400m and 800m runners
hold their breath for the last 30 meters, simulating the end of a race when
they will be most fatigued. Maintaining form during the last 30 meters of a
race like this is crucial. According to de Oliveira, “The most important
thing you can do in the race no matter how exhausted you get is to maintain
your form.”
Joaquim Cruz, coached in this way by de Oliveira, won gold in the
800m competition during the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles and silver at
the 1988 Olympics in Seoul. Further accomplishments included bronze in
the 800 meters at the 1983 World Championships and gold in the 1,500
meters during the 1987 and 1995 Pan American Games. By the end of
1984, he was the National Collegiate Athletic Association champion and
Olympic champion; undefeated in all seven of his 800m finals; had run the
second-, fourth-, fifth-, and sixth-fastest 800m times in history; and easily
ranked as number one in the world for the 800 meters in 1984.
The legendary Czech athlete Emil Zátopek, described by the New York
Times as perhaps one of the greatest distance runners ever, also incorporated
breath holding into his regular training. Zátopek was a man of small stature,
standing 5 feet 8 inches tall and racing at 139 pounds, but he found an edge
over his competitors by developing his own innovative training techniques,
which included interval training and breath holding. While walking to and
from work each day, he passed a lane lined with poplar trees. On the first
day, he held his breath until he reached the fourth poplar. On the second day
he held his breath until he reached the fifth poplar, increasing the distance
of his breath hold by one tree each day until he could hold his breath for the
entire line of trees. On one occasion, Emil held his breath until he passed
out. While it is not necessary to practice to this extreme, it is fascinating to
note that one of history’s greatest runners was performing breath holding
long before it formed part of training for some present-day athletes.
The difficulty in presenting accounts of active athletes is that they strive
to keep their training regimens a secret. It doesn’t make much sense to
disclose your innovative techniques, especially when they give you an edge
over the competition. To date, I have worked with a number of Olympic and
professional athletes who have incorporated the breathing exercises in this
--- END PAGE 124 ---

--- PAGE 125 ---
book into their training. Given the tiny (but highly important) difference in
margin of performance between one elite athlete and another, I am very
much aware of the importance of keeping training information close to
one’s chest.
However, sometimes hints and snatches of information can be gleaned
through the press, suggesting that breath holding is becoming more widely
practiced in the athletic community. For example, a recent article on the
athletic website Eightlane.org reported that Galen Rupp—the current
American record holder for the 10,000 meters and indoor 3,000 meters, and
silver medal winner at the 2012 London Olympics—had recently collapsed
during training. Rupp’s headphones had fallen off and “he was unable to
hear his coach reminding him to breathe.” Reading between the lines, it
seems as if Rupp may well have been practicing breath holding during his
training sessions, with his coach setting his limits. Please note that it is
neither necessary nor safe to hold your breath in order to create such an
extreme air hunger. To get the most benefit from the breath-hold exercises
in this book, only hold your breath until you experience a medium to strong
urge for air. Pay attention to the intensity of the air hunger you create as you
perform each exercise, and release your nose when you feel challenged.
You should be able to recover your breathing within 2 to 3 breaths
following a breath hold.
To the uninitiated, purposely holding the breath may seem strange.
Oxygen is necessary for life, so why subject the body to such a limitation?
Just as physical training is a very natural activity for mankind, so too is
breath holding. As a child, you might have held your breath any time you
swam to pick up a coin or other object from the bottom of a swimming
pool. At other times, you may have held competitions with siblings or
friends to see who could hold their breath for the longest, with passing the
1-minute mark being an acceptable accomplishment.
For the past thirteen years, thousands of children have attended my
courses to help address coughing, wheezing, and symptoms of
breathlessness and asthma. Children as young as four are able to practice a
number of different breath-hold exercises, each with a specific purpose. For
example, there is a breath-hold exercise to help unblock the nose, another to
help stop a wheeze or a cough, while another is designed to improve
breathing volume by holding the breath for as long as possible.
--- END PAGE 125 ---

--- PAGE 126 ---
While adults may at first be wary of holding their breath, children often
take to it like ducks to water. I usually work with five or six children to a
group, ranging in age from four to fifteen years. Beginners are gently
introduced to the exercises by walking a distance of 10 paces while they
hold their breath. After 3 or 4 repetitions, the number of paces is increased
in increments of 5 until the child understands the exercise and experiences a
moderate need for air. Most children master the exercise in no time at all,
and are soon in friendly competition with their peers to hold their breath for
as many steps as possible.
I usually expect children to hold their breath for 30 paces during the
first session, increasing by 10 extra paces each week. Some children will
make quicker progress and can learn to hold their breath for up to 80 paces
in as little as two or three weeks without losing breath control or
experiencing any stress. Even professional athletes would be impressed by
this feat. More important, at 80 paces, in my experience, the child’s blocked
nose, cough, wheeze, or exercise-induced asthma will have completely
disappeared.
The beauty of breath holding is that while the air shortage can be
relatively extreme, it is entirely under our own control and for a short
duration of time only.
For premenstrual women, vegetarians, or those with a history of anemia,
it may be necessary to take an iron supplement to support the production of
normal red blood cells. If, despite sustained practice of these exercises, your
BOLT score fails to increase, it may be useful to visit your doctor to have a
complete blood count. If your hemoglobin is low, speak with your doctor
about iron supplementation. In some individuals, I have witnessed iron
supplementation making a remarkable difference to BOLT scores within
just a few short weeks.
The following Oxygen Advantage breath-hold training exercises
provide simple ways to simulate the beneficial effects of high-altitude
training and high-intensity training while allowing you to exercise in your
usual way. Each exercise provides both a hypoxic (lack of oxygen) and a
hypercapnic (high carbon dioxide) response. Combining these two effects
produces important changes in the body, such as:
• Lowering sensitivity to carbon dioxide
--- END PAGE 126 ---

--- PAGE 127 ---
• Increasing endurance
• Reducing discomfort and fatigue from lactic acid buildup
• Increasing the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood
• Improving breathing economy
• Improving VO2 max
By incorporating these easy techniques into your routine, you will find
that your breath-hold ability increases quickly, and you will begin to see
results within your training and your competitive performance. 
Using a Pulse Oximeter 
To get the best results from breath-hold exercises, it can be helpful to use a
handheld device called a pulse oximeter that measures how loaded the
blood is with oxygen. Convenient and noninvasive, using a pulse oximeter
simply involves placing a probe on your fingertip to measure the oxygen
saturation (SpO2) of your blood. A pulse oximeter can be purchased rather
cheaply, but my advice is to purchase a better-known brand such as
NONIN, as they tend to be more responsive. One of the main benefits of
using a pulse oximeter is that it can be very motivating to witness the drop
in oxygen saturation as you practice breath holds, reinforcing the success of
the exercise. In addition, the device can help to ensure that you don’t
overdo the exercises by lowering your SpO2 below 80 percent.
Normal oxygen saturation at sea level varies between 95 and 99 percent
(as we have seen), while the benefits from breath holding occur when the
SpO2 level is dropped to below 94 percent. In the beginning, you may not
notice much of a decrease to your oxygen saturation while performing
breath holds. However, with practice and the ability to tolerate a stronger air
shortage, the drop to oxygen saturation will become evident in as little as a
few days.
The effects of breath holding depend on two factors—oxygen saturation
during training and the length of the exposure to reduced oxygen—but slow
and steady is the way to go, just as it is whenever you start a new exercise
program. To get the most out of breath-hold exercises, it helps to start
--- END PAGE 127 ---

--- PAGE 128 ---
gently, holding the breath until you feel a medium air hunger during the
first two or three breath holds before gradually increasing the duration and
intensity. This way, you will feel in control and be able to practice more
effectively. As your BOLT score increases, you will find it easier to manage
the sensation of air hunger, and your blood oxygen saturation will start to
drop below 94 percent. 
Simulate High-Altitude Training While Walking 
We begin by introducing a simple walking exercise that enables you to
achieve similar benefits to those experienced during intense physical
training in as little as 10 to 15 minutes. The beauty of this exercise is that it
can be performed anywhere and at any time, even if an injury is preventing
you from engaging in normal training. Similar to any intense physical
exercise, it is important to practice at least two hours after eating. Just as it
is not advisable to go for a jog directly after eating, it is also best to practice
breathing exercises on an empty stomach. Not only would it be
uncomfortable to perform breath holds too soon after a meal, but the benefit
of the exercise would be much reduced as the process of digestion increases
breathing.
During this exercise you will be practicing breath holds as you walk.
For the first 2 to 3 breath holds, in order to gently acclimatize your body to
lower levels of oxygen, it’s important to hold your breath only until you feel
a medium hunger for air. For the remaining breath holds, challenge yourself
by aiming to achieve a relatively strong need for air. Due to a delay in the
pulse transit time, it is common for the decrease in oxygen saturation to
take place not during the breath hold, but soon after it. Therefore, to get the
most from the exercise, minimize breathing for about 15 seconds following
the breath hold by taking short breaths in and out through the nose. If you
have a pulse oximeter, you might enjoy observing the decrease to your
oxygen saturation as you do this—effectively simulating high-altitude
training and bringing the mountain to you.
--- END PAGE 128 ---

--- PAGE 129 ---
• Walk and hold: After a minute of continuous walking, gently
exhale and pinch your nose to hold your breath. If you feel
uncomfortable pinching your nose while walking in public, you
can simply hold your breath without holding your nose.
Continue to walk while holding your breath until you feel a
medium to strong air shortage. Release your nose, inhale
through it, and minimize your breathing by taking very short
breaths for about 15 seconds. Then allow your breathing to
return to normal.
• Continue walking for 30 seconds and repeat: Continue
walking for around 30 seconds while breathing through your
nose, then gently exhale and pinch your nose with your fingers.
Walk while holding the breath until you feel a medium to
strong hunger for air. Release your nose and minimize your
breathing by taking short breaths in and out through your nose
for about 15 seconds. Then allow your breathing to revert to
normal.
--- END PAGE 129 ---

--- PAGE 130 ---
• Repeat breath holds 8 to 10 times: While continuing to walk,
perform a breath hold every minute or so in order to create a
medium to strong need for air. Minimize your breathing for 15
seconds following each breath hold. Repeat for a total of 8 to
10 breath holds during your walk.
This exercise will take about 12 minutes to complete and is highly
effective at teaching your body to do more with less. At first you may only
be able to hold your breath for 20 or 30 paces before you feel a strong air
shortage (or less if you have asthma or are out of breath). As the number of
paces per breath hold increases, the air shortage you experience will
progress from easy to moderate to strong. As you feel an increased hunger
for air, the breathing muscles in your abdomen or neck will begin to
contract or spasm. An added effect of the contractions is to provide your
diaphragm with a workout, thereby strengthening your main breathing
muscle. During the longer breath holds, as you feel your breathing muscles
spasm, focus on relaxing your body. Allow your muscles to go soft as you
hold your breath. Relaxing the body in this way allows a longer breath hold
with less stress.
With repetition, as the weeks go by, you will find yourself being able to
hold your breath for 80 to 100 paces. Your ability to hold your breath will
increase with practice and without stressing your body. Do not overdo it.
Ideally, your breathing should recover easily and become calm within 3 or 4
breaths. While this exercise is a challenge, it should not be stressful.
If you notice any side effects, such as an elevated or stronger than
normal pulse for a prolonged period after completing breath holding, then it
is best to refrain from performing the stronger breath holds. Instead,
concentrate on breathing lightly both during rest and physical exercise to
bring benefit to your health and sports.
Breath holding can also be incorporated into a jog, run, or bike ride.
While you may not be able to hold your breath for as many paces during a
jog as you can during a walk, the quality of the exercise will be better
because of the greater accumulation of carbon dioxide in the blood.
Breath holding during training adds an extra load that would only
otherwise be experienced during maximum intensity exercise.
--- END PAGE 130 ---

--- PAGE 131 ---
Here is a breath-hold exercise to try while jogging or running:
• Run and hold: Ten to fifteen minutes into your run, when your
body has warmed up and is sweating, gently exhale and hold
your breath until you experience a medium to strong air
shortage. The length of the breath hold may range from 10 to
40 paces and will depend on your running speed and BOLT
score.
• Break for 1 minute and repeat: Following the breath hold,
continue to jog or run with nasal breathing for about 1 minute,
until your breathing has partially recovered.
• Repeat breath holds 8 to 10 times: Repeat the breath hold 8 to
10 times during your run, followed each time by a minute of
nasal breathing. The breath holds should be challenging but
should also allow breathing to recover to normal within a
couple of breaths.
--- END PAGE 131 ---

--- PAGE 132 ---
If you find this exercise in any way stressful, or have difficulty
recovering your breathing after a breath hold, then refrain from doing the
exercise until your BOLT score has increased to at least 20 seconds. 
Breath Holding During Cycling 
A similar practice can be employed as you ride your bicycle:
• After your body has warmed up, exhale and hold your breath
for 5 to 15 pedal rotations.
• Resume nasal breathing while continuing to cycle for about 1
minute.
• Repeat this exercise 8 to 10 times throughout your ride. 
Breath Holding During Swimming 
Swimming is the only sport in which breathing volume is controlled, as the
face is immersed in the water and the weight of the body on the water
restricts breathing even further. Breathing through the mouth is probably the
best option during swimming, as nasal breathing may result in water
inhalation.
To incorporate reduced breathing during swimming, you will need to
increase the number of strokes between breaths. You can do this in gradual
increments, increasing the number of strokes between breaths from 3 to 5 to
7 over a series of lengths. This exercise was employed by former Olympic
swimmer and triathlete Sheila Taormina, who achieved the fastest 1.5 km
swim during the Sydney Games in 2000. In my correspondence with
Taormina, she explained how reduced breathing was used to create a
training effect so that the swimmer would be challenged to do more with
less. However, unlike some sports, such as underwater hockey, the breath
hold is never pushed to an absolute maximum, in order to ensure the safety
of the swimmer.
--- END PAGE 132 ---

--- PAGE 133 ---
In addition to the hematological benefits from breath-hold training, it
has been found that breath holds also improve swimming coordination.
After breath-hold training, swimmers have shown increases in VO2 peak as
well as an increase in the distance traveled with each swimming stroke.
During the front crawl it is necessary to turn the head sideways every few
strokes in order to take a breath. However, each time a swimmer takes a
breath, hydrodynamic drag takes place, which ultimately wastes energy and
reduces performance. One of the benefits of having a high BOLT score is
that breathing becomes more efficient, meaning that less air is required
during a swim. Reducing the number of breaths minimizes drag, helping to
conserve energy for improved performance.
The same training has also been applied to underwater hockey players,
who perform their sport below the surface of the water in a swimming pool.
The object of the game is to pass a weighted puck along the bottom of the
pool using an underwater hockey stick, scoring points in the opposing
team’s goal. As play takes place underwater, it is advantageous, if not
essential, that players are able to hold their breath for long periods of time.
Part of the training of underwater hockey players includes prolonged and
repeated breath holds and controlled breathing, which lead to a higher
tolerance for carbon dioxide and an increase in breath-hold time.
Researchers investigating the effects of short repeated breath holds on
underwater hockey players found that these exercises reduced
breathlessness and produced a higher concentration of carbon dioxide in the
blood. In addition, lactate values were found to be lower in underwater
hockey players compared to untrained individuals, meaning that the pain
from lactic acid buildup was reduced. These athletes clearly have a high
tolerance for carbon dioxide, most likely explained by their experience with
prolonged breath holding for their sport. As we have already seen, reduced
sensitivity to carbon dioxide translates into reduced breathlessness during
exercise as less breathing is required to eliminate excess carbon dioxide.
This allows greater physical exertion with lighter breathing—enabling your
body to do more with less. 
Advanced Simulation of High-Altitude Training
--- END PAGE 133 ---

--- PAGE 134 ---
Normal oxygen saturation at sea level varies between 95 and 99 percent. To
receive any benefit from hypoxic (reduced oxygen) training, oxygen
saturation levels must drop below 94 percent (and ideally to below 90
percent). The effect of this method depends on two factors: oxygen
saturation during training, and the length of the exposure to reduced
oxygen.
Lowering oxygen saturation below 90 percent for a duration of 1 to 2
minutes can significantly increase the production of EPO, and this can
easily be achieved by using this exercise.
Before you consider doing this exercise, please get the all clear from
your physician. This exercise is only suitable for those who have good
physical fitness, perfect health, a BOLT score of longer than 30 seconds,
and are accustomed to performing intense physical exercise. In other words,
if you wish to try this exercise, you must be familiar with experiencing
strong air shortages. Please refrain from doing this exercise if any of the
following statements apply to you:
• You are in any doubt about your capabilities to perform intense
physical exercise.
• You are unwell.
• Your BOLT score is shorter than 30 seconds.
• You are not currently in a regular physical training program.
This advanced exercise aims to readjust the composition of your blood
and alter levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide. After months of
experimenting, I have developed this exercise to lower the oxygen
saturation of arterial blood and to maintain this decrease over a number of
seconds. I have practiced this exercise hundreds of times and include the
following guidelines to help you to perform it correctly and to be aware of
potential side effects:
--- END PAGE 134 ---

--- PAGE 135 ---
• To regulate the decrease in oxygen saturation to below 94
percent and to ensure that it does not go below 80 percent, it is
important to use a higher-quality pulse oximeter during this
exercise.
• This exercise should be practiced on a relatively empty
stomach, at least three hours after eating.
• The first breath hold is between 40 and 60 paces, or until you
feel a medium to strong need for air.
• After the first breath hold, subsequent holds are performed
every 5 to 10 paces.
• Following each breath hold, either exhale through your nose or
take a sip of air in through your nose before the next breath
hold.
• A “sip of air” means taking a tiny breath in, the purpose of
which is to relieve tension rather than take in air. It is about 10
--- END PAGE 135 ---

--- PAGE 136 ---
percent of a normal breath.
• Contractions of the diaphragm will strengthen as the air
shortage progresses. Try to bring a feeling of relaxation to your
body as the air shortage increases.
• With each successive breath hold, oxygen saturation will
continue to decrease.
• Continue to observe the pulse oximeter, ensuring that you do
not go below 80 percent SpO2.
• Challenge but do not stress yourself.
• If the air shortage is too great, take a slightly larger breath and
continue to relax.
• Perform this exercise for 1 to 2 minutes.
The objective of the exercise is to generate a reasonably strong air
shortage in order to lower oxygen saturation and to maintain it at a lower
level for a period of between 30 seconds and 2 minutes.
Please note that it is not advisable or even necessary to lower your
oxygen saturation below 80 percent. Maintaining an oxygen saturation of
less than 91 percent for approximately 24 seconds can result in an increase
of EPO of up to 24 percent, while maintaining this saturation for 136
seconds can result in an increase of EPO of up to 36 percent. 
Putting the Oxygen Advantage Program to the Test
--- END PAGE 136 ---

--- PAGE 137 ---
France is well known for its global cycling events. It is not
only the home of the Tour de France but also to such legendary
mountains as Mont Ventoux and Col le da Madone, which lure
cyclists from around the world to conquer their slopes. The
thriving French amateur road racing culture is steeped in
folklore, setting such intense challenges that some athletes are
unable to compete more than a few seasons due to injury,
fatigue, or burnout.
Nick Marshall is an Australian cyclist who started racing in
the Paris region. A father of two and a businessman, Nick had
trouble juggling the demands of work and family with what he
felt were “old-school training methods.” Seeking a better way to
train, Nick started using advanced yoga breathing and then the
Oxygen Advantage principles to develop more power while
reducing his overall training load. Initially, Nick had a BOLT
score of just 25 seconds (common even among elite athletes),
but through the nasal breathing, Breathing Light to Breathe
Right, and simulating high-altitude training, his BOLT score
now regularly reaches 60 seconds.
The primary Oxygen Advantage exercise Nick used was a
daily 30-minute routine combining the following: 
1. Breathe Light to Breathe Right for 15 minutes. 
2. Simulate High-Altitude Training while walking with breath
holds of 60 to 80 paces. 
3. Rest for 3 to 4 minutes. 
4. Do 1 set of Advanced Simulation of High-Altitude
Training to reduce arterial blood oxygen saturation to
around 81 to 84 percent.
The application of Oxygen Advantage techniques has
resulted in a drop in lap time along with a reduction in weight
and the improvement of Nick’s overall health. On his bike, Nick
--- END PAGE 137 ---

--- PAGE 138 ---
has seen an improvement in VO2 max and lactate buffering
during hard efforts, and a reduced heart rate at rest. (Lactate
buffering refers to the body’s ability to offset or neutralize the
effects of lactic acid during intense exercise.) A big benefit for
Nick is the ability to reduce the training hours spent on his bike
while still steadily improving his fitness—a clear sign that he
has become more efficient as an athlete. 
Oxygen Advantage Training: Short- and Long-Term Benefits 
Oxygen Advantage training involves temporarily subjecting the body to
reduced oxygen saturation. This is usually achieved by living or training at
high altitudes, but breath-hold exercises can easily bring about the same
result. Performing just 5 maximum breath holds can significantly increase
the concentration of oxygen-carrying red blood cells in the blood, but often
levels will return to normal within 10 minutes following the final breath
hold. Does this mean that breath-hold training is only beneficial directly
before a competition? The answer is no. Several research studies have
shown that permanent improvements to oxygen-carrying capacity can be
achieved by regularly exposing the body to reduced concentrations of
oxygen. If you incorporate the Oxygen Advantage program into your
normal training and practice nasal breathing during rest and day-to-day
activity, you will begin to see real physiological changes that will enable
you to raise your game and increase your endurance over both the short and
long term.
The benefits of genuine and simulated high-altitude training have been
studied in many different ways, and the results repeatedly show that long-
term exposure to reduced oxygen concentration brings about advantageous
changes for individuals looking to improve their physical performance.
Breath-hold divers have been found to show a 5 percent higher resting
hemoglobin mass than untrained divers, suggesting that long-term breath
holding has a tangible effect on performance. In addition, experienced
breath-hold divers demonstrate a stronger spleen contraction in response to
--- END PAGE 138 ---

--- PAGE 139 ---
breath-hold exercises, leading to a greater release of red blood cells into the
blood supply, improving their oxygen delivery.
In chapter 1, I mentioned Don Gordon, who has reached new heights in
his cycling performance by applying the Oxygen Advantage program. In a
recent e-mail, he informed me that his hematocrit was 52 percent (up from
47 percent)—high enough to provide increased aerobic performance while
still remaining within the upper normal range.
As I have noted before, it is not possible or practical for everyone
wishing to benefit from the effects of hypoxic training to live at high
altitude, but fortunately beneficial results can be obtained with less drastic
alterations to your lifestyle and training routine.
The adage “use it or lose it” can be applied to all forms of training;
form, fitness, and endurance can only be maintained through constant
repetition and practice. The same is true for your breathing. First you must
learn how to breathe efficiently and correctly day and night, during rest and
activity. Only then should you apply Oxygen Advantage techniques to your
training routine and sporting competition. By practicing these exercises
regularly, you will benefit from all the advantages of high-altitude training,
increase your VO2 max, and move beyond your previous limits.
To fully utilize the power of Oxygen Advantage reduced breathing
exercises, it is important to bring a feeling of relaxation to your body as you
exercise, and encourage your breathing volume to reduce. Exercise at a
pace in which your breathing is regular and controlled, and you experience
a feeling of air shortage. To generate greater intensity and bring about
positive physiological changes from hypoxic training, incorporate breath
holds into your physical training. Your BOLT score will provide continuous
feedback on your breathing volume during rest and physical exercise. If
your BOLT score decreases, it means your breathing is heavier than your
metabolic requirements. This will have negative implications for both
performance and health. Return to the earlier exercises and concentrate on
retraining your breathing habits until you are able to improve your BOLT
score to more than 30 seconds.
When you first begin these exercises, your breath-hold time and BOLT
score may be short, but with regular training and a commitment to the
--- END PAGE 139 ---

--- PAGE 140 ---
program, both these measurements can be increased over a short period of
time.
A number of research papers have come to conclusions that support my
findings, studying athletes and nonathletes alike to see the effects of breath-
hold exercises on an individual’s tolerance of carbon dioxide. These studies
have found that breath-hold time can be increased as a result of short-term
and long-term practice. For example, a study measuring the breath-hold
time of volunteers practicing breath-hold exercises with their faces
immersed in water found that the length of breath holds increased by up to
an impressive 43 percent over a series of exercises. Another study found
that breath-hold divers with 7 to 10 years of experience were able to hold
their breath for up to 440 seconds, compared to up to 145 seconds achieved
by inexperienced individuals. Similarly, the duration of breath-hold time for
triathletes was found to be significantly lengthened following a three-month
breath-hold program.
Earlier on, we investigated the effects of a reduced sensitivity
(ventilatory response) to carbon dioxide, finding that it resulted in better
sports performance, reduced breathlessness, and improved VO2 max. Your
BOLT score allows you to measure this sensitivity and provides a useful
method for tracking your progress, providing you with both a goal to strive
for (attaining a BOLT score of 40 seconds) and positive reinforcement that
you are making real changes to your body’s capabilities as you watch your
score increase. All the exercises in this book aim to increase your BOLT
score and improve your body’s tolerance for CO2, and you will be able to
notice improvements to your well-being and performance right from the
very first time you practice.
--- END PAGE 140 ---

--- PAGE 141 ---
CHAPTER 8 
Finding the Zone
C onsidered the greatest moment in twentieth-century boxing, the 1974
“Rumble in the Jungle” pitted undefeated world heavyweight champion
George Foreman against former champion Muhammad Ali. The event was
organized by boxing promoter Don King and sponsored by the King of
Zaire with the promise of a major purse to the winner.
No one thought Ali had much of a chance of beating Foreman. After all,
Foreman was both younger and larger than Ali and was considered the
strongest fighter of his generation—no previous opponent had lasted more
than three rounds with him. But Ali had more than just speed and strength
—he used psychology and tactics to his advantage. During the early rounds
of the fight Ali toyed with Foreman by frequently leaning on the ropes and
covering himself up, leading Foreman to throw ineffective body punches
and tire himself out. By the seventh round, Ali turned to taunting, goading
the weary Foreman with jibes like “They told me you could punch!” and
“That all you got, George?”
In the eighth round Ali saw his moment and took it, landing a strong left
hook and hard right. Foreman, weakened by fatigue and distraction,
stumbled to the canvas, and though he managed to get up at the count of
nine, the referee called the bout to an end. Muhammad Ali, a master in
psychology, won the title by a knockout.
Very few people could have expected this outcome. Both fighters were
equally motivated to win, but while Foreman was at that time the stronger
combatant, Ali’s constant barrage of taunts played a significant role in
undermining Foreman’s mental strength, causing his concentration to lapse
and allowing him to lose his temper—the opportunity Ali needed to strike.
--- END PAGE 141 ---

--- PAGE 142 ---
By pulling his opponent out of the zone, Ali created an opening for himself,
overcoming all odds. And that’s all it takes—just one distraction can
dramatically alter the outcome of any event. Often athletes are deprived of
success not because of lack of skill, fitness, or stamina, but by their own
thoughts.
When looking back on a disappointing performance, most athletes will
comment that their head “just wasn’t in it.” Training the mind to be in the
flow is just as vital as training the body. As any athlete knows, one thought
is all it takes to divert attention from the task at hand, ruining the shot,
penalty, race, or putt. But while in the flow, distracting thoughts do not
enter. The shouts of opposing spectators are not heard, a mistake made
during the game is not ruminated on, and thoughts of past mistakes or of
future goals do not arise. There is no fear of losing. There is no expectation
of winning. You are not anxious about actions or reactions from opponents
but effortlessly perform to the best of your ability. Nothing else matters.
You are present, using the full concentration of your mind in a state of
undivided attention.
“Going with the flow” is a concept popularized by Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi, former head of the department of psychology at the
University of Chicago. Csikszentmihalyi described “flow” as the experience
of “being completely involved in an activity for its own sake. Self-
consciousness falls away. Time flies. Every action, movement, and thought
follows inevitably from the previous one, like playing jazz. Your whole
being is involved, and you’re using your skills to the utmost.” This mental
state is also sometimes described as being in the zone or the present
moment.
Flow is a state of concentration that allows for complete immersion in
the situation at hand. Being in the flow means that no boundaries exist
between you and the activity in which you are involved. The player and the
game become one. The ego—which is the fictitious story that we create
about ourselves—is left behind. Conscious thinking ceases, and the athlete
acts spontaneously. Any sense of self-consciousness is set aside, allowing
full concentration and focus to be obtained. While in the flow, instinct and
intuition take over and the right action happens automatically, without the
need for conscious thought.
--- END PAGE 142 ---

--- PAGE 143 ---
When in the flow you do not think about how good you are, or how
useless you are, or what the spectators think of you, or what you are going
to do tomorrow, or what your hair looks like. The usual repetitive nonsense
generated by the active Western mind ceases. Concentration—the ability to
focus unhindered by distracting thoughts—is at its highest. In such a state
of intense concentration, your complete attention can be devoted to the
game.
Being in the flow allows for a still, quiet mind, undistracted by
conscious thoughts. It is a state that involves the use of the entire brain
rather than just the logical processes of the left brain. Being in the flow is
the very antithesis of Western education, whose sole purpose is to develop
and nurture the analytical, reasoning, and logical brain.
You will no doubt have experienced the feeling of an activity taking up
all your attention and focus to the point where you forget everything else
around you. When you are truly engaged in creative endeavors like sports,
writing, painting, music, and drama, many hours can pass by unnoticed.
The dancer and the dance become one. The painter and the painting become
one. The runner and the race become one.
During training practice, an athlete will perform the same action over
and over again, making precise adjustments to create the perfect sequence,
whether it is marking an opponent during a game, taking a golf swing,
knowing when to overtake during a race, or taking a penalty kick. In the
same way, a martial arts expert develops controlled and flawless
movements through years of constant repetition and refining. Each time a
movement is replicated, the brain stores information and develops muscle
memory, eventually allowing the task to be performed without conscious
effort. In essence, the body knows what to do—the mind simply needs to
get out of the way. There is no room for thought in fast-paced activities;
thoughts serve only as distractions. An athlete at peak performance does not
think. Instead, instinct kicks in, muscle memory ensures spontaneous
movement, and 100 percent of energy is directed toward the task at hand. In
the zone, the athlete finds that his or her reactions and movements flow
without conscious thought. Intuition takes over and the right action occurs
naturally.
During the 1988 Monaco Grand Prix, Ayrton Senna managed to stay
ahead of his competitors with ease, including a teammate driving a similar
--- END PAGE 143 ---

--- PAGE 144 ---
car. Recounting the race, Senna explained how he achieved this without
conscious effort: Letting his instincts guide him, he felt as if the circuit had
become a tunnel, and no matter how fast he drove, there was always room
for more. 
Enter the Zone at Will 
The zone is nothing more than performing in the absence of thought. When
the mind is still and thoughts are no longer a distraction, you are able to
give an activity your complete and undivided attention. Being able to focus
without distracting thoughts defines concentration, a vital attribute for the
proper execution of any action and the achievement of any goal. An active
mind results in diminished concentration as every little thought interferes
with the task at hand. For example, an individual who is reading this book
with an active mind is merely looking at the page. His attention is
elsewhere on a never-ending train of repetitive and useless thinking.
Although his eyes might be following the sentences, his mind is not. When
he reaches the bottom of the page, it is unlikely that he will remember much
of the content.
Nowadays, as we spend more time communicating via social media,
playing computer games, and surfing the Internet, our powers of
concentration are diminishing. According to international motivational guru
Kevin Kelly, we are now living in an attention-deficit society. The dial has
moved from conversation to presentation and from dialogue to monologue.
We no longer give each other our undivided attention, and neither do we
take the time to observe our own breathing or allow our minds to still.
Ted Selker of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology supports this
view, claiming that because the Internet offers so much choice we end up
spending our time flitting from one thing to another, shortening our
attention spans and forming a habit of poor concentration. Selker suggests
that the nature of web browsing can leave us with an attention span of just 9
seconds—the same as that of a goldfish.
Reading a piece in the New York Times, I was surprised to learn that the
children of the late Apple founder Steve Jobs hadn’t been introduced to the
iPad. When journalist Nick Bilton asked Jobs if his children loved the
--- END PAGE 144 ---

--- PAGE 145 ---
gadget, he replied, “They haven’t used it. We limit how much technology
our kids use at home.” This stance has been echoed by a number of
technology chief executives, who set very strict criteria on the amount of
screen time their children experience—all too aware of the implications of
extended periods spent looking at a screen. As the modern world becomes
increasingly dependent on screens and devices, gadget addiction has the
potential to isolate people from the world around them, subduing social
interaction and increasing mind activity.
Not only is an overactive mind less conducive to focus and productivity,
it also leads to increased stress, anxiety, and depression—all of which
contribute to mental health problems and a reduced quality of life.
The importance of being able to control and still the mind cannot be
overestimated. An athlete with a quiet mind will enjoy good powers of
concentration and be able to enter the zone at will, but an athlete with an
active mind will have a head full of unnecessary thoughts and will find it
difficult to enter the zone. If the mind is overactive during daily life, it
follows that the mind will be overactive during sports. Only when the mind
is relatively still during normal daily life can the athlete enter the zone
during competition. A still mind can be attained through having a high
BOLT score, using meditation, and developing awareness of the mind—
nothing else.
You could, of course, go down to your local bar and drink six or seven
large beers. No doubt this approach will quiet the mind. As appealing as it
sounds, achieving a state of mind where thoughts are drowned out with
alcohol is not conducive to alertness and increased performance. Instead,
for thousands of years, human beings have practiced different forms of
meditation to quiet and tame the mind. Meditation allows you to pay
attention to your thoughts, emotions, and feelings, while reducing repetitive
and useless thinking.
Ryan Giggs made his first appearance for the Premiership football club
Manchester United during the 1990–91 season. As the most decorated
player in English football history, Giggs has won thirteen Premier League
medals, four FA cup winner’s medals, three League cup winner’s medals,
and two Champions League winner’s medals. At the age of forty, when
most of his peers had long since retired, Giggs continued to play
professional Premier League football. So what is his secret? According to
--- END PAGE 145 ---

--- PAGE 146 ---
Giggs, self-awareness has been a major factor in his extended career: “The
focus on oneself is hugely important, even if it is only for a daily hour of
stretches and meditation,” he says.
The renowned golfer Tiger Woods is also well known for using
meditation to improve his game. Tiger’s father, Earl Woods, was
instrumental in developing his son’s concentration. Earl Woods explained
he would repeatedly attempt to distract his son as he practiced his swing by
dropping a golf bag or shouting obscenities. Earl Woods believed that Tiger
could be the “first black intuitive golfer ever raised in the United States”
and tested his meditative concentration from a very young age. And his
prediction came true: Tiger Woods has been the world number one golfer
for more consecutive weeks than any other player in history. The ability to
play sports intuitively relies on complete immersion in the zone, where the
right action occurs effortlessly and the golfer and the game become one. In
the film The Legend of Bagger Vance, the celebrated coach describes the
perfect swing as being in harmony with “all that is, all that was, and all that
will be.”
To get to this place and access intuitive intelligence, it is necessary to
practice quieting the mind. Intuitive intelligence is not learned but
experienced. Those who bring about monumental change and success in
this world have access to it. For some it is an automatic process. For others,
including myself, it has to be developed. A clear example of intuitive
intelligence can be found in the late Steve Jobs. In an interview with his
biographer Walter Isaacson, he described observing how people living in
India relied a lot more on their intuition than the analytical reasoning of the
West. Jobs believed that intuitive intelligence was more powerful than the
intellectual intelligence revered in the Western world. Jobs was a dreamer,
putting logic aside and accessing the power of universal intelligence
through a still mind. It is because of this intuition and creativity that
products such as the iPhone, iPad, and Mac came into being.
In the past, meditation has evoked a negative image as a hippie exercise
practiced by those with nothing better to do. Slowly but surely this image is
changing, as scientists have begun to recognize the many benefits of
quieting the mind, such as reducing anxiety and improving attention and
concentration during stressful challenges.
--- END PAGE 146 ---

--- PAGE 147 ---
A 2014 study investigated whether mindfulness meditation–based
techniques influenced the resilience of United States Marines. Eight Marine
infantry platoons comprising 281 soldiers were randomly divided into two
groups. One group received twenty hours of classroom instruction in
mindfulness and practiced the techniques for at least a half hour daily for
eight weeks. The second group did not receive any mindfulness training.
Both groups then participated in training under battlefield conditions. In a
report published in the American Journal of Psychiatry, the researchers
concluded that the marines who practiced mindfulness experienced
improved quality of sleep, reduced stress, and a quicker recovery of heart
rate and breathing following intensive combat training.
In other studies with U.S. Marines trained in mindfulness-based
techniques, brain scans revealed similarities to those of Special Forces
soldiers and Olympic athletes, and the area of the brain responsible for
controlling fear was shown to have actually shrunk. During warfare,
business, sports, or even normal family life, a calm, attentive, and collected
mind always results in better decision making. Staying fully focused during
a stressful situation is essential if you want to take the correct course of
action.
Until recently, it was commonly believed that the brain stopped
developing when we reached adulthood. It has only been within the last few
years that scientists have discovered that the brain can be changed by
practicing mindfulness meditation. This is tremendous news, not only for
those in sports but also for anyone suffering from anxiety or depression.
The ability to bring about changes in the brain could enable people to take
back control of their mental health rather than accepting a lifelong reliance
on mind-altering medication.
Neuroscientists from the most prestigious universities around the world,
including Harvard and MIT, have conducted much research to investigate
the changes that take place in the brains of people who meditate. There is
strong evidence that present-moment awareness literally changes the brain,
making many regions more powerful and efficient. A team of scientists
from the University of British Columbia and Chemnitz University of
Technology pooled data from twenty studies investigating this
phenomenon. Remarkably, all studies showed that mindfulness meditation
resulted in an increased density of gray matter, leading to more effective
--- END PAGE 147 ---

--- PAGE 148 ---
processing of information. MRI scans revealed that at least eight different
regions of the brain increased in efficiency, including the orbitofrontal and
hippocampal, which play a role in our ability to hold attention, cultivate
positive emotions, and retain emotional stability. People who meditate are
happier with themselves, are better able to resist distractions, and learn from
past experience—all traits that are essential in today’s modern life.
The ancient Greek aphorism “know thyself” is written in the forecourt
of the Temple of Apollo at Delphi. While its exact meaning is often the
subject of debate among scholars, in the context of harnessing the power of
meditation, the words ring with truth. When you are mindful, you become
more aware of your inner monologue, allowing you to stop the cycle of
compulsive thought processes and step out of the prison of self-doubt. Only
when you realize that you are a prisoner of the mind is it possible to escape.
And while the walls and bars may not be concrete and steel, being a captive
of your thoughts can have a significant effect on your ability to focus and
perform.
I like to divide thoughts into two categories: practical thoughts, which
are useful and serve a purpose, and distracting thoughts, which serve no
purpose at all. To decide on a course of action and achieve anything in life,
practical thoughts are essential. Conversely, distracting, useless, repetitive
thoughts only serve to scatter your focus and prevent you from entering the
zone.
Practical thoughts will help an athlete to plan for an upcoming event,
put together a training schedule, and organize any logistics such as booking
travel or accommodation. Prior to a game an athlete might channel his
thoughts into rehearsing the perfect shot or visualizing winning the race
with confidence. Mental imagery like this can serve as useful preparation
and is a positive way to use your thoughts.
Distracting thoughts, however, will be habitually negative and irrational,
often so automatic that the individual is unaware of them. This type of
thinking creates tension, draining you of energy and distracting your game.
As the Irish writer Oscar Wilde once said, “Thinking is the most unhealthy
thing in the world, and people die of it just as they die of any other disease.”
Thinking is a habit. We have been taught how to think by the influences
of society, education, and our friends and family. From a young age we are
conditioned to believe that thinking is a good thing—how many times have
--- END PAGE 148 ---

--- PAGE 149 ---
you been told to “think about it” or “think it over”? Developing the mind
into a sharp analytical tool is obviously very useful for achieving in the
world of academics and other livelihoods, and while it is important that we
learn how to think, it is equally important that we learn how to stop
thinking. Just as a fire provides comfort and warmth from the cold, it can
also be a destructive force when out of control. The mind is a similarly
double-edged sword.
At this point you might be thinking, What is he talking about? I’m in
control of my own mind! But are you really? How easily can you turn off
your thoughts? I would like you to try a simple exercise: Stop thinking and
observe how long it takes before the first thoughts enter. Is it 5 or 10
seconds, perhaps?
The degree to which you are in control of your mind depends on how
long you are able to remain free from thought. The longer you can remain
effortlessly free from thought, the better your powers of concentration and
focus. Most people are only able to clear their mind for a few seconds at
most. It is likely that your mind has more control over you than you may
have imagined. The good news is that there is much to gain from taking
control of your thought processes. Learning to quiet your mind is easy to do
with a little focus and practice. Think of it as a challenge, just like any other
new form of training, but one that will inevitably improve your health and
sports performance.
The first step to escape the trappings of a busy mind and take control of
your thought processes is to become aware of the thoughts inside your head.
Seldom do we observe our minds. Seldom are we aware of our thought
activity and the effect it has on mood, tension, and performance. Bring your
thoughts to the forefront of your mind. When you first observe the activity
in your head, you might find that your thoughts become amplified. This is
simply because they are under your scrutiny rather than running unhindered
in the background. You may also discover that the same repetitive thoughts
have been running through your mind for quite some time, possibly for
years. This is also normal, so don’t be critical of yourself. Observing the
mind is a most positive activity, allowing you to realize just how active it is.
This awareness is the first step in allowing you to break free from the
trappings of the mind and improve your concentration and focus.
--- END PAGE 149 ---

--- PAGE 150 ---
When you take time out to observe your thoughts, you will realize just
how often you are stuck inside your head. There is no need to analyze or
judge what is going through your mind—doing so will only pile on more
thoughts. The mind is never calmed by further questioning, and thinking too
much is the very habit that we want to address. In order to step out of this
constant circle of thought—to get out of your head and into life—you must
learn to tame your mind.
By simply making the commitment to pay attention to your thoughts
periodically throughout the day, you can take control of the most important
tool you possess—the power of your mind. The clarity of your mind plays a
significant role in determining your quality of life: A still mind brings
benefit to your sleep patterns, mood, and health, while a mind full of
incessant thoughts and distractions will blunt your ability to reach your full
potential.
It is especially important to observe your thoughts when an
undercurrent of negative thought takes over. Don’t let yourself be
overwhelmed by self-doubt and worry. The mind is unable to differentiate
between an imagined and a real event; to the body, both are the same. If you
are experiencing pregame nerves or overthinking the decision of a coach or
worrying about being dropped from the team or anxious that you won’t be
able to complete that charity fun run, your body will react as if the event
has already taken place. As soon as you become aware of an anxious train
of thought, take notice of its effect on your body. Does your head or
stomach feel tense? Is your breathing getting faster? Are negative and
repetitive thoughts causing you to feel nauseated? How you think
determines how you feel, and how you feel feeds back into how you think.
A feeding frenzy of negative thought and emotion will inevitably result in
poor performance and health.
Each time you find your head full of internal chattering, ask yourself if
all this thinking and analysis is actually helpful. Is it getting you anywhere?
Is it helping to solve the problem? If you continue thinking in this way, will
it do anything to address the situation, or is it just a never-ending merry-go-
round of habitual anxiety? Asking these questions provides an insight into
the nature of repetitive thought and the way it affects your life. The
realization that these negative thoughts serve no purpose to you can offer
the impetus you need to escape from the clutches of your mind.
--- END PAGE 150 ---

--- PAGE 151 ---
Be patient with your observation. At first, your thoughts may continue
unabated as you start to notice the tension created within your body—your
heart beats faster, butterflies flutter in your stomach, and your mind refuses
to cease its activity. In time, and with practice, you will learn to still your
mind and take back control. Observe your thoughts as many times as
possible throughout your day, especially when faced with a challenge.
There will be times when you can quiet your mind effortlessly; at other
times the buildup of emotions may make it more difficult. Either way,
observe how negative thinking affects your body and ask yourself if these
types of thoughts are useful to you. Simply asking yourself this question
will bring awareness to your life and allow you to know yourself better.
In time, if you commit to observing your thoughts and the effect they
have on your body, you will find you spend less energy on fruitless
thinking. Your mind will be clearer, your body more relaxed, and life will
become easier. You will notice more of what takes place around you and
miss less.
Repetitive, regurgitating thought is extremely draining, causing stress,
tiredness, and headaches. The less headspace you give to negative thinking,
the more room you have in your life for positivity and improvement.
Consider the following example:
Michael is driving his car to an important training session, well aware
that he is likely to be late. As he projects his mind into the future, he
imagines and rehearses the reaction from his coach and teammates. He
cannot stop these thoughts circling around his head, worrying about the
outcome, getting frustrated with traffic, and generally winding himself up.
His body feels tense, a headache begins to take hold, and he probably starts
to drive faster than he should.
Alan is also driving on his way to a training session. It is likely that he
too will be late. Knowing that he is doing the best he can to get there on
time and that no amount of worrying is going to get him there any faster,
Alan brings his attention to his breath, observing the flow of air as it enters
and leaves his body. Every now and again the thought of being late enters
Alan’s mind. As he notices the thoughts, he asks himself whether these
thoughts are helpful. Knowing only too well that anxiety will only serve to
make him tense and distract him, he takes his attention back to his breath,
keeping himself calm and relaxed.
--- END PAGE 151 ---

--- PAGE 152 ---
Now imagine both Michael and Alan are cut off by another car, forcing
each of them to apply the brakes. How do you think each one reacts to the
situation? Most likely, Michael is engulfed in rage and sounds the horn
angrily. Alan, on the other hand, chooses not to react and does not get
sucked into the situation.
In this example, the two drivers were presented with the same
challenge, but while one immediately reacted to the challenge, the other
responded by choosing to let it go. There is no doubt that a stressed or
anxious person reacts more strongly to a difficult event than a relatively
calm person. Keeping a quiet mind enables you to consider a situation more
objectively and choose how to respond rather than being consumed by the
moment. Alan had the choice to respond or not. Michael’s instincts took
over before he could make a conscious decision.
In addition to observing your thoughts, it is just as vital to be able to
quiet your mind. Together, these skills will magnify your ability to enter the
zone during sports. When you first practice taming your mind it is normal
to find distracting thoughts entering your head every few seconds. In fact,
you should expect them to appear. Do not be disheartened—this
bombardment of thoughts has built up through years of conditioning and
will take time to strip away. Layer upon layer of thoughts have been added
by every influence in your life: education, religion, society, relationships,
and work. The mind has simply developed a bad habit; it knows how to
think but is unable to stop thinking.
When you first begin practicing meditation, try not to become frustrated
when the mind wanders, because it inevitably will. Many people abandon
meditation too quickly when they find it isn’t an instant fix. You may feel
discouraged if your thoughts don’t switch off as quickly as you had hoped,
but try to view the practice as just that: practice, not as a fixed outcome or
goal.
Your intention while meditating should be to make a dedicated effort to
become aware of your own mind, to observe your thoughts, and to practice
simply being still and present. Thoughts will enter. Thoughts will go. That
is the nature of the human mind. Each time you notice your mind
wandering, all you need to do is gently bring your attention back to your
breath or bring your awareness to your inner body.
--- END PAGE 152 ---

--- PAGE 153 ---
All throughout my time at school, college, and my early years of work,
my mind was extremely active. I believed that thinking was a positive thing
but had no way of differentiating practical thoughts from repetitive,
unnecessary, or negative ways of thinking. Most of the time I lived stuck in
my head, on automatic pilot, without realizing just how constantly thoughts
were streaming through my mind. Having such an active mind diminished
my concentration—to achieve good grades it was necessary for me to spend
many hours studying, and I found it difficult to retain information as there
simply wasn’t any room left in my head. For one university exam I spent
three months studying in the Berkeley Library at Trinity College Dublin.
An hour before the examination I headed there again with all my notes for a
last-minute recap and was joined by my friend Terry, who hadn’t prepared
at all. While the rest of us had been studying business, Terry had devoted all
of his time setting up a tax reclamation service. He borrowed my notes and
studied them for a mere 15 minutes. As I observed his unwavering and
effortless concentration, I could not help but notice that Terry had
something I did not. My concentration at that time was so poor that I was
easily distracted, and the little attention I had was forced. When the exam
results came back, I was somewhat scandalized to discover that Terry had
secured the very same mark as me. What he achieved in 15 minutes took
me three months. This is exactly the difference between a productive,
focused, and concentrated mind and one that is out of control.
To get through university I continued my long hours of studying,
experiencing stress, fatigue, and severe respiratory problems in the process,
completely unaware that my mind was working against me. Twenty years
later, it comes as no surprise that Terry’s company employs one thousand
people, winning countless awards in business and customer service.
A skittering mind, jumping from thought to thought, is a leech to
productivity, creative endeavor, and quality of life. Having a focused mind
is probably the greatest asset in every walk of life, whatever your
occupation or lifestyle.
After university I secured a job in middle management with a U.S.-
based car rental company. We were indoctrinated into the philosophy of the
company, molded to perform, and encouraged to give the best years of our
lives for profit. We were told exactly how to answer the phones, how to
deliver spiels to potential customers, and how to upsell collision damage
--- END PAGE 153 ---

--- PAGE 154 ---
waivers. There were targets to be met, employees to be managed, and sales
calls to be made. Each Monday morning I dreaded the thought of going in
to work. I was a living wreck at age twenty-four. My mind never stopped,
my stress levels soared, and the more I thought about leaving the job, the
more my mind kept me trapped in it.
Just as I was reaching the breaking point I heard about a course in
personal development and jumped at the chance to enroll. During the course
the instructor spoke about the importance of a still mind, and guided us
through a simple meditation. After the very first session I noticed my
perception was suddenly much clearer and lighter. The tension had left my
head, my mind was quieter, and for the first time I caught a glimpse of
stillness. As I walked home, it was as if my thoughts had been put to one
side, allowing me to focus my complete attention on the sights, sounds, and
smells around me. I had walked down Grafton Street in Dublin many times
before, but never had I actually been there. On previous visits, my attention
had been completely stuck in my head. I would walk from one end of the
street to the other without remembering any aspect of the journey. It is
difficult to relate to life, or be part of life, when all your attention is stuck in
your mind.
The next morning I found my mind swamped once again with internal
chatter, but the unforgettable experience from the day before remained with
me. This epiphany occurred in the late 1990s, and in the months that
followed I made a dedicated effort to bring stillness of the mind into my
life. I had many ups and downs on my initial journey to quieting my mind
—there were days when my mind was out of control and I felt like I was
getting nowhere—but I now regard that time spent in quiet solitude as my
most productive ever.
We are conditioned to believe that in order to be productive and
successful we must be constantly doing something. This belief, which
forms the basis of modern society, is quite insane. We are not human 
doings; we are human beings . During my workshops, students are often
astonished to hear that if I were given the choice between my degree—
which I worked so hard for—and learning to reduce my thought activity, I
would choose the latter without hesitation.
I do my best to make my life a meditation, and I would estimate that my
thought activity has reduced by around 50 percent since I first began
--- END PAGE 154 ---

--- PAGE 155 ---
practicing stilling my mind. Now, my thoughts are more practical: I set my
goals, decide on a course of action, and set out to achieve them. Because
there is more space between my thoughts, there is room for creative ideas
and solutions to enter. I bring my mind into stillness many times throughout
the day by focusing on my breath or taking my attention into my inner
body. Of course, negative thoughts do sometimes appear; I still get upset
and angry from time to time, and I have no problem confronting and
challenging another person if required, but this is part and parcel of being
alive. In nature, animals will sometimes fight, but after the confrontation
they will go their separate ways, living life instead of dwelling on the event
for hours on end. Nature moves simultaneously with time. More often than
not, we humans spend much of our lives either stuck in the past or
anxiously trying to get to the future. How can we possibly expect to utilize
the full power of our brains if all our attention is consumed by habitual
thought?
Since I learned to still my mind, one of the main differences to my life
is that when faced with a challenge I feel less daunted and am able to
recover from a setback much more quickly. By waking up to what takes
place in my mind, I have a greater choice over whether I continue with the
stream of thought or step out of it. In my early twenties, I never realized
that I had this choice. Until I understood that I was the prisoner of my mind,
I was unable to differentiate between my all-consuming thoughts and who I
really was. By drastically reducing nonsense thoughts, my mind is now free
to concentrate on anything of my choosing. At age forty-one, my
concentration, energy, focus, and happiness have increased tenfold
compared to when I was sixteen—and all I have done is learn how to stop
thinking.
My life was completely transformed by three simple techniques:
breathing lightly, merging with my inner body, and bringing my attention
into the present moment. Each of these practices has been instrumental in
improving my quality of life, reducing unnecessary thought activity, helping
to access intuitive intelligence, and enabling creativity in my work. These
powerful exercises are straightforward, quick to learn, and can be easily
incorporated into your way of life. Practice the following techniques
regularly to begin reclaiming your mind and clearing your head.
--- END PAGE 155 ---

--- PAGE 156 ---
Follow the Breath to Enter the Zone 
This sports meditation is based on the exercise Breathe Light to Breathe
Right, which was introduced on page 74. The objective is to follow the
pattern of your breath and bring a feeling of relaxation throughout your
body in order to quiet the mind. Following the breath involves observing
the cycle of each inhalation and exhalation, and is a simple and useful
method of internalizing your focus while shutting out any unnecessary
thoughts.
When first beginning your meditation practice, try to choose a place
where you will not be distracted. Sitting in an upright position helps you to
focus, while closing your eyes helps to direct your attention inward. With
experience, observing the breath and bringing your attention into the inner
body can be practiced during any situation or activity.
Following the breath is an activity innate to humans and has been
practiced since time immemorial. The breath is the bridge between the mind
and the body. In order to enter the zone during any type of sports
competition, the body and mind must be merged together so that you can
become one with the game.
The breath can be felt entering and leaving the body at four distinct
points. The first is the area just inside the nose, the second is the area at the
back of the throat, the third is movement of the chest, and the fourth is
movement of the abdomen. You may find it easier to focus on one point
more than others—experiment as you practice to see which feels most
natural for you.
To begin, place one hand on your chest and one hand on your abdomen,
just above your navel. Follow your breath as it enters the nostrils or passes
down the throat. Concentrate on the area you are breathing into—are you
using your chest or your abdomen to inhale? Do you feel your chest rise
and fall with each breath, or do you feel your abdomen move gently in and
out? Do not change your breathing, simply observe it. At first, you might
find your mind wandering—don’t worry if it does but simply bring your
attention gently back to the breath.
As you observe your breathing, continue to relax your inner body. Using
mental encouragement, silently tell the muscles of your chest and abdomen
--- END PAGE 156 ---

--- PAGE 157 ---
to relax. As you feel your body soften, gently slow your breath. There is no
need to deliberately interfere with the breathing muscles by tensing them or
restricting your breathing. Instead, simply allow your breathing to become
quiet and soft, using mental commands to relax your body.
The objective here is to reduce your breathing to the point where you
create a mild to moderate hunger for air. This need for air should be distinct
but not so strong that your breathing accelerates, or your abdomen muscles
contract, or the rhythm of your breath becomes chaotic. If you do find that
your breathing becomes disturbed by the hunger for air, then take a break
from the exercise for about 15 seconds and resume when your breathing is
back to normal. Try this breathing practice for 10 minutes or so.
Breathing exercises of all kinds are helpful for taking attention from the
mind and into the present moment. However, the creation and maintenance
of a tolerable air shortage over the course of this exercise can be
instrumental in further slowing down the activity of the mind. There is
nothing like the feeling of an air shortage for anchoring attention to the
breath. An additional benefit to breathing lightly is the activation of the
body’s relaxation response, indicated by increased production of watery
saliva in the mouth. The technique and effects of reduced breathing are
explored in more detail in chapter 4.
When I first started to use this method of observing the breath during
meditation, I sometimes became frustrated to find my mind wandering. This
is natural. In fact, you should expect your mind to wander at first. With
practice, your mind will wander less and less, the gap between thoughts will
increase, and you will feel happier and more alert.
By practicing meditation regularly, you will find that your attention no
longer spends so much time in your mind, separated from life, dwelling on
things you cannot change and things that have not happened yet. Over the
past fifteen years I have completed several periods of “noble silence”—a
series of ten consecutive days when I wake up at five in the morning and
meditate until it is time to retire to bed at eight o’clock at night. Car keys,
computer, phone, and wallet are put away. Noble silence involves a silence
of the tongue and mind—no talking or thinking. At the end of the ten days,
my mind is razor-sharp, calm, alert, and focused.
For those starting out in meditation, even a short period of 10 minutes
observing the breath can bring about great changes in your life. Spend two
--- END PAGE 157 ---

--- PAGE 158 ---
weeks observing your breath as often as you can throughout the day. More
important than the length of time you observe your breath during one sitting
is the number of times you bring attention to your breathing throughout the
day. See and feel the difference that this practice makes to your focus and
concentration during sports and in your everyday life. 
Connect with the Inner Body to Enter the Zone 
Focusing on oneself involves taking attention out of the mind and merging
with the miracle that is the human body. There is an intelligence that
operates within our bodies, far greater than that within the mind. Every
moment, thousands of functions automatically take place within the body
without any direction from the mind. The intelligence of the mind is but a
mere fraction of the natural intelligence that resides within the body.
Consider the many vital automatic functions of the body, such as breathing,
the beating of the heart, and the process of digestion—conscious thoughts
are not required for these complex and tireless processes, but imagine if just
one of these activities was the responsibility of the human mind. Even if the
mind was only responsible for directing each breath—a relatively
straightforward procedure—it is unlikely that we would last for more than
an hour. The human body is a miracle and operates on such a vast innate
intelligence that it is unlikely human beings will ever be able to produce
comparable technology. Despite man’s best efforts to develop a robot to
parallel the human body, prototypes are awkward and capable of handling
only a small number of functions. The natural intelligence that resides in the
human body is incredible, and we all have access to its capabilities so long
as we do not allow the mind to overshadow it. Simply by taking your
attention from incessant thinking and directing your senses into the inner
body, you will be able to draw from the stillness and intelligence residing
there.
In the Western world we rarely focus on the inner body unless
something is wrong. Seldom do we pay attention to the body when it is free
from pain. Seldom do we truly experience our body as alive and feel the
vibration of energy that resonates there. The body is your connection with
this energy. If you have never directed your attention to your inner body
--- END PAGE 158 ---

--- PAGE 159 ---
before, start off slowly. If you have learned to follow and reduce your
breath, you will find this relatively easy to do.
Close your eyes and bring your attention to one of your hands. Direct
your focus to the hand and feel it from within. With your eyes closed, feel
the inner sensations of your hand. You may begin to notice the temperature
of the air against your skin, or you may feel subtle inner bodily sensations.
Stay with these sensations for a little while and quietly observe them. When
you are focused on the inner bodily sensations of your hand, move your
attention to include your arm. Now feel the inner bodily sensation of your
hand and arm together. Do not analyze or think about it, just feel it.
Next, bring attention to your chest and focus from within for a minute
or so. You may feel the texture of your clothes against your skin, or you
may feel the heat emanating from your chest. After a minute or so, bring
attention to your stomach and check for any tension. If your stomach is
tense, imagine it gradually relaxing. Feel the area around your abdomen
gently softening as the tension dissolves away. The more active your mind,
the greater the tendency that your stomach will be in a knot. Relax this area
using your imagination and allow any tension to disappear.
Now feel the energy field of both hands, both arms, your chest, and your
abdomen at the same time. Keep your attention there. As long as your
attention is on your body, it is not on your mind. The incessant thought
activity of your mind will gradually slow down as your focus remains on
your inner body.
With a little practice, you will be able to focus your attention on your
inner body from head to toe. Dispersing your attention throughout the inner
body is especially helpful during physical exercise and competition, and
this exercise can help you to enter the zone at will. 
Live in the Now to Enter the Zone 
By following the breath and bringing attention to the inner body, we are
able to bring our attention to the present moment.
The present moment is the only time in which life truly unfolds. You
cannot re-live your life in the past, nor can you live your life in the future.
When the future arrives, it is the now. Be here fully. Do not spend your
--- END PAGE 159 ---

--- PAGE 160 ---
entire life, as most of humanity, with all of your attention stuck in your
head. How can you relate to the reality of life if you are too busy focusing
on memories, worries, and what-ifs?
A simple practice to bring your attention to the present moment is to
merge with your surroundings. We connect to our surroundings in a
physical way, through the five senses of sight, sound, touch, taste, and smell
—not by intellectual perceptions. Put aside the habit of analyzing, judging,
labeling, and comparing everything you see. Instead, bring a gentle focus to
your surroundings without the usual running commentary. Take your
attention out of your thoughts and look around. Really look, as if you are
seeing things for the very first time. As you look, begin to listen to the
sounds rising and falling around you. As you look and listen, feel the
weight of your body, whether you are standing, sitting, or lying. Feel the
warmth or coldness of the air on your face. Feel the clothes on your back.
Bring in your other senses of smell and taste. Now you are free from
thought. Now you are free from internal noise and distractions. You are like
a child, seeing everything for the first time. It is that simple. 
Live Your Daily Life in the Zone 
Quieting the mind should not just be limited to the time spent in formal
meditation. Instead, your whole life should be a meditation. Each day, as
you go about your daily affairs, bring your attention to your breathing and
your inner body. As you watch TV, do not surrender all of your attention to
the program, but immerse yourself in your inner body. As you walk, jog, or
run, follow the natural rhythm of your breath and disperse your attention
throughout your body. Scan your body for any tension that may be residing
there, and bring a gentle feeling of release to tense areas to encourage
relaxation. Tension of muscle groups during sports is counterproductive and
consumes energy—learn to recognize areas of tension in your body and
practice melting them away with the power of your mind.
To observe complete relaxation of all muscles groups, watch a video of
a cheetah gracefully running at full throttle. The leg muscles look to be
completely relaxed and floppy as the animal moves effortlessly between
strides. The cheetah is able to devote all of its energy to its speed through
--- END PAGE 160 ---

--- PAGE 161 ---
complete relaxation as it runs. Practice running with your entire body
instead of just your head. Imagine running without a head. Be headless for
the duration of your run. Run with every cell in the remainder of your body.
Merge with the movement and become one with it. Bringing a feeling of
relaxation throughout your body while you exercise allows you to go with
the flow and enter the zone. The greater the proportion of your daily life
that is spent unhindered by thought, the easier you will find entering the
zone during competition. 
A Concentrated and Undivided Mind 
Imagine a pool player who wins ten games in a row. During each game, he
is in the flow, pocketing balls easily while positioning the cue ball perfectly
for the next shot. His game is effortless and spontaneous.
Based on his success, the player decides to place a wager of five dollars
that he will win the next game. No longer is he doing the activity for the
experience or enjoyment of it. Now he has an ulterior motive, and his mind
is divided between the wager and playing the game. Only part of his
attention remains on the activity. He has lost focus, and he loses.
Ronan O’Gara is a former rugby union player who played for Ireland
and Munster. Considered by many to be one of the best fly-halfs of his
generation, he won four Triple Crowns with Ireland and two Heineken Cups
with Munster. He also scored more tries for Ireland than any other fly-half
in history and is the third most capped player in rugby union history.
With such impressive repeated successes, one would expect O’Gara to
have been full of self-confidence, approaching each game in his stride.
However, in a compelling interview with Irish national television, he
described how he wished he could have “laughed and enjoyed it more,”
especially in the lead-up to games where he would be “puking, questioning
everything, not sleeping, feeling low, and going for walks” to try to quell
his negative inner commentary. O’Gara is not alone in this experience of
pregame anxiety, and no doubt his feelings are shared by many professional
athletes who, in their sense of pride and dedication to their team and
country, place immense pressure upon themselves.
--- END PAGE 161 ---

--- PAGE 162 ---
This is the side of professional sports that is seldom talked about. It is
brushed under the carpet and hidden from view while the world gets to see
only the outward displays of power, strength, speed, and skill. After playing
for over a decade at the professional level, Ronan O’Gara began to settle
down only when he knew that his retirement from professional sports was
imminent: “It was only in the last eighteen months that I said I’m going to
start enjoying myself for whatever limited time is left.”
Why is so much anxiety and tension created prior to a game? Prematch
days for many athletes might involve hundreds of “what if” thoughts: What
if I don’t feel right on the day? What if I get injured? What if I make a
mistake? What if I mark the wrong guy? What if I’m not selected? What if I
perform badly and get dropped from the team? As imagination runs riot,
anticipation of all the possible things that could happen during the game
builds so high that nervous tension and anxiety take over to the point of
distraction. In reality, there are so many variables involved that it is
impossible for the mind to predict what is going to happen. Not only that,
but the mind is capable of creating an imaginary drama with outcomes far
worse than what might actually unfold. It is essential to understand that in
any situation there are many factors outside of your control, and despite
your best efforts you are but a part of the larger whole. Ruminating on
anything outside of our control is simply a distraction and a waste of
energy. Having passion for what you do and the desire to perform to the
best of your ability are all that matters. Everything else is in the hands of
the universe, so there really is no point in worrying about it. Before a game
or event, observe negative or recurrent thought patterns and make a
conscious decision to step away from thinking about things that you have
no control over.
I may not be an athlete, but I can closely relate to the process of
thinking so much that your thoughts consume you. As a sixteen-year-old
boy from a Catholic background, educated in an all-boys school, I was
particularly shy when it came to talking to girls. From time to time, a very
attractive blond girl would take the same bus as me to school. I longed for a
conversation with this girl, dreaming about what I would say, nervous that
she would rebuke my advances. On one particular day she sat right next to
me, and while my heart thumped out of my chest, no words could come out
of my mouth. I was completely tongue-tied in a sea of doubt and sat the
--- END PAGE 162 ---

--- PAGE 163 ---
whole ten-mile journey in silence. I had built up the moment into something
so big, so monumental, that it scared the life out of me. In hindsight, all I
really wanted to do was strike up a conversation, to say hello and ask her
how school was going, to ask whom she hung out with, and maybe talk
about our favorite music. It was all very innocent, but overthinking created
a task of gigantic proportions, almost as if I were planning to ask the girl to
marry me.
With experience and confidence we learn how to deal better with
situations like this, but by persisting in overthinking every action, we add
unnecessary hurdles to the path to success. There is no doubt that had I
thought less about striking up a conversation with the girl, it would have
happened naturally and easily when the situation arose.
Although a certain amount of stress helps to keep us focused, too much
thinking, anxiety, and apprehension about what can go wrong can cause a
loss of concentration on the game. The night before a big event you may
find yourself lying in bed ruminating on every possible scenario, while in
reality a deep sleep is really what you need to secure a good performance
the following day. There is a time for planning, and it is more likely to be
effective when you are able to focus on it productively. Pregame warm-ups,
drills, rehearsals, and discussions of tactics can help to reduce stress and
iron out uncertainties, but lying awake worrying about what might go
wrong will only cause more self-doubt and potentially ruin your
concentration on the day.
It is important to consistently monitor the effectiveness of your
thinking. When you begin to notice the same thoughts creeping into your
head for the umpteenth time, ask yourself whether these thoughts are
actually serving a purpose. Are they helpful for devising a strategy or
addressing the situation? Or are they keeping you on a merry-go-round of
insanity? Questioning the usefulness of your thinking allows you to
determine which thoughts are useful and which are negative and repetitive.
Even though you may not be able to prevent these thoughts from occurring,
you can learn to reduce them by quieting your mind and bringing your
attention to the breath in between bouts of overthinking. Later, if you feel
the need to think a little more about whatever is bothering you, spend a few
minutes indulging your thoughts before merging back with the quietness of
the breath. Alternating between thinking and quietness creates space
--- END PAGE 163 ---

--- PAGE 164 ---
between thoughts to allow fresh ideas to surface. The thoughts that emerge
after the silence of meditation can be very powerful, creative, and intuitive,
and may naturally provide you with the solution to your worries. The same
process of course applies to daily life.
Practicing meditation and achieving a quiet mind are extremely valuable
techniques for athletes, or anyone who suffers from anxiety, enabling you to
reduce your inner commentary and focus on what’s important. To reduce
prematch apprehension and nerves, you will need to approach the game
from a different mind-set. Participate in your sport solely for the
experience, because you enjoy it. When your only wish is to experience the
game or the individual shot, swing, or race, there is no ulterior motive. This
doesn’t mean that you will simply be going through the motions—no, not at
all. When you are playing or running or shooting or cycling solely for the
experience, your mind will be undivided and a state of intense alertness will
ensue. In this state, you will be at the top of your game.
At first, make a commitment to really experience your sport during
training sessions, where there is nothing to lose. Fully experience your sport
by dispersing your attention throughout your entire body and getting in
touch with your senses. In time, you will feel comfortable “experiencing”
your sport regardless of the level of competition, allowing muscle memory
to ensure a smooth and effortless performance.
Make it a priority to occupy your body with your full attention and
experience the aliveness of your entire body. During a race, follow your
instincts and your natural rhythm, letting muscle memory decide on the
course of action: how far to stay back, when to overtake, what move to
make next. Before taking a penalty kick or another game-changing action,
focus on your breathing and use the breath as an anchor to your inner body.
Whenever you find your mind ruminating about an upcoming event,
immediately bring your attention to your breath or inner body. If you are
trying too hard to win, psyching yourself out about the outcome, worrying
about your competitors and past failures, or spending too much time
analyzing every potential move, your mind will be divided and you will
lose focus. 
Improve Brain Oxygenation
--- END PAGE 164 ---

--- PAGE 165 ---
It is perfectly normal for athletes to be nervous before competition. But
while a little nervousness keeps us alert, too much may induce
hyperventilation, which reduces oxygenation of the brain. You might not be
sitting for an exam, but without a doubt, mental alertness, concentration,
and normal cognitive functioning are prerequisites for good performance.
In addition to following the breath and occupying your inner body with
your attention, the following Breathing Recovery Exercise is very helpful in
calming the mind during the days and nights leading up to competition.
When stressed, hold your breath! It is also helpful for recovering from
physical exercise and increasing your BOLT score. Having a high BOLT
score will help negate the effects of nervousness. 
Perform a series of small breath holds following these instructions:
• Take a small, silent breath in and out through your nose.
• Hold your breath for 2 to 5 seconds.
• After each breath hold, breathe normally for around 10 seconds.
Do not interfere with your breathing.
--- END PAGE 165 ---

--- PAGE 166 ---
• Continue to do a small breath hold followed by normal
breathing for around 10 seconds.
• Practice this exercise for at least 15 minutes.
Having a BOLT score of less than 20 seconds during rest indicates
chronic overbreathing. To attain optimum performance in terms of
breathing efficiency, cardiovascular health, and delivery of oxygen to
tissues and organs, a BOLT score of at least 40 seconds is necessary.
Researchers have observed that hyperventilation significantly affects mental
performance as well as physical capabilities. A study investigating
unexplainable aircraft accidents tested the abilities of jet fighter pilots to use
coordination apparatus after a short period of breathing too much. The
results showed that mental performance deteriorated by 15 to 30 percent
when the concentration of carbon dioxide in the blood was significantly
reduced. Another study found that when hyperventilation reduces arterial
concentration of carbon dioxide, physiological changes occur in the brain,
causing dizziness and concentration problems. Researchers discovered that
reduced levels of carbon dioxide detrimentally affected performance that
required attention, causing progressively slower reaction times and an
increase in errors.
The symptoms of hyperventilation and anxiety are similar and have
been found to be linked in some cases. A study from the department of
psychology and statistics at the University at Albany in New York found
that students with high anxiety had lower levels of carbon dioxide and a
faster respiration frequency than students with low anxiety. The results of
this study are not surprising when you consider the effects of
hyperventilation: dizziness, headaches, chest pains, and light-headedness. Is
it the anxiety that is causing hyperventilation, or is it hyperventilation that is
causing the anxiety? As we already know, hyperventilation reduces the
concentration of carbon dioxide in the blood. This leads to a narrowing of
blood vessels and reduced delivery of oxygen to the brain. An oxygen-
deprived brain is more excitable and agitated, and as it floods with self-
generated thoughts, anxiety kicks in. One contributes to the other, creating a
vicious and self-perpetuating cycle.
--- END PAGE 166 ---

--- PAGE 167 ---
I vividly remember attending one of my final exams at Trinity College
in Dublin. In an effort to relax, I took a brief walk before the exam, during
which I took several big breaths through my mouth. I was already a heavy
breather and the additional big breaths brought on light-headedness and
dizziness. Little did I know that my anxiety and deliberate attempts to take
deep “calming” breaths were actually depriving my brain of oxygen—not
an ideal recipe when total alertness and concentration are required. Often
this is an unconscious activity that athletes do without even realizing it.
However, the vast majority of athletes also feel that taking big breaths is
beneficial. The belief is there, but they are not always aware of practicing it.
Overbreathing is never the answer to improving performance, and adequate
oxygenation of the brain is required if you are to fulfill your true potential. 
Quality Sleep for Performance 
To help maintain a calm and concentrated mind, you must experience good-
quality sleep at all times, particularly during the period leading up to an
exam, performance, or competition. Having a BOLT score of less than 20
seconds and breathing through the mouth during sleep may result in many
of the following symptoms:
• Snoring
• Sleep apnea (holding your breath many times throughout the
night)
• Disrupted sleep
• Insomnia
• A racing mind
• Nightmares
• Sweating
--- END PAGE 167 ---

--- PAGE 168 ---
• Needing to use the bathroom at around 5 or 6 A.M. 
• A dry mouth upon waking
• Brain fog upon waking
• Fatigue first thing in the morning
• Fatigue during the day
• Poor concentration
• Upper or lower respiratory complaints
Mouth breathing during sleep creates a considerable loss of carbon
dioxide while also bypassing the benefits of nitric oxide, culminating in a
reduction of morning BOLT score. The solution to better breathing at night
is to Breathe Light to Breathe Right during the day and especially before
sleep. To reduce and eventually eliminate breathing through the mouth at
night, follow these guidelines:
• Avoid eating within the 2 hours before sleep, as the process of
digestion increases breathing.
• Keep your bedroom cool and airy (but not cold). A hot and
stuffy room will only serve to increase breathing.
• Sleep on your front or left side; sleeping on your back is by far
the worst position, as there is no restriction to your breathing.
• Ensure that your mouth is closed while you try to get to sleep
(you can wear 1-inch Micropore tape across the lips as
described in chapter 3 to help ensure this).
• A most important practice to discourage heavy breathing at
night is to Breathe Light to Breathe Right for 15 to 20 minutes
before going to sleep. This exercise is especially good for
--- END PAGE 168 ---

--- PAGE 169 ---
calming the mind and helping you to experience deep sleep
during the nights leading up to competition.
--- END PAGE 169 ---

--- PAGE 170 ---
PART III 
The Secret of Health
--- END PAGE 170 ---

--- PAGE 171 ---
CHAPTER 9 
Rapid Weight Loss Without Dieting
F or many weekend warriors, the motivation to exercise is to shed a few
extra pounds for better health, a boost of self-confidence, and that feel-good
factor. There is no doubt that exercise is a good route to improved health
and weight loss, but it addresses only half of the story. Weight loss occurs
only when the amount of calories we burn is greater than the amount we
consume. In addition to keeping an eye on the pedometer, we also need to
stand back from the table. This is where many people fail, ending up on a
yo-yo diet of weight loss followed by weight gain in a never-ending cycle
of frustration.
For over a decade I have witnessed hundreds of people achieve a safe
method of appetite suppression leading to steady, effective weight loss
using breath reduction techniques. Weight loss for these individuals varied
from 2 to 6 pounds within just two weeks. In addition, people often found
themselves to be eating more heathfully with less desire for processed food
and more demand for water. What’s more, this weight loss and change to
better eating habits occurred easily and without effort. In many cases weight
loss was actually a secondary benefit, as most participants were applying
the breathing exercises to remedy asthma, anxiety, or snoring. The only
instruction they were given with regard to their diet was to eat when hungry
and stop when satisfied.
When Eamon entered his fifties, he tipped the scales at more than 260
pounds. Ireland was going through a rough time economically, and Eamon’s
business was not doing very well. The increased stress of trying to steer his
business back on track led him to eat and drink more than ever before.
Nearly every night he headed down to his local pub to meet with friends
--- END PAGE 171 ---

--- PAGE 172 ---
and drown his sorrows. Within two years, Eamon was diagnosed with high
blood pressure and type 2 diabetes.
For years, Eamon had lived a comfortable life in good health. As a
younger man he played sports and exercised regularly. Now he found
himself caught in a vicious circle of feeling low and despondent, unable to
focus and unable to get his business or health back on track. Following the
untimely passing of a close friend, Eamon decided that he had enough and
said to himself, “I’ve got to change my life.” This was his wake-up call.
When Eamon contacted me to help reduce his stress levels, he was
desperate to improve his situation: “My business has me totally stressed
out, I’m not sleeping at night and can’t even think straight.” My main focus
was to help him get back to good health by retraining his breathing. With an
increase in energy and concentration, the rest would follow.
Eamon’s starting BOLT score was just 8 seconds, and he displayed traits
of someone dealing with stress and anxiety: taking large breaths from the
upper chest and sighing regularly. Eamon’s first steps were to learn how to
breathe through his nose day and night, to take time out to relax and
meditate, and to practice the Breathe Light to Breathe Right exercise. Stress
was the main issue to be resolved, and learning how to still the mind was an
essential part of addressing his other symptoms.
For people with diabetes and high blood pressure, it is important to go
slowly and gently when practicing reduced breathing exercises, so as not to
put additional pressure on the body. Reducing breathing commonly leads to
a reduction of blood sugar levels, and while this is a good thing, decreasing
levels too quickly is not. As Eamon’s BOLT score increased, both his
diabetes and high blood pressure medications were reduced accordingly by
his doctor. If you have high blood pressure or diabetes, it’s important to
consult your medical professional before embarking on a reduced breathing
program.
Eamon’s regimen was as follows:
• Perform 10 minutes of Breathe Light to Breathe Right (page
74), 4 times per day, with 1 session just before bed and 1 just
after waking.
--- END PAGE 172 ---

--- PAGE 173 ---
• Stop and observe the breath for 1 to 2 minutes at various times
throughout the day to further reduce overthinking.
• Tape the mouth closed before retiring to sleep to ensure nasal
breathing at night.
• Practice the Breathing Recovery Exercise (page 91) whenever
he felt anxious or stressed.
• Walk with the mouth closed for 30 minutes daily.
• Pay attention to appetite and eat only when hungry.
• Reduce alcohol consumption to no more than 2 servings of
alcohol each night for the first week. From week 2, reduce
drinking to every other night.
From the start, Eamon questioned whether these techniques were
actually going to work. They flew in the face of everything he had been told
to date—well-meaning stress counselors had encouraged him to take deep
breaths—and reducing his breathing seemed like the opposite of what he
needed.
During our first consultation, Eamon practiced the Breathing Recovery
Exercise of holding his breath for 5 seconds, followed by normal breathing
for 10 seconds. He continued this for about 5 minutes before taking a rest.
Following the Breathing Recovery Exercise I asked Eamon to place his
hands on his chest and abdomen, and to apply gentle pressure with his
hands to slow down his breathing and create a light air shortage. He
practiced Breathe Light to Breathe Right for 3 minutes. Despite
experiencing a mild urge for air, within minutes he started to feel tension
lifting from his head. I’m pretty sure this was the turning point for Eamon.
Breathing light had improved his blood flow and body oxygenation after
just a couple of minutes—assuring him that this was indeed the way
forward.
From then on I saw Eamon each week for a month. His BOLT score
made steady progress, and by the fourth week it had increased to 27
--- END PAGE 173 ---

--- PAGE 174 ---
seconds. His sleep was far better, leaving him feeling more alert upon
waking, and he experienced a tremendous improvement to his well-being.
Eamon’s high blood pressure and blood sugar levels also reduced, while his
doctor observed his progress and altered his medication as required.
Another positive side effect from the reduced breathing for Eamon was
a lessened need for food. His appetite was much lower than normal, and he
gave up drinking completely on weekday evenings. With decreased stress
levels, there was far less temptation for both alcohol and food. Eamon’s
friends and neighbors have commented on how well he looks now that his
weight has been reduced by more than thirty-five pounds. I have met with
him a few times since, and although his BOLT score progress has slowed
slightly, he not only looks like a different person but feels it as well.
Eamon’s story stands out in my mind as he achieved a lot despite having a
lot of distractions and difficulties going on. He was extremely dedicated and
followed through with each task he was given. It is often the case that those
who are the most unwell are the most determined to follow the program in
order to get their health back. Suffering can be a very effective motivator,
but it’s even better to make just a few small effective changes before you
reach the breaking point.
My objective for this chapter is to show you the relationship between
breathing and food consumption, not to tell you what and what not to eat.
Of course there are foods that are best eaten in moderation or eliminated
entirely from the diet, and these are well documented in most books on
health and diet. A much more useful approach is to look at the reasons why
you might be stuck on a permanent yo-yo diet, or continue to struggle to
lose weight, and the answer may be closer than you think.
We can live without food for weeks, without water for days, but without
air for just a few minutes. In terms of importance for survival, breathing is
at the top of the list, followed by water, with food in last place. Health
professionals, athletes, and nonathletes alike pay far more attention to their
food than their breathing, but what happens if we switch this focus around?
Improve your BOLT score by 10 seconds and you will find your appetite
changing. Improve your BOLT score to 40 seconds and your life will
change.
The loss of appetite and resultant weight normalization from obtaining a
higher BOLT score may be due to a combination of several factors,
--- END PAGE 174 ---

--- PAGE 175 ---
including one’s blood pH shifting toward normal, the effects of simulated
high-altitude training, or simply an increased feeling of relaxation helping
to reduce emotional eating. In this section we will examine each of these
elements to help explain why Oxygen Advantage exercises help reduce the
appetite.
Overweight individuals tend to have poor breathing habits, such as
chronic hyperventilation, frequent sighing, and breathing from the mouth
and upper chest. Putting on a few extra pounds causes us to breathe more
heavily, and not just during physical exercise—breathing volume is
increased during rest as well. Based on my observations, there is a clear
relationship between breathing volume and food consumption. The question
is whether processed and acid-forming foods lead to the development of
poor breathing habits, or might it be that poor breathing habits lead to
cravings for processed and acid-forming foods? In my experience there is a
feedback loop between breathing and weight gain, and this cycle must be
broken if change is to occur.
The pH scale measures acidity and alkalinity, ranging from 1 to 14. On
this scale, 1 is the most acidic, 14 the most alkaline, and 7 is neutral. As we
saw in the first chapter, carbon dioxide plays a crucial role in the regulation
of blood pH. Our bodies strive to maintain a state of balance known as
homeostasis, which includes normal blood pressure, normal blood sugar,
and normal blood pH within a narrow range of 7.35 and 7.45. This balance
of chemicals is kept in check by the lungs and the kidneys. If blood pH
drops below 7.35 it will become too acidic, causing breathing volume to
increase as the lungs work to correct pH levels by offloading carbon dioxide
(which is itself acidic). Over-acidity of the blood may occur when we eat
processed and acid-forming foods, leading to heavier breathing and
symptoms of bloating, lethargy, and weight gain.
Conversely, an individual who chronically overbreathes will expel too
much carbon dioxide, increasing blood pH to alkaline levels above 7.45.
One hypothesis for the relationship between overbreathing and weight gain
is that the body craves processed and acid-forming foods in an effort to
normalize blood pH. Correct breathing volume and a good diet work
together to keep blood pH at a healthy balance.
Throughout evolution humans have adapted very well to coping with
short-term stress. During short periods of stress, breathing volume
--- END PAGE 175 ---

--- PAGE 176 ---
temporarily increases as the fight-or-flight response is activated. Once the
stress has dissipated, breathing volume will normalize once more, allowing
carbon dioxide to accumulate and restore normal pH. However, when it
comes to long-term stress, persistent overbreathing decreases carbon
dioxide levels for extended periods of time, meaning blood pH is not given
the opportunity to normalize.
Notable health practitioners around the world advise eating alkaline-
forming foods such as fruit and vegetables and avoiding an excess of acid-
forming foods such as animal protein, grains, and processed foods. And
though the majority of us know what it means to eat healthily, the
temptation of processed and sugary foods can sometimes be impossible to
ignore. Are we just following the demands of our bodies, or is there a way
to get rid of these urges for unhealthy food naturally?
Time and time again I have witnessed startling changes to the diets of
my students who learn to practice reduced breathing, often without the need
for deliberate avoidance or willpower. These individuals, when shown how
to address their poor breathing habits and increase their BOLT score by at
least 10 seconds, automatically find their diet changing to healthy foods
over processed foods. It begs the question: Might breathing be the missing
link in the majority of weight-loss programs?
Breaking the vicious cycle of acid-forming foods and increased
breathing volume is certainly a factor in achieving weight loss and
provoking a reduction in appetite, but there are other factors to consider
when looking at the relationship between breathing and diet, such as the
effects of simulated high-altitude training.
Since 1957, scientists have identified that animals lose weight when
living at high altitude. Sherpas and others who reside permanently at high
altitudes are also generally thinner than their sea-level counterparts. Based
on this observation, there have been many studies that point to the benefits
of living at high altitude as a way to reduce obesity. The reason for this
sustained weight loss seems to coincide with the lack of appetite
experienced at high altitude due to a reduced saturation of oxygen in the
blood.
In tests with mice it was found that moderate exposure to lower oxygen
saturation can reduce body weight and, just as important, the levels of blood
sugar and blood cholesterol. Researchers concluded that this was due to
--- END PAGE 176 ---

--- PAGE 177 ---
increased synthesis of EPO by the kidneys. This discovery has a particular
resonance with the Oxygen Advantage program, since breath holding has
been shown to increase EPO by up to 24 percent.
Of course, living at high altitude is not feasible or even economically
possible for most people, and ironically obesity is also a risk factor for
developing acute mountain sickness. But you needn’t climb a mountain to
achieve sustained and effective weight loss. Reduced breathing exercises
like those practiced in the Oxygen Advantage program provide a practical
and accessible alternative to high-altitude training.
High-altitude training can be simulated by incorporating breath holding
into physical exercise as well as practicing reduced breathing during rest.
For individuals with a BOLT score of less than 10 seconds, or those who
have any preexisting health concerns, I would recommend starting by
becoming accustomed to breathing through the nose night and day. From
there, you can practice the Breathe Light to Breathe Right exercise for 10
minutes, 4 times a day in order to reduce your breathing volume toward
normal and increase your BOLT score. Even a gentle approach like this can
be enough to kick-start a reduction in appetite and help toward achieving
healthy weight-loss goals.
For those with a BOLT score of more than 20 seconds and who are
relatively healthy, in addition to practicing the above exercise you can also
begin to incorporate breath holding into your physical exercise to simulate
high-altitude training, as described in chapter 7. Holding the breath during
walking, jogging, or running to create a medium to strong hunger for air
decreases the oxygen saturation of the blood to below 94 percent, which can
lead to a suppression of appetite. I suggest that you add these exercises into
your current training regimen to make the program easier to sustain over the
long term.
Another reason simulated high-altitude training may contribute to
weight loss is that walking or jogging with nasal breathing allows the body
to work with oxygen (aerobically), while incorporating breath holds every
minute or so makes the body work without oxygen (anaerobically). During
an anaerobic state the body is forced to burn calories from fat stores in
order to produce energy. Incorporating both aerobic and anaerobic workouts
into your training program will lead to increased calorie burn and weight
loss.
--- END PAGE 177 ---

--- PAGE 178 ---
Finally, there are emotional and psychological factors to take into
account when looking at the reasons behind increased appetite and weight
gain. The relationship between stress and increased food intake is well
documented, with food often providing a distraction or comfort to negate
feelings of anger or loneliness, or financial or relationship issues. I imagine
that most readers will have experienced, at one point or another, that their
demand for food increases when they are bored, stressed, or feeling low.
This is mostly an unconscious habit, just as smokers will light up a cigarette
without making any conscious effort to do so. As if on autopilot, we find
ourselves going to the refrigerator or cupboard to consume whatever is in
sight, despite having no genuine sensations of hunger.
In a study conducted by the University of Minnesota, data was collected
from more than twelve thousand individuals to determine the relationship
between perceived stress and health behaviors. Results showed that high
stress for both men and women was associated with smoking, a diet that
was high in fat, and a reduction in exercise. As stress is known to increase
food consumption, anything that helps to reduce the effects of stress can be
useful as an aid to weight loss. Throughout this book I frequently discuss
the importance of taking your attention from the mind and dispersing it
throughout the body, focusing on the breath or the present moment.
When your attention is focused on the sensations of your inner body and
your breath, it is impossible to maintain anxious, stressful, and distracting
thoughts. These practices of meditation have been employed by human
beings for thousands of years, and today many studies show the benefits of
meditation as a means of helping with weight loss. Controlling stress and
depression can be conducive to maintaining long-term weight loss, and
while it is relatively easy to shed a few pounds with a burst of well-
intentioned exercise and healthy eating, the Holy Grail is to reach and
maintain your ideal weight—no one wants to spend their life struggling on
a restrictive diet.
The exercise Breathe Light to Breathe Right on page 74 has been
specially designed to help you bring your attention away from the mind and
onto the breath. This exercise is performed while sitting or lying down, but
a certain amount of focus and concentration is still required to follow the
breath and gently allow it to reduce to create a tolerable air shortage.
Observing your breath, slowing it down, and bringing a feeling of
--- END PAGE 178 ---

--- PAGE 179 ---
relaxation throughout the body is in itself a meditation. An additional
benefit of practicing this exercise and nasal breathing is an improvement in
body oxygenation, thereby reducing brain cell excitability and stress.
Meditation doesn’t have to be about sitting in a corner in a lotus
position saying “om.” At first it will be necessary to find a quiet place to sit
so that you can focus on observing your breath to practice, but in time this
exercise can be brought into any aspect of your life. As described in chapter
8, make your life a meditation by taking your attention out of your head and
into the current moment. It is impossible to experience life when we hide
away from it by allowing the mind to be permanently occupied by worries
and stress. You are not just a head. In fact, imagine you are headless. No
matter what activity you partake in, bring your attention out of your head,
into your body, and on to the activity. Become the activity. And you can
apply this theory to your eating habits too.
Eating is a basic function that often receives very little conscious
attention during our busy daily routines. It is common practice to stuff food
into our mouths unconsciously, not even really tasting anything after the
first bite. The next time you eat, observe how many times you actually
noticed the texture, taste, and smell of your food. Did you eat most of your
meal with your attention elsewhere? Or did you experience the sensory
wonders of your food, bite by bite?
Forty-one-year-old Tessy considers herself a born worrier. As the eldest
child, she often felt an overwhelming sense of responsibility toward her
family and younger siblings; throughout childhood, her parents constantly
reinforced the notion that Tessy’s primary role was to show a good example
to her younger brother and sister. At school she excelled at both sports and
academic work and became focused on achieving top marks—anything
other than an A grade was unacceptable. The few times she received a C
grade, she and her parents would get very upset. On one such occasion her
father went to the extent of taping her report card to the refrigerator door to
remind everyone in the house that marks like this were not to be tolerated.
It sometimes seemed to Tessy that her parents were trying to realize
their own ambitions through her, but that it was impossible for them to be
fulfilled. Her brother and sister had far less pressure put upon them, were
required to do less homework and fewer household chores, and enjoyed
much more freedom. These inequalities became even more apparent during
--- END PAGE 179 ---

--- PAGE 180 ---
their teenage years when the younger ones were allowed to watch hours of
television and go to parties while Tessy was expected to concentrate on her
studies.
Tessy grew resentful of her parents. She hated the fact that there was
one set of rules for her and another for her siblings. Through the molding by
her parents, Tessy felt that she always had to be a people pleaser and a
perfectionist, and if she failed to reach her high expectations, she would feel
very low and critical of herself.
Things came to a head a year ago when Tessy’s mother came to visit
and stayed for a whole month. It was then that Tessy realized just how
much her mother’s high-strung personality made Tessy feel stressed.
Although she had long been an adult, Tessy had never escaped the
attentions of her overbearing mother, who advised her, smothered her, and
always said she knew what was best for her. As her mother had grown
older, Tessy chose to keep the peace and continued to bottle up her feelings
rather than confronting her.
Unsurprisingly, Tessy’s mother’s visit was very stressful. In a bid to
distract herself from the stress, Tessy found herself eating more and more.
Whenever she felt that things were getting to be too much, she would cook
a meal or head to the local diner to dissipate her feelings. She enjoyed the
pleasure of cooking, tasting, and eating, and now the food was serving an
additional purpose by helping her to cope.
Six weeks ago, I received a call from Tessy complaining that she was
feeling increasingly short of breath. Feelings of dizziness while driving had
made her feel very anxious about her health, suspecting that something
more serious was going on, and she had begun to suffer from
breathlessness, unable to take a satisfying breath. Recognizing the angst in
Tessy’s voice, I asked her to come in to see me the following day. She
explained the situation that led to the changes in her breathing and the use
of food as a crutch. She was conscious about having a “spare tire” around
her waist, which wasn’t helping with her self-esteem, and she was anxious
about her breathing issues—the time had come to make a change.
We started by measuring Tessy’s BOLT score and found it to be 10
seconds. Although she was predominantly a nasal breather, she used her
upper chest to breathe and sighed regularly. I explained to her that optimal
breathing should be difficult to see and not heard, with gentle movements
--- END PAGE 180 ---

--- PAGE 181 ---
from below the diaphragm. During stressed-out breathing, however, the
opposite takes place, leading to an unnecessarily large breathing volume
and all its associated problems. Tessy needed to learn how to use slow and
gentle breathing to bring her body into relaxation.
First, I asked her to place one hand on her chest and one hand above her
navel and to become aware of her breathing, to feel the air as it entered and
left her body. When she was conscious of her breathing, I asked her to
breathe light and gently soften her breathing in order to create a tolerable
need for air for a couple of minutes. Tessy felt uncomfortable with the
feeling of air hunger, so I asked her to reduce the time spent on the exercise
in order to gently condition her body to acclimatize to the sensation. She
repeated 3 sets of 1.5 minutes each, with a small rest of 1 minute or so
between them, and soon became accustomed to practicing the exercise.
To help quicken her progress, I decided to teach her a walking exercise
with breath holds. This involved walking with her mouth closed for about 1
minute or so, followed by gently exhaling through her nose and pinching it
with her fingers to hold her breath for 10 paces. Following each breath hold,
Tessy continued to walk while breathing through her nose for 1 or 2
minutes, followed by exhaling through her nose and holding her breath.
Tessy found this exercise much more comfortable and proceeded to increase
the lengths of her breath holds to 15 and then 20 paces. Each time she
advanced, I checked to ensure Tessy’s breathing remained under control,
and soon she was able to hold her breath for 30 paces, even feeling
comfortable with the feeling of air shortage. Tessy explained that she found
it easier to practice reduced breathing while walking than sitting still, as she
knew that the air hunger was only temporary.
Tessy made such good progress that we decided to move onto
abdominal breathing to change her breathing pattern from the upper chest to
the diaphragm and address her chronic overbreathing. For this exercise I
asked her to stand up, as an upright position provides an ideal posture for
abdominal breathing, and gave her the following simple instructions:
• Breathe in—gently allow your abdomen to move outward.
• Breathe out—gently allow your abdomen to move inward.
--- END PAGE 181 ---

--- PAGE 182 ---
By focusing her attention on her chest and abdomen, Tessy was able to
switch from upper-chest to abdominal breathing effortlessly. The next step
was to gently soften and slow down her breathing to produce a comfortable
hunger for air. Tessy practiced lightening her breathing for 3 minutes before
taking a break for 1 minute or so. After 3 sets of this exercise and a short
rest, I measured Tessy’s BOLT score again to find it had increased to 23
seconds. This drastic change to her BOLT score took place in a single one-
and-a-half-hour session, and Tessy felt calmer, more alert, and in much
greater control of her breathing. BOLT scores do not usually increase so
quickly, but from time to time it is possible! However, as I explained to
Tessy, her sudden high BOLT score would reduce again over the following
few hours, but could be regained through the practice of the exercises she’d
learned.
A few weeks after we met, Tessy reported that she had felt extremely
thirsty on one of the days, almost as if her body was desperate to rehydrate
itself with plain water after months of relying on fizzy drinks. Exhilarated
by her progress, Tessy felt calmer, more energetic, and no longer turned to
food for comfort, losing ten pounds simply through the practice of quiet,
gentle, reduced breathing.
By practicing Oxygen Advantage exercises and making improvements
to your breathing pattern, you will achieve a higher BOLT score and
experience a reduction of your appetite. Listen to your body and observe
what it is telling you. Get used to responding only to the feeling of genuine
hunger rather than eating for boredom or in response to stress or depression.
The next time you feel the urge to go to the refrigerator or eat a snack, ask
yourself, “Do I really feel hungry?” By eating only when your body
actually requires food, you will make the most of your natural suppression
of appetite and find losing weight and maintaining a healthy diet achievable
and simple. A detailed program for helping to achieve weight loss can be
found on page 282.
--- END PAGE 182 ---

--- PAGE 183 ---
CHAPTER 10 
Reduce Physical Injury and Fatigue
M y brother Lee and his wife, Marie, are in their early thirties and live
with their two children in the town of Navan in Ireland. Their work life,
family life, and social life all revolve around physical training and
preparation for long-distance events, and every few weeks they participate
in triathlons, marathons, and even ultramarathons. Most people outside their
sporting circle regard them as exercise nuts, and every now and again, for a
bit of devilment, another of my brothers—Dave, who does no physical
exercise at all—sends Lee the most recent newspaper reports describing
how too much exercise is bad for your health, increases the risk of
developing different conditions, or causes premature death. There is nothing
more pleasurable to a couch potato, it seems, than to extol the dangers of
exercise to those who do it.
There is anecdotal evidence to suggest that athletes may be at risk of
becoming seriously ill early in life or die younger than the rest of the
population, despite being in peak physical condition. And while the benefits
of exercising to maintain good health are well accepted by all health
authorities, is there ever a time when exercise can simply be too much or
too intensive?
To investigate the relationship between longevity and career success,
Professor Richard Epstein and Catherine Epstein from the Kinghorn Cancer
Center in Sydney, Australia, analyzed one thousand New York Times 
obituaries published between 2009 and 2011. Their findings revealed that
sports players lived on average for 77.4 years, while longer lifespans could
be found in the military, business, and politics, where individuals lived for
84.7 years, 83.3 years, and 82.1 years respectively. And while 77.4 years is
--- END PAGE 183 ---

--- PAGE 184 ---
a ripe old age, why should athletes live shorter lives than those who
probably devote less time to their health and fitness?
In addition to professional athletes living shorter than their counterparts
in the business world, there is much documented evidence that intense
physical exercise increases oxidative stress that may contribute to
premature aging, damage to the heart, and dementia.
Given that most health professionals encourage physical exercise for
good health, in what circumstances might exercise be damaging? And,
more important, what can we do to reap the benefits of physical activity
without putting our health at risk? The key to answering these questions
seems to lie in controlling the amount of stress put on the body during
exercise—more specifically, oxidative stress, which results from too many
free radicals washing about our system.
Free radicals are molecules generated by the breakdown of oxygen
during metabolic activity. We all create a certain amount of free radicals
through the very act of breathing, but normal levels do not pose a problem
since the body’s defense mechanism is able to neutralize the molecules with
antioxidants such as glutathione, ubiquinone, flavonoids, and vitamins A, E,
and C. But when our antioxidant defenses are overwhelmed by too many
free radicals, cells can be damaged and our health adversely affected. This
is what is known as oxidative stress.
Free radicals are highly reactive and attack other cells, causing damage
to tissues and negatively affecting lipids, proteins, and DNA. During
physical exercise we produce more free radicals than usual due to an
increase in breathing and metabolism, which can lead to an imbalance
between the production of free radicals and the antioxidants required to
detoxify them, resulting in muscle weakness, fatigue, and overtraining.
Investigations into physical training, regular aerobic exercise, marathon
running, and extreme competitions have consistently found that antioxidant
levels decrease after intense physical activity or extreme competition, while
free radical production increases.
In a paper published in the Journal of the American College of
Nutrition, Guillaume Machefer and colleagues investigated whether
extreme running decreases blood antioxidant defense capacity. Blood
samples were collected from six well-trained athletes participating in an
ultramarathon called the Marathon of Sands. In what is considered to be one
--- END PAGE 184 ---

--- PAGE 185 ---
of the toughest foot races on earth, competitors run the equivalent of six
regular marathons over six days in the Sahara Desert, during which they are
required to carry their own food. Blood samples were taken from runners 72
hours after completion of the race, with researchers noting a “significant
alteration of the blood antioxidant defense capacity” and concluding that
“such extreme competition induced an imbalance between oxidant and
antioxidant protection.”
In an attempt to deal with this potentially detrimental imbalance
between antioxidants and free radicals, athletes are often encouraged to take
large regular doses of antioxidants. At first glance this might seem like
sound advice, but studies exploring the use of dietary antioxidants to reduce
oxidative stress and exercise-induced muscle injury have met with mixed
results to date.
An alternative and totally natural method of protecting against the
excessive buildup of free radicals is to supplement regular exercise with
breath holding and to increase your BOLT score. This method is cheap,
nontoxic, and less controversial than supplements, providing effective
protection against oxidative stress. Breath holding after an exhalation
causes a decrease in oxygen saturation, which triggers an increase in lactic
acid. At the same time, carbon dioxide levels also increase, leading to a rise
in the concentration of hydrogen ions, which further acidifies the blood.
Repeated practice of breath-holding exercises offsets the effects of lactic
acid, inducing the body to make adaptations to delay acidosis (increased
acidity in the blood) and enabling the athlete to push harder without
experiencing the same level of fatigue.
Research has shown that breath-holding exercises can improve an
individual’s tolerance to hypoxemia (low levels of oxygen in the blood) and
reduce the acidity of the blood, eliminating oxidative stress and reducing
lactic acid buildup. Athletes with long-term experience of breath-hold
training, such as divers, have demonstrated a marked reduction in blood
acidosis and oxidative stress in studies, suggesting that the extended
practice of breath-hold exercises can be instrumental in avoiding the
negative effects of free radicals produced by exercise.
Research spanning thirty years has investigated the mitigating factors in
exercise-induced oxidative stress, taking into consideration different types
of activity, duration, intensity, and the capabilities of the individual. The
--- END PAGE 185 ---

--- PAGE 186 ---
correct dose of physical exercise will of course vary from person to person
according to physical condition and training habits, but the results of
numerous studies show that oxidative stress can best be avoided by
engaging in regular exercise combined with breath-hold training. The body
is very good at adapting to consistent physical activity but cannot always
react quickly enough to protect itself from a sudden influx of free radicals
produced by infrequent high-intensity exercise. Exercising several times a
week at a moderate, comfortable intensity from which you can recover
easily is the best way to increase your body’s natural antioxidant defenses
and reduce oxidative stress. However, if you are a weekend warrior who
does very little or no exercise during the week but engages in intense
training on the weekend, you may be doing more harm than good.
More rigorous training regimens can also provide adequate protection
from oxidative stress, so long as intensity and duration is increased
gradually; a competitive athlete preparing for an upcoming event will need
to allow a sufficient period of time to condition his or her body against
oxidative stress. Studies show that well-trained athletes are perfectly able to
cope with the oxidative stress caused by intense training and competition
after the right kind of preparation—in fact, small amounts of oxidative
stress can even prove beneficial for the body in strengthening antioxidant
defenses.
While breathing naturally increases during physical exercise,
individuals with a low BOLT score breathe more heavily than normal,
creating an even greater quantity of free radicals relative to their physical
work rate. A higher BOLT score, on the other hand, corresponds to a lower
breathing volume, producing fewer free radicals and reducing the risk of
muscle damage, injury, fatigue, and premature aging—possibly even
extending the length of life. Breath-holding techniques offer a simple and
effective way to increase antioxidant protection in athletes who exercise
intensely and can easily be incorporated into regular training.
Alan is an amateur cyclist in his early twenties living on the west coast
of Ireland. Very competitive by nature, Alan has won many races, often
beating riders more seasoned and experienced than himself. He came to me
for help because he found that it sometimes took him a half hour to recover
his breathing after a race. Taking so long to catch his breath—even after
strenuous activity—was a clear indication that Alan was pushing his body
--- END PAGE 186 ---

--- PAGE 187 ---
too hard during competition. As I expected, his BOLT score measured 15
seconds, meaning that his breathing volume was much larger than
necessary. The breathlessness he experienced after exercise showed that his
body was struggling to compensate. I explained to Alan that although he
was clearly fit and capable of winning races, he was literally subjecting his
body to abuse. At the time, he was suffering from a dry cough and head
cold as a result of his exercise, but if he continued in the same way, the
effects of overbreathing might not always be so mild.
My advice to Alan was to adapt his cycling to the capabilities of his
body. First, he needed to increase his BOLT score to at least 35 seconds to
align his breathing volume with his metabolic needs. I asked Alan to switch
to nasal breathing during as much of his training as possible, reverting to
mouth breathing only when absolutely necessary. Since the nose offers a
smaller entry for breathing than the mouth, nasal breathing sets a limit to
the volume of air taken into the lungs. Nasal breathing is a great barometer
for training intensity, and my objective was for Alan to match his exercise
to his capabilities by not pushing himself past the point where he could
maintain nasal breathing. This is a safe and easy-to-implement approach,
enabling a gradual but steady increase of BOLT score, which in turn allows
for a sensible increase in intensity and duration.
One small land-based mammal has managed to confound the
overwhelming evidence to support the negative effects of oxidative stress.
For the past few decades, scientists have studied the naked mole rat—a
bald, blind creature that looks like a hot dog with teeth and lives for up to
twenty-eight years, almost eight times longer than any other rodent. The
naked mole rat lives in East Africa, where it is considered a pest by local
farmers as it burrows tunnels underneath fields and eats vegetable crops.
The breathing rate of the naked mole rat is very low in comparison to
other rodents, and it lives in crowded colonies where there is little oxygen
and high levels of carbon dioxide. As such, the naked mole rat is an
excellent embodiment of the “less is more” theory of breathing. This might
also explain how, despite living with high oxidative stress from a young
age, the naked mole rat maintains good health and longevity, and in all the
years this rather ugly animal has been studied, it has never been known to
develop cancer. Even when scientists have injected the mole rat with
cancer-causing agents, the disease was resisted. Exactly why the naked
--- END PAGE 187 ---

--- PAGE 188 ---
mole rat is immune to cancer is unknown, but some scientists are hopeful
that finding an answer may provide the key to unlocking a cure for humans.
Living congruently with nature’s system of checks and balances seems to be
the key to a long and healthy life. The naked mole rat does this remarkably
well, given that researchers have discovered that the negative affects of high
oxidative stress may be offset by high carbon dioxide levels. 
Maintaining Your Fitness During Injury or Rest 
The cost of an injury to an athlete can be devastating. Not only does the
athlete have to endure the pain of the injury, but he or she also faces a drop
in morale and the risk of decreased physical performance due to a lapse in
training. Although a few days’ rest from a regular exercise routine can lead
to improved performance, several studies have shown that a rest period of
around four weeks results in detraining effects on the body, including:
• Increase in body weight
• Increase in fat mass
• Increase in waist circumference
• Decrease of VO2 peak
When you have worked so hard to increase VO2 max and maintain your
fitness, the effects of detraining can be enormously disappointing,
especially when it becomes a recurrent event. For some, high-intensity
exercise may be the source of a repetitive cycle of injury and detraining;
when the body responds to injury with inflammation, free radicals are
produced, which may lead to further muscle damage. There is, however, a
way to prevent lapses in your regular routine, as well as maintaining fitness
if you suffer an injury. The Oxygen Advantage program provides a solution
to both the risk of injury and the limits an existing injury may place on your
abilities. Practicing the Breathe Light to Breathe Right exercise along with
breath holds can help to increase VO2 max and the oxygen-carrying
--- END PAGE 188 ---

--- PAGE 189 ---
capacity of the blood while reducing lactic acid and improving blood flow.
This optimal combination means that partial fitness can be maintained even
in the case of injury or extended periods of rest.
A significant bonus of the Oxygen Advantage program is that it can be
performed during rest or during exercise, and does not require an athlete to
be injury-free. Some of the benefits of high-intensity exercise can even be
obtained by adding breath-hold exercises to a gentle walk. Improving the
way you breathe during rest and exercise will have positive repercussions
on your general health as well as your athletic performance, reducing the
risk of injury and enabling you to perform beyond your previous limits.
--- END PAGE 189 ---

--- PAGE 190 ---
CHAPTER 11 
Improve Oxygenation of Your Heart
O n the morning of September 11, 2001, I received a phone call from my
wife, Sinead, telling me to switch on the news. Listening to the accounts of
what had taken place in New York City and at the Pentagon, I felt a chill go
right through me. The tragedy felt even closer to home as Sinead and I had
visited that wonderful city just three months prior.
On that same day, another tragedy unfolded, although it did not receive
the same coverage as the terrorist attacks. In the United States alone, 3,000
people lost their lives to heart attack and stroke—two of the top three killers
in the United States. The same tragedy occurred on Wednesday, September
12, and again on Thursday, September 13, repeating itself each and every
day ever since. And while the falling of the Twin Towers will justifiably be
remembered forever, the victims of cardiovascular disease are only
remembered by their nearest and dearest. We cannot predict when a
catastrophic event like 9/11 will occur, but we can help ourselves to extend
and enrich the time we have to live and enjoy the company of those around
us by taking care of our bodies and especially our hearts.
Understanding a simple and scientifically proven way of keeping our
blood vessels healthy is invaluable to living life to the full. In this chapter,
we explore the role of the gas nitric oxide, along with techniques for
optimal breathing in order to maintain good cardiovascular health.
In 1867 the Swedish chemist, inventor, and industrialist Alfred Nobel
invented dynamite by combining the chemical nitroglycerine with silica to
form a less volatile explosive than nitroglycerine alone. Although his
invention was initially intended to be used for blasting rock for industry, it
later became synonymous with war and destruction. A few years after
--- END PAGE 190 ---

--- PAGE 191 ---
Nobel’s invention, doctors discovered that this same chemical was effective
in helping to reduce high blood pressure and treating the cardiovascular
condition known as angina pectoris. In the human body, nitroglycerine—the
same material used to make explosives—converts to the gas nitric oxide to
provide amazing benefits for cardiovasular health. In his later years, Nobel
suffered from heart disease, and when doctors tried to prescribe
nitroglycerine to relieve his condition, he declined it, writing to his friend:
“Isn’t it the irony of fate that I have been prescribed nitroglycerine, to be
taken internally! They call it Trinitrin, so as not to scare the chemist and the
public.” It was unfortunate that Nobel could not envision how a chemical so
destructive outside the body could actually help it internally.
In 1896 Alfred Nobel suffered a stroke and died. In his will, the
majority of his wealth was endowed to provide “prizes to those who, during
the preceding year, shall have conferred the greatest benefit to mankind.”
Although the motives of Nobel remain unclear, many commentators,
including Albert Einstein, were of the view that this final act was an attempt
to relieve his conscience and promote world peace. To ameliorate the
negative effects from the invention of dynamite, Nobel ensured that a
prestigious ceremony would take place each year to recognize those who
make the greatest positive contributions to life.
In an ironic twist of fate, nearly one hundred years after Nobel’s death,
three doctors, Robert Furchgott, Louis Ignarro, and Ferid Murad, were
awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discovering how
nitric oxide had many important beneficial effects for the cardiovascular
system. Had Alfred Nobel conceded to the wishes of his doctors, it is
possible that his life may have been extended.
Sometimes referred to as the mighty molecule, nitric oxide is produced
within the 100,000 miles of blood vessels throughout the human body,
including the paranasal sinuses surrounding the nasal cavity.
Nitric oxide sends a signal for the blood vessels to relax and dilate. If
there is too little nitric oxide, blood vessels constrict and the heart has to
raise the pressure to send blood throughout the body. The easiest way to
understand this is to imagine a garden hose with a knot in it: The water
cannot flow freely and the pressure must rise if the water has any chance of
flowing from one end to the other. Persistent high blood pressure or
hypertension damages the arterial blood vessels, causing a buildup of
--- END PAGE 191 ---

--- PAGE 192 ---
plaque and cholesterol and also possibly blood clotting. If the blood clots
and leads to an obstruction, this may cause the heart or brain to be deprived
of blood and oxygen, resulting in a heart attack or stroke.
Nitric oxide plays a monumental role in human health by reducing
cholesterol, reversing the buildup of plaque in the blood vessels, and
helping to prevent blood clotting, all of which significantly increase the risk
for heart attack and stroke. According to Nobel laureate and distinguished
professor of pharmacology Dr. Louis Ignarro: “[Nitric oxide] is the body’s
natural defense to prevent all of these things from happening.”
Producing sufficient nitric oxide enables blood flow to be directed
effortlessly around the body, ensuring that vital organs receive sufficient
oxygenation and nutrients. As blood vessels relax, the heart is able to
normalize the pressure required to distribute blood throughout the body.
Ways to increase nitric oxide include slow nasal breathing, regular
moderate physical exercise, and eating foods that produce nitric oxide.
As nitric oxide is produced inside the paranasal sinuses as well as the
blood vessels, breathing gently and calmly through the nose allows the gas
to be picked up and carried to the lungs and blood. According to Jon
Lundberg, professor of nitric oxide pharmacologics at the world-famous
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden, large amounts of nitric oxide
are constantly released in the nasal airways of humans. As we breathe in
through the nose, nitric oxide will follow the airflow to the lungs, where it
plays a role in increasing the amount of oxygen uptake in the blood.
Dr. David Anderson of the National Institutes of Health in the United
States also believes that how we breathe may well hold the key for how the
body regulates blood pressure. It is well known that slow, gentle breathing
from the diaphragm relaxes and dilates blood vessels, but the reasons
behind this lasting drop in blood pressure is not completely understood. A
plausible explanation is that the regular practice of relaxed breathing
activates the body’s relaxation response, resulting in improved blood gas
regulation and dilation of blood vessels.
As we partake in physical exercise, blood flow increases and stimulates
the inner lining of the blood vessels to produce more nitric oxide. An
interesting study by a team of researchers from Hiroshima University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences compared changes to blood flow
in response to different intensities of physical exercise. Exercise intensity
--- END PAGE 192 ---

--- PAGE 193 ---
describes the perceived effort by individuals while physically moving their
bodies. For example, most people will agree that walking at a moderate
pace is a low-intensity exercise because it is easy to sustain and involves
light demands in terms of breathlessness and recovery. The study, which
was published in the journal Circulation, found that low-intensity exercise
—which expends about the same amount of energy as window-shopping—
wasn’t enough to optimally increase blood flow. Conversely, high-intensity
exercise—which includes vigorous activity at a fast pace—actually
worsened blood flow. But the middle path—moderate-intensity exercise,
such as a brisk walk or a light jog or cycle—increased production of nitric
oxide and improved blood flow throughout the body.
While physical exercise is an excellent way to increase nitric oxide,
diet, dietary supplements, and nasal breathing also play significant roles. In
a recent conversation with Irish cross-country running coach John Downes,
he told me how he actively encourages his athletes to drink beet juice,
explaining how he witnessed an increase in performance and reduction of
cramping as a result. Since John isn’t a man to waste energy on unfruitful
training practices, I decided to find out more. I soon discovered a study
conducted by the University of Exeter that investigated the effects of
increased dietary intake of beet juice, which is rich in the nitrates required
to generate nitric oxide. A study group of men aged between nineteen and
thirty-eight drank about two cups of beet juice every day for a week. This
resulted in a “remarkable reduction” in the amount of oxygen required to
perform exercise in comparison with a control group who drank water: The
beet juice drinkers were able to cycle up to 16 percent longer before tiring.
Furthermore, blood pressure within the beet juice drinkers dropped (within
normal levels), even though it wasn’t high to begin with. In conclusion, the
researchers commented that the reduction of oxygen required for
submaximal exercise following the drinking of beet juice “cannot be
achieved by any other known means, including long-term endurance
exercise training.”
Along with beet juice, essential nitric oxide–producing, heart-protecting
food sources to include in your diet include fish, green vegetables, dark
chocolate, red wine (a glass per day—not the bottle!), pomegranate juice,
green or black tea, and oatmeal. Food sources to be limited in your diet
include the usual culprits of meat and processed foods. Along with eating
--- END PAGE 193 ---

--- PAGE 194 ---
the right foods, supplementing your diet with the amino acid L-arginine has
been proven to increase nitric oxide production, although results vary
depending on age and genetics. These simple changes to your diet, in
addition to simply breathing lightly through your nose, may provide the key
to lifelong cardiovascular health.
Most of us never give a moment’s thought to our cardiovascular health,
taking for granted that our heart will continue to perform its essential task
for seventy years or more. But heart-related problems are not limited to
those with a history of heart disease; completely avoidable cardiac issues
can be experienced by young and otherwise healthy individuals, and
prevented simply by increasing nitric oxide levels and by changing the way
they breathe.
In 1909, American physiologist Dr. Yandell Henderson produced
groundbreaking work on the relationship between breathing and heart rate
that remains relevant today. In a paper entitled “Acapnia and Shock: Carbon
Dioxide as a Factor in the Regulation of Heart Rate,” Henderson describes
how he was able to regulate the heart rate of dogs to any rate he desired,
from 40 beats or fewer per minute up to 200 or more, by altering their
pulmonary ventilation. Henderson noted that even a “slight reduction of
carbon dioxide of the arterial blood caused a quickening of the heart rate.”
A few years ago, I worked with a thirtysomething woman named Anna
who had been experiencing heart palpitations characterized by a fast
heartbeat. Her resting pulse was about 90 beats per minute—the average
heart rate is between 60 and 80 bpm—leaving her feeling that her “heart
would beat right out of [her] chest.” This feeling was a source of major
distress for Anna and she had consulted a number of specialists, but there
didn’t seem to be anything physically wrong with her.
In an effort to get to the bottom of the problem, Anna had undergone a
number of physical examinations and an electrocardiogram. The good news
was that her cardiovascular health was normal. The bad news was that there
was still no identified reason or solution for her predicament. Following her
diagnosis, she was convinced that she had a medical condition incurable by
modern science.
Unfortunately, Anna is not alone. The late chest physician Dr. Claude
Lum wrote a number of articles illustrating her experience to a tee, based on
patients who presented the very same pattern of symptoms with no physical
--- END PAGE 194 ---

--- PAGE 195 ---
anomaly. The one thing all these cases had in common was a tendency for
overbreathing, the seemingly innocuous habit that is found to be the
“mystery” cause behind numerous complaints and conditions in every field
of medical practice.
Anna and her husband, having exhausted the traditional routes for a
solution, somehow came across my work and were relieved to hear that the
effects of overbreathing could indeed lead to palpitations characterized by
an abnormally rapid heartbeat. With nothing to lose, they enrolled in my
course.
When Anna arrived at the clinic, she appeared to be the picture of
health, in her early thirties, slim, and of a petite build. For a few moments I
observed her breathing without her noticing. She seemed to be a nose
breather, but the one thing that caught my eye was that she would sigh
every few minutes, lifting her shoulders and taking in a large breath. I’d
seen the effects of regular sighing many times over the years, often in
individuals prone to anxiety, and just like mouth breathing, it is a habit that
usually goes unnoticed. I explained to Anna that in order to resolve her
heart symptoms, it was very important that she retrain herself to stop this
regular sighing.
Even though a sigh is often involuntary, taking place before the
individual is aware of it, we still have a measure of control to reduce and
eliminate the pattern. I explained to Anna that she should hold her breath or
swallow any time she felt a sigh coming on. If by chance she missed one,
she should hold her breath for 10 seconds to compensate for the
overbreathing. I also provided her with a relaxation exercise and taught her
the Breathe Light to Breathe Right exercise, which she proceeded to
practice diligently for 10 minutes, 6 times per day. In addition, Anna began
to pay more attention to her breathing throughout the day, ensuring that it
stayed calm and quiet at all times.
When husband and wife returned one week later, Anna explained how
much calmer she felt, and brought the fantastic news that her pulse had
reduced to a perfectly average 60 to 70 beats per minute. Anna’s case was
one of my first experiences of the effect of overbreathing on cardiovascular
health, and one that I will never forget—a clear demonstration of how
overbreathing can affect us in so many different and potentially serious
ways.
--- END PAGE 195 ---

--- PAGE 196 ---
To demonstrate the effects of breathing on heart rate, I often ask my
students to locate their pulse and take six or seven big breaths quickly
through their mouth—within seconds, they are able to feel their pulse
getting quicker. I then ask the students to practice gentle, slow, relaxed
breathing and notice how the pulse slows down. If breathing rate and
volume can have such an immediate and significant effect on the heart, we
need to ask what repercussions poor breathing habits might have on the
long-term health of our hearts.
The heart performs the most important function of the body, and, like all
muscles, it requires sufficient blood flow and oxygenation in order to work
properly. As Henderson showed, breathing in excess of normal metabolic
requirements causes a reduced concentration of carbon dioxide in the blood.
This state of hypocapnia (which Henderson called acapnia ) can affect
cardiac functioning by decreasing the circulation of blood in the blood
vessels and reducing blood flow to the heart. Since low levels of carbon
dioxide in the blood lead to a strengthening of the bond between the red
blood cells and oxygen, the result is reduced delivery of oxygen to the
heart. On the other hand, increasing carbon dioxide levels in the blood by
reducing breathing volume toward normal will result in improved blood
flow and increased available oxygen, providing the heart with a ready and
reliable supply of oxygen. 
Cardiac Arrest in Athletes: A Missing Link 
Each year, fit and healthy young athletes die from sudden adult death
syndrome or cardiac arrest. These deaths have a far-reaching effect not only
on family, friends, and classmates but also on entire communities.
Cormac McAnallen played Gaelic football for his native County
Tyrone, winning almost every honor in the game during his career. He was
also a student at Queen’s University Belfast and University College Dublin,
and was named Queen’s University graduate of the year in 2004.
On March 2, 2004, at just twenty-four years old, he died suddenly in his
sleep due to an undetected heart condition. Tributes to Cormac came from
all sectors of society, including Irish president Mary McAleese, who hailed
him as “one of the greatest Gaelic footballers of his time.”
--- END PAGE 196 ---

--- PAGE 197 ---
While undertaking research for this book, my curiosity was roused as to
why healthy athletes might experience cardiac arrest or exhibit
electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities with no other apparent risk factors.
After all, most athletes are in the prime of their life, eat a good diet, do not
smoke, have normal cholesterol levels and normal blood pressure, and
generally care for their health. Aside from genetic predisposition, which of
course we have absolutely no control over, what other factors might
increase the risk of cardiac arrest in athletes?
In search of the reasons behind unexplained heart failure in young
athletes, several studies have explored ECG abnormalities in order to find a
connection between the electrical system that controls the heart’s rhythm
and unexpected cardiac arrest.
When the heart beats abnormally—either too fast or too slow, or
irregularly—this condition is termed arrhythmia . Cardiac arrest happens
when the electrical signals that control the timing and rhythm of the
heartbeat become completely chaotic. When this happens the heart is no
longer able to effectively pump blood around the body, and unless the
condition is treated promptly, death is inevitable.
For the best chances of survival, immediate application of
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) followed by defibrillation is essential.
Although cardiac arrest often comes with no warning, clues such as
abnormal heart rate, chest pain, dizziness, fainting, blackouts, and flu-like
symptoms are sometimes present. Just prior to the onset of cardiac arrest,
the athlete may feel dizzy or unwell and then collapse, stop breathing, and
quickly lose consciousness as blood and oxygen stop flowing to the brain.
Unless circulation is restored within a few minutes, irreversible brain
damage and subsequently death will result from sudden heart failure and the
cessation of circulation.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a test used to interpret the electrical
activity of the heart, assessing the rate and regularity of the heartbeat as
well as the presence of any damage to the heart muscle. In assessing ECG
abnormalities, doctors examine various indicators that are linked to a
number of life-threatening cardiac conditions.
Studies have found that certain ECG changes in young athletes are
common and usually reflect adaptations of the heart as a response to regular
physical training. However, certain abnormal ECG readings, such as T-
--- END PAGE 197 ---

--- PAGE 198 ---
wave inversion and ST segment depression, were found to be potential
precursors to sudden and unexpected cardiac arrest during sport or exercise.
Markedly abnormal ECGs in young and apparently healthy athletes may
also suggest the initial signs of underlying heart disease.
ST segment depression is considered to be a sign of reduced circulation
in the blood vessels of the heart, and it has been suggested that there is a
link between ST segment depression and the risk of sudden cardiac death.
In a study including 1,769 men without evident coronary heart disease, a
total of 72 deaths occurred in the eighteen years of follow-up—all of whom
showed asymptomatic ST segment depression during exercise on their ECG
readings.
Earlier on we discussed how overbreathing reduces blood flow and
oxygen delivery to the heart. An opportune question at this point is whether
the amount of air we breathe plays a role in the onset of cardiac arrest. This,
I think, could be an important factor in the investigation of sudden cardiac
death in young athletes.
A study conducted by researchers from the University of Patras in
Greece revealed how the amount of air we breathe can produce changes in
electrocardiogram results. During the study a total of 474 healthy volunteers
with no apparent heart disease increased their breathing rate to more than
30 breaths per minute for 5 minutes to create the effects of hyperventilation.
ECG readings reported abnormalities in 72 volunteers, including findings of
ST depression and T-wave inversion, with 80.5 percent of abnormalities
occurring within the first minute of hyperventilation. Interestingly, the study
found that age, gender, smoking, and hypertension did not influence the
overall incidence of the abnormalities, showing that even perfectly healthy
individuals can be susceptible to the abnormalities caused by
hyperventilation.
If increasing the breathing rate to 30 breaths per minute over 5 minutes
can induce ECG abnormalities, what effects might strenuous exercise have
on an athlete’s risks of cardiac disease when you consider that air intake can
increase to between 50 and 70 breaths per minute during moderate- to high-
intensity activity? Should athletes be taught how to ensure healthy
breathing volume during exercise in order to minimize the effects of
hyperventilation on their cardiovascular health?
--- END PAGE 198 ---

--- PAGE 199 ---
Penny is a cardiac nurse who has worked at a Limerick hospital for the
past thirty years. As a fit and healthy woman of normal build, Penny
became worried when she began to experience symptoms of arrhythmia in
her sixties. The issue had developed gradually over a few years, and Penny
described the feeling as “a large butterfly fluttering about in the left side of
my chest,” which could occur at any time of the day or night, sometimes
going on for eight hours or more.
It all started when Penny’s job became more demanding and she took on
extra responsibilities and hours. Ireland has experienced an economic crisis
for several years, leading to many cutbacks in our health service. As a
result, the frontline staff of nurses has taken much of the brunt in the form
of extra workloads. For Penny, the effect of these changes was increased
anxiety, which she saw as the main cause of her arrhythmia.
As an episode of arrhythmia began, Penny would feel a need for extra
oxygen. To satisfy this air hunger, her anxiety and breathing would
increase, making her heart race and further contributing to her complaint. It
was a vicious circle, as her symptoms fed back into the condition.
I met Penny at my clinic in Limerick and observed that she breathed
through both her nose and mouth. Her breathing was noticeable, from the
upper chest, and there was no natural pause on the exhalation. Her BOLT
score was 8 seconds, leaving me in no doubt that she was chronically
hyperventilating: the possible source of her cardiac problems.
To begin retraining Penny’s breathing, I helped her to learn how to
breathe using her diaphragm. I instructed her to place one hand on her chest
and one hand just above her navel so that she could easily feel where her
breathing was coming from, and begin to direct her breathing into her
abdomen. Breathe in: abdomen out. Breathe out: abdomen in. Penny’s next
step was to exert a small amount of pressure against her chest and abdomen
with her hands so that she felt a slight resistance to her breathing. In blocks
of 3 minutes, Penny practiced calming her breathing, gently slowing it
down and taking less air into her body in order to create a slight shortage of
air. I asked Penny to practice this exercise for 10 minutes, 5 times per day.
The rest of her simple program consisted of breathing through her nose at
all times and wearing paper tape across her mouth at night to make sure she
didn’t breathe through her mouth during sleep.
--- END PAGE 199 ---

--- PAGE 200 ---
I met Penny several times over the following weeks, and by the third
week her BOLT score had increased to 25 seconds. More important, her
symptoms of arrhythmia had reduced significantly.
The exercise I gave Penny is very similar to the Papworth method
developed by Dr. Claude Lum. Dr. Lum was well known for his studies of
overbreathing and was described as an “archetypal caring physician” who
displayed the rare qualities of both sympathy and patience, particularly to
those with psychosomatic disease. In 1959, at Papworth Hospital in
Cambridgeshire, England, Dr. Lum formed part of a team developing
cardiopulmonary bypass techniques, and during the following decades, his
interest in habitual hyperventilation burgeoned. Together with his team of
physiotherapists, he developed the Papworth method in order to address this
common breathing disorder. Dr. Lum dedicated every effort to generate
greater awareness of hyperventilation syndrome through his writings and
lectures, many of which were published in reputable medical journals,
including the Lancet, the Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, and the 
Journal of Psychosomatic Research . He was one of those rare doctors with
the drive and courage to devote much of his working life to unearthing the
cause of so many common diseases of civilization that are, at best, only just
managed with medication. 
Heart Attack: A Missing Link 
Myocardial infarction, otherwise known as a heart attack, occurs when
blood flow to the heart is severely reduced or cut off altogether. This
stoppage of blood results in oxygen starvation and damage or death to part
of the heart muscle.
Heart attacks often occur during or following physical exercise or
emotional stress. Both activities increase breathing volume, and when
breathing volume is greater than the body’s metabolic needs, carbon dioxide
is removed from the lungs and blood, resulting in reduced blood flow and
reduced oxygenation of the heart.
Up to 10 percent of heart attack patients have symptoms attributable to
hyperventilation. In one particular study, 3 to 6 percent of patients showed
normal findings on coronary angiography soon after they experienced
--- END PAGE 200 ---

--- PAGE 201 ---
myocardial infarction, suggesting that the infarctions were not in fact due to
any underlying heart disease but could have resulted from hyperventilation.
Reduced blood flow to the heart muscle due to hyperventilation may
then be partially or wholly responsible for myocardial infarction in some
individuals. It follows, therefore, that the way we breathe, and the resultant
levels of carbon dioxide in our blood, can have significant effects on the
health and function of our hearts.
In the following sections we will investigate whether patients with
cardiac problems, including those who suffered a heart attack, breathe more
heavily than normal and whether breathing exercises aimed at correcting
breathing volume may reduce the risk of further cardiac problems, and
whether hyperventilation during resuscitation can adversely affect
outcomes. 
Heart Disease and Hyperventilation 
People with some types of heart disease tend to breathe more heavily and
more intensely than healthier people, but many also experience a reduction
of symptoms when their breathing volume is corrected toward normal. If
these individuals had practiced light breathing in the first instance, would
they have been less at risk of developing heart disease?
A study of twenty patients with moderate to severe chronic cardiac
failure showed that these individuals had a breathing volume of between
15.3 to 18.5 liters per minute. Given that normal breathing volume should
be between 4 to 6 liters per minute, each of these patients was breathing a
volume of air that was enough for two or three people. This research, along
with other similar studies, show that patients with chronic heart failure
breathe too intensely. Patients who exhibited heavy breathing were also
found to have feelings of breathlessness during physical exercise. This
comes as no surprise when you realize that how we breathe during rest
determines how we breathe during physical exercise. Breathing noticeably
from the upper chest during rest leads to increased breathlessness during
physical exercise and the cycle of overbreathing is destined to continue.
It is evident from this research that the way we breathe is a contributing
factor in cardiac health, showing a positive correlation between increased
--- END PAGE 201 ---

--- PAGE 202 ---
breathing volume and the severity of chronic heart failure. Not only does
overbreathing reduce the ability of the heart to pump blood around the
body, an excessive breathing volume also reduces blood flow to part of the
heart muscle, causing insufficient oxygenation. In a 2004 study published in
the European Journal of Cardiovascular Prevention and Rehabilitation, 
fifty-five men were examined two months after suffering a heart attack.
After following a program of breathing exercises, the patients’ breathing
volume per minute significantly decreased by approximately 50 percent—
from 18.5 to 9.8 liters. Remembering that normal breathing volume per
minute is 4 to 6 liters, it is evident from this study that patients who suffered
from a heart attack also tend to breathe far in excess of what is required, but
that this volume can be reduced much closer to normal simply by
implementing correctional breathing exercises.
In addition, patients who practiced these breathing exercises showed an
increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in their arterial blood, from
33.2 mmHg to the highest point of the normal range of 44.2 mmHg. Based
on improvements to breathing volume and respiratory function, the authors
of the study recommended that breathing retraining could act as a valuable
rehabilitation measure after heart attacks.
Other studies confirm these benefits, showing how breathing exercises
can have lasting effects on respiratory function and help to reduce
symptoms of cardiac dysfunction. 
Hyperventilation During Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
(CPR) 
We have seen clearly how the effects of breathing light can improve blood
flow and oxygenation, and may even be able to help prevent heart attacks in
those who breathe excess volumes of air. Overbreathing can cause
numerous health concerns, but there is a more disturbing risk associated
with this condition that could literally make the difference between life and
death.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is performed during cardiac arrest
to help preserve normal brain function until further measures can be taken
to restore blood circulation and breathing. We know that hyperventilation
--- END PAGE 202 ---

--- PAGE 203 ---
causes reduced blood flow and reduced oxygenation of the heart, but
studies have also revealed that excessive ventilation during CPR is actually
detrimental to survival.
Researchers investigated instances where CPR resulted in death due to
excessive ventilation applied by well-trained but overzealous rescue
personnel. Despite adequate training, these professionals hyperventilated
their patients while attempting resuscitation through higher than necessary
breathing rates. It is thought that the high airway pressure resulting from
administering more air into the patient than necessary had a detrimental—
and ultimately fatal—effect on patients’ blood flow. One study concluded
with the following warning: “Additional education of CPR providers is
urgently needed to reduce these newly identified and deadly consequences
of hyperventilation during CPR.”
Reviewing the findings above, it is shocking to think that the very
procedure designed to help save lives might in fact be having the opposite
effect. It is even more shocking when we consider that the relationship
between breathing volume and blood flow to the heart was first documented
over a century ago. Thankfully, since 2007 there has been a monumental
change in CPR procedures involving manual ventilation. Increasingly, the
emphasis during CPR is now on chest compressions to maintain circulation,
rather than manual ventilation.
Over the years, I have witnessed many young athletes at all levels of
fitness breathing too intensely for their given level of exercise. In this
chapter, I have attempted to join the dots between excessive breathing
volume, reduced oxygenation of the heart, and resultant ECG abnormalities,
heart attacks, and chronic heart disease. It is only logical to surmise that a
poorly oxygenated heart is less able to cope with the demands of intense
physical exercise. Yet every month I see reports of children, teenagers, and
young adults who were in the prime of life dying from undetected heart
conditions. Upon hearing the news I often wonder: Could this tragedy have
been avoided if the victim had been encouraged to breathe normally and
through the nose? The breathing volume of athletes and nonathletes alike is
crying out for attention, and greater awareness would be worth all of the
effort, if even just one young life were saved.
--- END PAGE 203 ---

--- PAGE 204 ---
CHAPTER 12 
Eliminate Exercise-Induced Asthma
I n childhood, treatments for forty-three-year-old Julian’s asthma included
cough medicine, trips to the coast for the benefits of sea air, and inhaling
steam from a boiling kettle. On some nights, Julian remembers his
wheezing being so bad that he stayed up most of the night with his head out
the window in an effort to breathe. Any individual who experienced asthma
as a child during the 1970s and 1980s can probably testify to the lengths
that similarly worried parents took to try to help their children to breathe.
By the late 1980s Julian had been prescribed various relievers and
preventative medications, in addition to regular trips to the hospital for
nebulizer treatment. This never-ending cycle of medication and
hospitalizations continued for many years, and although Julian tried to keep
fit, he often found he was unable to breathe, particularly during the small
hours of the night.
Fast-forward to 2006, and Julian was taking higher doses of asthma
medication while his fitness level gradually reduced, a totally unproductive
cycle that was beginning to seriously affect his health and well-being.
Julian’s story is typical of any individual with moderate to severe asthma;
although physical exercise can be very beneficial, many persons with
asthma simply tend to avoid it for fear of having an attack.
In early 2007, Julian attended one of my Dublin courses at which we
focused on breathing through the nose, breathing light, and practicing
breath holds while walking. Julian took his last dose of reliever medication
the day after the course.
Within six months, Julian’s asthma had drastically improved, and by
Christmas 2007, he had his last dose of preventative medication. His fitness
--- END PAGE 204 ---

--- PAGE 205 ---
also improved and he was able to swim a mile per day, five times a week. In
2008, Julian’s GP agreed to reclassify his medical record as “asthma
resolved.”
Over the next three years, Julian’s exercise plan evolved to include eight
hours of high-intensity indoor cycling, circuits, and stretching classes per
week, as well as the techniques of nasal and reduced-volume breathing he
learned from my course.
These changes, along with adjustments to his eating habits, allowed
Julian to improve his performance and enjoy more energy and stamina at a
higher level of activity. At the age of forty in 2012, Julian ran five half-
marathons and covered over 750 training miles. He achieved a personal best
of 1:46 in his third half-marathon; two weeks later he completed the Berlin
full marathon in 3:57. Following the Berlin Marathon, he ran the Dublin
City Marathon in 4 hours. In six months, Julian had knocked over 8 minutes
off his first half-marathon time.
In six years, Julian progressed from a chance encounter with one of my
books to attending my breathing course, improving his fitness, completely
eliminating prescription medicine for his asthma, and running half and full
marathons in very respectable times!
The word asthma derives from Greek and means “to pant.” While
asthma has been around for a very long time, it affects more people today
than ever before. Exercise-induced asthma affects an estimated 4 to 20
percent of the general population and 11 to 50 percent of certain athlete
populations. Interestingly, one study showed that while 55 percent of
football athletes and 50 percent of basketball players displayed airway
narrowing conducive to asthma, athletes from the sport of water polo
showed significantly fewer asthma symptoms. Later on in this section we
will investigate why this might be.
So, what causes asthma? The most common theories include the
hygiene hypothesis, which rests on the premise that too much cleanliness
means children are not exposed to enough germs, resulting in diminished
immune capabilities later on in life. A second commonly cited explanation
is an increase in pollution, but while this may well be a trigger, it is not
necessarily the cause. For instance, the west of Ireland, where I live, has a
high asthma rate but very good air quality.
--- END PAGE 205 ---

--- PAGE 206 ---
Might there be another factor that plays a significant role in causing
asthma—that of habitually breathing too much? If this were true, then
surely reducing breathing volume could result in a reversal of the condition.
By looking at the causes and symptoms of asthma, and the physiological
changes resulting from the condition, we can begin to determine just how
important breathing exercises can be in treating asthma.
Since asthma is a condition characterized by difficulty in breathing, a
logical approach would be to attempt to find the root cause by first
addressing poor breathing habits. Tackling asthma from this angle is not
new and was employed by the ancient Greek physician Galen and the
sixteenth-century doctor Paracelsus, who recommended breath holding and
breathing exercises for the treatment of coughing and narrowed airways.
The prevalence of asthma increases relative to wealth. Increased wealth
leads to a change in living standards: Food becomes more processed,
competitive stress increases, houses become more airtight, we perform less
physical exercise, and the majority of our jobs are sedentary. Fifty years
ago, our living and working situations were quite different, and asthma rates
were significantly lower. During that time, we ate more natural foods, had
less competitive stress, our houses were drafty, and most occupations
involved physical labor. Back then, our lifestyle was conducive to a more
normal breathing volume, and, as a result, asthma was far less common.
As we have seen, normal breathing volume for a healthy adult is
generally agreed to be 4 to 6 liters of air per minute, but adults with asthma
demonstrate a resting breathing volume of 10 to 15 liters per minute, two to
three times more than required. Imagine the effect on the respiratory system
when an individual breathes twice or three times too heavily all day, every
day.
Normal breathing during rest involves regular, silent, abdominal breaths
drawn in and out through the nose. People with asthma, on the other hand,
display habitual mouth breathing with regular sighing, sniffing, and visible
movements from the upper chest. During an exacerbation of asthma,
symptoms like wheezing and breathlessness increase along with respiratory
rate, relative to the severity of the condition. In other words, as asthma
becomes more severe, there is also an increase in breathing volume.
While it is well documented that people with asthma breathe too much,
there is a need to determine whether the increase to breathing volume is a
--- END PAGE 206 ---

--- PAGE 207 ---
cause or effect of the condition. As the airways narrow a feeling of
suffocation is generated, and a normal reaction is to take more air into the
lungs to try to eliminate this sensation. Either way, it is a vicious cycle;
narrowed airways lead to heavier breathing that causes an increase in
breathing volume, resulting in the narrowing of the airways and on and on,
worsening the condition and establishing bad breathing habits as a matter of
necessity. 
The only way to determine whether breathing too much causes asthma
is to investigate what happens when a group of individuals with asthma
practice breathing exercises designed to bring their breathing volume
toward normal.
A study at the Mater Hospital in Brisbane found that when the breathing
volume of adults with asthma decreased from 14 liters to 9.6 liters per
minute, their symptoms reduced by 70 percent, the need for rescue
medication decreased by 90 percent, and the need for preventer steroid
--- END PAGE 207 ---

--- PAGE 208 ---
medication decreased by 50 percent. The study found a direct relationship
between the reduction of breathing volume and improvement to asthma.
The closer breathing volume reduced toward normal, the greater was the
reduction of asthma symptoms such as coughing, wheezing, chest tightness,
and breathlessness. Furthermore, the trial’s control group—who were taught
the hospital’s in-house asthma management program—made zero progress.
The reason for this was solely due to the fact that there was no change to
their breathing volume. Further studies reinforced these findings by
showing that people with asthma who practiced reducing their breathing
volume had far better asthma control with a significantly reduced need for
preventive steroid and rescue medication within 3 to 6 months.
Since 2002 I have taught thousands of children and adults with asthma
how to address the root cause of their condition—breathing too much.
Triggers such as animal dander, dust mites, exercise, pollution, excessive
hygiene, and changes in the weather are often cited to be the cause of
asthma symptoms, but in my experience the vast majority of sufferers can
take back significant control of their condition, regardless of their triggers,
by simply learning to breathe light. The fundamental cause of ongoing
asthma symptoms can almost always be attributed to breathing too much.
As long as a student understands the exercises and devotes time to changing
his or her breathing, positive results are consistent and reproducible.
Based on the fact that a number of clinical trials have shown that asthma
symptoms and the need for asthma medication are significantly reduced
following the employment of reduced breathing exercises, there is no doubt
that overbreathing is a significant contributor to asthma. Of course, it is also
normal for people prone to asthma to increase their breathing volume to
compensate for a feeling of suffocation, but this action is simply part of a
feedback loop. Elements of modern living increase breathing volume,
which can activate asthma in genetically predisposed individuals. As their
asthma takes hold, the individual breathes faster and more intensely,
worsening the condition. While it is important to recognize this feedback
loop, the first step to addressing asthma is to reduce excessive breathing
habits.
I can relate to any child or adult with asthma because for more than
twenty years I struggled with the same symptoms; I was unable to perform
even the most basic physical exercise, my nose was constantly stuffed, and I
--- END PAGE 208 ---

--- PAGE 209 ---
continuously breathed through an open mouth. Year after year my asthma
medication increased with no signs of my symptoms abating. My sleep,
concentration, mood, and quality of life were all adversely affected. It was
only by chance, when I learned of the work of Russian doctor Konstantin
Buteyko, that I was able to reverse my asthma. Within a few short days my
wheezing decreased dramatically, simply by learning to unblock my nose
and normalize my breathing volume. I have now been wheeze-free for the
past thirteen years, and all I did was to learn to breathe normally again.
This had such a tremendous impact on my life that I changed careers in
2001 and retrained under the auspices of the late Dr. Buteyko. In 2002, I
founded Asthma Care to help publicize this information to children and
adults with asthma. Our clinics are now offered in a number of countries.
The first step to addressing chronic overbreathing is to make the switch
from mouth to nasal breathing. While nasal breathing is important for
everyone, for people prone to asthma it is vital. When breathing volume is
greater than normal, there is a tendency to open the mouth in order to allow
more air to enter the lungs. People diagnosed with asthma often feel they
are not taking in enough air while breathing through the nose, which causes
them to breathe through the mouth.
Mouth breathing influences asthma in a number of ways:
• Air taken in through the mouth is not filtered of airborne
particles, including germs and bacteria.
• The mouth is simply not as effective as the nose in conditioning
air to the correct temperature and humidity prior to entering the
lungs.
• Because the mouth provides a larger space to breathe through
than the nose, breathing volume will be higher, causing too
much carbon dioxide to be expelled from the lungs. Carbon
dioxide is a natural “opener” of the smooth muscle in the
airways. The loss of carbon dioxide therefore causes asthma
airways to narrow even more.
--- END PAGE 209 ---

--- PAGE 210 ---
• Unlike nasal breathing, mouth breathing does not allow us to
benefit from nasal nitric oxide, which supports the lung’s
defensive capabilities.
Taking all these factors into consideration, it is not surprising that
mouth breathing causes a reduction in lung function in people with mild
asthma and plays a significant role in the exacerbation of asthma symptoms.
Not only is it important to breathe through the nose during rest, it is also
beneficial to nasal breathe during physical exercise. In a paper published in
the American Review of Respiratory Disease, researchers studied the
beneficial effects of nasal breathing on exercise-induced asthma. The study
observed that most subjects with asthma spontaneously breathed with their
mouths open when instructed to breathe “naturally.” The authors found that
mouth breathing during exercise caused the airways to narrow even further.
In contrast, when subjects were asked to breathe only through their nose
during exercise, exercise-induced asthma did not occur at all. The paper
concluded that “the nasopharynx and the oropharynx play important roles in
the phenomenon of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.” In simple terms,
the effects of breathing through the nose are integral to reducing or avoiding
exercise-induced asthma completely.
The fact that elite athletes with asthma often favor swimming above
other forms of exercise is not a coincidence. During swimming, the face is
immersed underwater, reducing the amount of air taken into the lungs and
increasing the athlete’s tolerance for carbon dioxide. Although the swimmer
may draw his or her breath in through the mouth, the protective effects of
reduced breathing are still evident. A child or adult with asthma may also
prefer swimming because the water exerts a gentle pressure on the chest
and abdomen, further restricting breathing volume and improving athletic
performance.
The difference between land-based exercise and swimming in terms of
breathing pattern and volume is significant for people with asthma. On land,
your breathing pattern during exercise is not restricted the way it is in water,
meaning that you can very easily overbreathe, resulting in constricted
airways, a reduction in the amount of CO2 in your blood, and a lower
BOLT score. For an individual with asthma, overbreathing during rest leads
--- END PAGE 210 ---

--- PAGE 211 ---
to overbreathing during exercise, which in turn leads to exercise-induced
asthma. However, exercising in water naturally causes you to restrict your
breathing and lower your breathing volume toward normal, providing a
much safer and more productive environment for people with asthma to
exercise.
At the beginning of this chapter we looked at statistics that showed that
in a group of athletes, narrowing of the airways affected 55 percent of
football athletes and 50 percent of basketball players, but 0 percent of water
polo players. With such a glaring disparity, what factors could possibly
explain the difference? The answer, as you have probably guessed by now,
is simple. Water polo training involves breath holding and swimming
underwater, resulting in a higher tolerance to carbon dioxide, increased
amounts of nitric oxide, and a reduced breathing volume. With a more
normal breathing volume, asthma tendencies don’t appear.
However, if you have asthma and do not wish to take up swimming,
there is a simpler way! The Oxygen Advantage approach incorporates all of
the beneficial aspects of swimming and more. Although the act of
swimming has its merits, it is well documented that spending time in
chlorinated pools is not ideal for asthma, as the chlorine can cause damage
to lung tissue. Furthermore, while swimming reduces breathing volume, it
is still important to address poor breathing habits outside of the pool. Many
swimmers remain habitual mouth breathers and continue to employ poor
breathing habits that reduce their athletic performance and maintain their
asthma.
Your success in addressing asthma will be based on your ability to
increase your BOLT score using the Breathe Light to Breathe Right and
simulation of high-altitude exercises described in this book. You will find a
program specific to your needs in Part IV. The general aim is to increase
your BOLT score to 40 seconds. The best time to measure your BOLT score
to track your progress is first thing in the morning, and if your BOLT
measurement remains less than 20 seconds, then your asthma symptoms
will persist. However, when your early morning BOLT score is greater than
20 seconds, symptoms such as wheezing, coughing, breathlessness, and
chest tightness will disappear. It’s important to note that you may still be
susceptible to certain symptoms even when you have achieved a BOLT
--- END PAGE 211 ---

--- PAGE 212 ---
score of 20 seconds when exposed to a trigger; a BOLT score of 40 seconds
is needed to fully eliminate your asthma symptoms.
As you work toward achieving a high BOLT score, you may continue to
experience symptoms, depending on your medical history and triggers.
Your ability to stop the effects of asthma using the exercise below is
dependent on two factors: how high your resting BOLT score is and how
quickly you react to the onset of symptoms. The sooner you begin
practicing the exercise, the easier it is to prevent symptoms from taking
hold. By ignoring your symptoms and hoping they will go away by
themselves, the effects of asthma tend to get worse and can take on a life of
their own. If you often experience asthma symptoms, you will know that
wheezing and coughing usually worsen over time, so it is important to
intervene early on.
This exercise can help stop asthma symptoms, but please get your
doctor’s permission to try it first. Then follow the instructions below during
the early stages of chest tightness, wheezing, coughing, or a head cold. If
you aren’t able to stop your symptoms within 10 minutes, then take your
rescue medication. If you are experiencing severe symptoms, of course,
then take rescue medication straightaway. If your rescue medication does
not stop your symptoms within a couple of minutes, it is advisable to call a
medical doctor immediately.
To stop asthma symptoms before they take hold, follow these steps:
--- END PAGE 212 ---

--- PAGE 213 ---
• Take a small, silent breath in and out through your nose.
• Hold your breath and walk for 10 to 15 paces.
• Stop walking, release your nose, and resume gentle breathing in
and out of your nose.
--- END PAGE 213 ---

--- PAGE 214 ---
• Wait for 30 to 60 seconds and repeat.
• Continue to walk while holding your breath for 10 to 15 paces
followed by resting with nasal breathing for 30 to 60 seconds.
• If your symptoms are mild, you may hold your breath for more
than 10 to 15 paces.
• Do this exercise for at least 10 minutes.
In addition to employing nasal breathing and achieving a high BOLT
score, it is also very important to warm up properly in order to avoid
exercise-induced asthma. The minimum time spent warming up should be
10 minutes. A good warm-up consists of fast walking while practicing a
medium to strong breath hold every minute or so. After the 10-minute
warm-up, increase the pace so that you’re moving as fast as you can while
maintaining nasal breathing. If you feel the need to open your mouth, slow
down. Following your physical exercise, encourage your breathing to calm
toward normal.
The positive results of reduced breathing exercises and nasal breathing
on the symptoms of asthma are fast and astounding. With such a simple
method, there really is no reason for anyone to suffer a single day more
from the discomfort of asthma.
--- END PAGE 214 ---

--- PAGE 215 ---
CHAPTER 13 
Athletic Endeavor—Nature or Nurture?
I n 1704, a racing stallion by the name of the Darley Arabian arrived in
Britain from Syria, and 95 percent of today’s male thoroughbreds descend
from him. Geneticist Patrick Cunningham and colleagues from my alma
mater, Trinity College Dublin, traced the lineage of nearly one million
horses from the past two centuries and determined that 30 percent of
variation in performance in thoroughbreds is due to genetics alone. In the
nature versus nurture debate, these results suggest that nature plays a
significant part in our athletic abilities.
There is one area in particular where a combination of genetics and
behavior has considerable influence on athletic performance, and that is the
way the face and jaws develop during childhood. For example, take a look
at the structure of the face and jaws of past Olympic gold medal winners
including Usain Bolt, Sanya Richards-Ross, Steve Hooker, and Roger
Federer. What is strikingly apparent for this group, and for the vast majority
of top-class athletes, is the forward growth of the face and width of the
jaws. Athletic success depends on having good airways, which in turn is
dependent on normal facial structure. Spend a lot of time with your mouth
hanging open or sucking your thumb during childhood and the face grows
differently from how nature intended.
In fact, Michael Phelps, the most decorated Olympian of all time, is one
of the very few top-class athletes who does not exhibit forward growth of
the jaws and a wide facial structure. Based on his facial profile, there is a
high likelihood that he was a mouth breather during childhood, possibly
requiring orthodontic treatment in his early teens. It is also possible that
Phelps chose swimming, either consciously or unconsciously, as it was the
--- END PAGE 215 ---

--- PAGE 216 ---
one sport that he could excel in. The very act of swimming restricts
breathing to help offset any negative effects that have developed from
mouth breathing or an inefficient breathing pattern.
Although the natural order of things is to breathe through the nose,
many children—especially those with asthma or nasal congestion—
habitually breathe through the mouth. Brazilian researchers investigating
the prevalence of mouth breathing in children aged 3 to 9 found that 55
percent of a random selection of 370 subjects were mouth breathers.
Children who regularly breathe through their mouth tend to develop
negative alterations to their face, jaws, and the alignment of their teeth.
Mouth breathing affects the shape of the face in two ways. First, there is a
tendency for the face to grow long and narrow. Secondly, the jaws do not
fully develop and are set back from their ideal position, thus reducing
airway size. If the jaws are not positioned forward enough on the face, they
will encroach on the airways. See for yourself: Close your mouth, jut out
your chin, and take a breath in and out through your nose, noting the way
air travels down behind the jaws. Now do the same but pull your chin
inward as far as you can—you will probably feel as if your throat is closed
up as you try to breathe. This is exactly the effect poorly developed facial
structure has on your airway size. It is no wonder that those with restricted
airways tend to favor mouth breathing.
The forces exerted by the lips and the tongue primarily influence the
growth of a child’s face. The lips and cheeks exert an inward pressure on
the face, with the tongue providing a counteracting force. When the mouth
is closed, the tongue rests against the roof of the mouth, exerting light
forces that shape the top jaw. Because the tongue is wide and U-shaped, it
follows that the shape of the top jaw should be wide and U-shaped also. In
other words, the shape of the top jaw reflects the shape of the tongue. A
wide U-shaped top jaw is optimal for housing all our teeth.
However, during mouth breathing, it is very unlikely that the tongue
will rest in the roof of the mouth. Try it for yourself: Open your mouth and
place your tongue on your upper palate. Now try to breathe through your
mouth. While it is possible to draw a wisp of air into the lungs, it will not
feel right. It follows therefore that the tongue of a mouth breather will tend
to rest on the floor of the mouth or suspended midway. Since the top jaw is
not then shaped by the normal pressures of the tongue, the end result is the
--- END PAGE 216 ---

--- PAGE 217 ---
development of a narrow V-shaped top jaw. Aesthetically, this contributes
to a narrowing of the facial structure, crooked teeth, and orthodontic
problems. It has been well documented that mouth-breathing children grow
longer faces.
The second way facial structure is affected by the way we breathe
during childhood is the position of the jaws. The way the jaws develop has
a direct influence on the width of the upper airways. Our upper airways
comprise the nose, nasal cavity, sinuses, and throat. Strong athletic
performance requires large upper airways that enable air to flow freely to
and from the lungs. Although a high BOLT score and effective breathing
technique are crucial for high levels of performance, having airways that
function with little resistance is also very advantageous. For example, a
marathon runner who has efficient breathing but airways that are the width
of a narrow straw is not going to get too far.
The normal growth of the face is forward. Since a mouth-breathing
child does not rest his or her tongue in the roof of the mouth, the jaws are
unable to be properly shaped by the tongue, and the natural forward growth
of the jaws is impeded. This results in jaws that are set back from their ideal
position, compromising airflow. For the correct development of the lower
half of the face and airways, it is imperative that a child habitually breathes
through his or her nose. Breathing through the nose with the tongue resting
in the roof of the mouth helps to establish the ideal conditions for the
normal development of the face.
I switched from mouth to nose breathing during the late 1990s, when I
was in my early twenties, but it was only after I met with myofunctional
therapists Joy Moeller, Barbara Greene, and Karen Samuel in 2006 that I
learned the correct position of the tongue. Until then, I hadn’t given it a
moment’s consideration, and most likely my tongue had been flopping
about without a home for the previous thirty-two years. Between them, Joy,
Barbara, and Karen have devoted almost a hundred years to reeducating
people on the placement of the tongue and facial muscles in order to
address a variety of detrimental issues that affect the development of the
jaws and teeth. Spending thousands of dollars on orthodontic treatment can
be in vain if poor habits such as mouth breathing, tongue thrusting, and
incorrect swallowing are not addressed. And you may be able to avoid
--- END PAGE 217 ---

--- PAGE 218 ---
orthodontic treatment altogether if these habits are not permitted to develop
in the first place.
In the correct resting position, three-quarters of the tongue should press
gently against the roof of the mouth with the tip of the tongue placed just
behind the top front teeth—the same place we put the tongue to make the N 
sound “nuh.” Just like nasal breathing, optimal resting tongue posture is not
a recent discovery; for thousands of years it formed an important part of
Eastern yoga and the religion of Buddhism. Yogi Bhajan, who introduced
Kundalini yoga to the United States in 1968, accredited the upper palate and
the tip of the tongue as the two most important parts of the body. The
ancient Buddhist scriptures of the Pali Canon contain passages describing
how the Buddha pressed his tongue against the roof of the mouth for the
purposes of controlling hunger and the mind.
This illustration shows the facial characteristics of a nasal breather and
is based on the Irish International and LA Galaxy soccer captain Robbie
Keane: 
Note the forward position of the jaws, high cheekbones, airway size,
and width of the face. The jaw is strong and positioned well forward so that
the chin is nearly as far forward as the tip of the nose. When cartoonists
draw illustrations of a dominant male, his strength is often conveyed by a
--- END PAGE 218 ---

--- PAGE 219 ---
rugged and exaggerated jaw. Socially, a wide facial structure and strong
jawline are considered healthier and more attractive than a recessed chin.
And not only is the classic square jawline more likely to get you a date, it
might also be beneficial to your bank balance. In a paper written by
researchers from the School of Business at the University of California at
Riverside, men with wider faces were found to be stronger negotiators,
commanding a signing bonus of nearly $2,200 more than their narrow-faced
counterparts. In a separate study by the same authors it was found that
companies led by men with wider faces also achieved superior financial
performance.
Throughout our evolution, social anthropologists have regarded facial
appearance as a determinant in establishing societal rank and individual
roles. Beauty is not just skin deep, and Aristotle was right when he stated
that “Beauty is a far greater recommendation than any letter of
introduction.” 
In the image above, the jaws are set back and the airways are smaller,
resulting in diminished athletic performance. Had the jaws been in a more
forward position, the nose would be straighter and smaller. The eyes look
tired as the face sinks downward, and there is poor definition of the
cheekbones. Chronic, habitual mouth breathing is also associated with
--- END PAGE 219 ---

--- PAGE 220 ---
postural changes that result in decreased muscle strength, reduced chest
expansion, and impaired breathing. Interestingly, researchers have found
that mouth breathers are more likely to be male.
While the above image is exaggerated somewhat, these features are
identifiable in thousands of children and adults who have fallen between the
cracks of the health care system and were not encouraged to breathe
through their nose. These same individuals often suffer from poor health,
low energy, and reduced concentration. In the words of Dr. Yosh Jefferson:
“These children do not sleep well at night due to obstructed airways; this
lack of sleep can adversely affect their growth and academic performance.
Many of these children are misdiagnosed with attention deficit disorder
(ADD) and hyperactivity.”
Dr. Egil Peter Harvold, an expert in orthodontics and craniofacial
anomalies, carried out extensive research into the development of the facial
structure of monkeys in the 1970s, discovering that the restriction of nasal
breathing over several years led to a lowering of the jaws, crooked teeth,
and other facial deformities. While today we would consider it dreadful to
experiment on innocent animals in this way, hundreds of thousands of
children take part in a similar experiment and experience the same
craniofacial anomalies due to the effects of mouth breathing. Dr. Harvold’s
studies paved the way for the treatment and prevention of the improper
development of the jaws and face and is accredited almost single-handedly
for introducing a branch of orthodontics known as functional appliance
therapy to North America.
A 2012 study investigating the long-term changes to facial structure
caused by mouth breathing noted that this seemingly “benign” habit “has in
fact immediate and/or deferred cascading effects on multiple physiological
and behavioral functions.” Infants and children who breathe through their
mouths due to nasal obstruction are likely to develop crooked teeth and a
longer, narrower face, permanently affecting their appearance. Mouth
breathing also has a significant impact on the health of the child, including
restriction of the lower airways, poor quality of sleep, high stress levels, and
a lower quality of life. Research has suggested that habitual mouth
breathing may even be connected to sudden infant death syndrome.
--- END PAGE 220 ---

--- PAGE 221 ---
Hold On to Your Teeth! 
Over the past few years I have been asked to give talks on nasal breathing at
dental conferences in Europe, Australia, and the United States. Each
conference presents a wonderful opportunity to speak with international
experts in dentistry and related disciplines, including orthodontics. There
are two specific groups within orthodontics that hold opposing views:
functional orthodontists and traditional orthodontists.
A functional orthodontist places emphasis on attaining the correct facial
profile of the face as well as straightening the teeth. Functional appliances
are worn by the child in order to help guide the growth of the face, jaws,
and teeth to reach their full genetic potential. The commonly held view of
functional orthodontists is that overcrowding of teeth is not because the
teeth are too big, but more likely because the jaw is too small as a result of
mouth breathing or thumb sucking. The course of action therefore is to
gently expand the jaws and guide them forward to make room for the teeth,
with extractions only carried out as a last resort.
In contrast, the primary emphasis of traditional orthodontics is to
straighten the teeth, with the facial profile and airway size receiving
secondary consideration. Crowded teeth are usually treated by extracting
four perfectly good premolars and retracting or pulling the front teeth back
to close up the excess space created. This retraction sometimes causes the
face, especially around the lips, to look caved in, and the nose and chin to
become more prominent. This retraction of the front teeth may also cause
problems with the joint of the jaw if the lower jaw is forced back too far.
When the lower jaw is too far back, it encroaches on the upper airways,
decreasing airway size and negatively affecting athletic ability.
If you are the parent of a child who may be undergoing orthodontic
treatment, I would like to impart some advice from international
orthodontist Dr. John Mew, who has devoted his life to ensuring the normal
growth of children’s faces:
• First ask the orthodontist how many permanent teeth will be
initially removed and how many more may need extracting
later. Sadly, most children who receive traditional retractive
orthodontic treatment lose 4 premolar teeth, and nearly half of
--- END PAGE 221 ---

--- PAGE 222 ---
these children will not have room for their wisdom teeth,
leaving them with 24 teeth. This can be completely avoided by
helping to ensure normal growth of the face to accommodate
all 32 teeth.
• Ask your clinician whether he or she is confident about
avoiding an increase in the vertical growth of your child’s face.
You have the right to be informed of all types of treatment and
to be warned of likely problems.
Knowledge is empowering. The best approach to determine the
treatment options for you and your child is to research both functional and
traditional orthodontic treatment. Selecting the correct approach will have
repercussions on the well-being of your child; it is well worth investing a
little time to determine a more noninvasive solution. Extractions should be
a last resort. 
Don’t Leave It Until It’s Too Late 
According to American research, 95 percent of head circumference growth
for the average North American white child takes place by the age of nine.
Development of the lower jaw, however, continues until approximately the
age of eighteen.
Based on these observations, for correct craniofacial growth to take
place, early intervention with nasal breathing and tongue posture is
essential. The negative effects of mouth breathing on the structure of the
jaws and face will have the most impact when they occur before puberty, so
there is only a brief window of opportunity to avoid the need for
orthodontic treatment and significant changes in a child’s facial structure.
My daughter is three years old. She first began to breathe occasionally
through her mouth at the age of eight months during teething, and since
then I have been encouraging her to breathe through her nose. I set an
example by breathing through my own nose all the time, and congratulate
her any time she has her mouth closed. As we live in the countryside, I
--- END PAGE 222 ---

--- PAGE 223 ---
often comment that Charlie the donkey breathes through his nose, as does
Snowball the cat. Such clever animals!
Genetically, there would be a high likelihood for my daughter to be a
mouth breather as both my wife and I had severe respiratory complaints
while growing up. The earlier you begin to encourage your children to
breathe through their nose and ensure the correct positioning of the tongue,
the better. Not only might you help them avoid orthodontic treatment
altogether, but the shape of their face, their general health, and their
athleticism will be significantly influenced during these few short years.
Even genetic predispositions can be minimized when the right action and
behavior is enshrined.
A few years ago I wrote a self-help book for children, teenagers, and
parents entitled Buteyko Meets Dr. Mew: Buteyko Method for Children and
Teenagers about the craniofacial changes associated with mouth breathing. I
put extensive amounts of research into the subject and included many peer-
reviewed papers and studies to support my claims. Most parents are
shocked when they realize that crooked teeth, narrow faces, large noses, and
undeveloped jaws can be avoided if a child is simply encouraged to breathe
through his or her nose. Not only is sports performance affected, but
lifelong health! We cannot be dispassionate about the impact of mouth
breathing on the development of our children. The detrimental effects that I
suffered from a childhood of breathing through my mouth needn’t happen
to anyone else, armed with the knowledge we have about the benefits of
nasal breathing.
--- END PAGE 223 ---

--- PAGE 224 ---
CHAPTER 14 
Exercise as if Your Life Depends on It
F or two million years we survived without supermarkets, convenience
stores, microwaves, or McDonald’s. In the past, in order to feed ourselves
and our families, muscle movement was required to collect berries and
vegetation or to track down an animal—often over several days—until it
collapsed from exhaustion.
Compare that to today’s couch potato lifestyle—do you know many
people who could adequately feed themselves if there was no food available
for convenient purchase? One thing is for sure—a major shift of attitude
would be required. In order to eat, we would have to perform regular and
sustained physical exercise, something that the human body is built for and
thrives upon. Why should we stop it now, simply because hunting our own
food is no longer necessary?
And while it might be too late for many of us to become elite athletes,
we can still enjoy and derive considerable benefit from regular physical
exercise. Even if you have lived a relatively sedentary life until now, you
can develop your fitness slowly and steadily and bring about positive
changes to your health. There is a great feeling of self-esteem and
accomplishment when we get up off our backsides or move away from the
computer. If you exercise for an hour per day, five times per week, for just a
few weeks, you will experience a remarkable difference in your sleep
quality, mood, and state of health.
Despite the advances of medical science, the diseases of modern
civilization continue to increase, and it could be argued that we are passing
responsibility for our health to pharmaceutical companies rather than
making changes to our lifestyle and diet to prevent illness in the first place.
--- END PAGE 224 ---

--- PAGE 225 ---
Each year, more and more people are developing asthma, heart disease,
diabetes, high blood pressure, and cancer. Not only that, but new “diseases”
are being invented all the time—and some might say it’s because the market
conditions and share prices of big pharmaceutical companies dictate a need
for new markets and ever-increasing sales. We may be living longer, but at
the expense of consuming vast quantities of medication as soon as we
approach fifty or sixty years of age. A far better option to help prevent the
onset of diseases—and one that involves no toxicity or expense—is to take
a regular fast walk or jog. If you haven’t exercised regularly before, please
pay a visit to your physician to get the all clear before starting.
One thing that pretty much all health professionals agree on is the
importance of regular physical exercise, taken within our limits. Dozens of
studies over the last few years have shown that regular physical exercise
provides many health benefits, including a reduced risk of cardiovascular
disease, cancer, and diabetes.
Studies as far back as the 1950s have investigated the relationship
between regular physical exercise and cardiovascular health. One of the
earliest was conducted by Dr. Jeremy Morris, who studied the incidence of
heart attacks in 31,000 transport workers. Morris found that bus conductors,
who spent most of their day climbing up and down the stairs of double-
decker buses, averaging between 500 and 700 steps per day, had reduced
incidences of heart disease than their bus-driving counterparts, who spent
90 percent of their day sitting down. Not only this, but heart disease
developed by the bus conductors tended to present later in life and was less
likely to be fatal.
The same study was replicated using over 100,000 postal workers, and
once again it was found that those who spent their day on foot or cycling
while delivering the mail had fewer incidences of heart disease compared to
workers in sedentary occupations such as telephonists, civil service
executives, and clerks. Dr. Morris’s findings are just as relevant today as
sixty years ago, and since more and more of us spend our working day
behind a desk, there is an increased need to perform regular physical
exercise. Even more important is that we perform this exercise within our
own personal limits.
The best way to ensure that we exercise within our capabilities is by
nasal breathing, and an important consideration is the length of time you
--- END PAGE 225 ---

--- PAGE 226 ---
can comfortably hold your breath, or your BOLT measurement. When your
BOLT score is less than 20 seconds, your breathing volume will be greater
than what your body requires, resulting in a risk of overbreathing during
physical exercise. All breathing should be through the nose when
performing physical exercise so as not to increase breathing volume even
further.
When your BOLT score is greater than 20 seconds, it’s fine for you to
breathe through the mouth during exercise for brief periods of time.
However, it is only when your BOLT score is greater than 30 seconds that
intense physical exercise can be performed without undue risk of
overbreathing. The goal for serious athletes, of course, is to attain a BOLT
score of 40 seconds.
Only with a high BOLT score of 40 seconds is breathing volume at a
normal level. Anything less indicates habitual overbreathing. And while it
would be a normal expectation for athletes to possess a high BOLT score, in
reality this is seldom the case. I have measured the BOLT scores of
hundreds of athletes, ranging from weekend warriors to elite Olympic-level
athletes, and guess what? The vast majority of BOLT measurements were
less than 20 seconds. Some, in fact, have been less than 10 seconds, as low
as any person with severe asthma. It is shocking to think of the stress that
such overbreathing is placing on the body during intense physical exercise,
so anyone serious about exercise should aim to reduce their breathing and
increase their BOLT score.
Like any change to your routine, the best way to determine the benefits
of reduced breathing, nasal breathing, and a higher BOLT score is to put the
Oxygen Advantage program into practice for 2 to 3 weeks. You will find a
program specific to your BOLT score, exercise history, and state of health
in Part IV of this book. Two or three weeks is a relatively short period of
time in the grand scheme of things, and most individuals will experience
positive benefits within a few short days. As you experience the positive
benefits, I am in no doubt that you will be happy to incorporate these
principles into your life, for the rest of your life.
For example, when I first learned to unblock my nose and switch from
mouth to nasal breathing, I immediately felt tension lifting from my head,
and despite having wheezed my way through the previous twenty years, my
--- END PAGE 226 ---

--- PAGE 227 ---
symptoms reduced by as much as 50 percent within the first day, simply by
breathing calmly through the nose.
Even if you are unwilling to make a 100 percent change to nasal
breathing during your peak season training, bear in mind that whatever you
do to incorporate the Oxygen Advantage program into your routine will
provide a return. Ultimately, your success depends on your ability to
improve your BOLT score—each 5-second improvement will cause the
benefits to accumulate.
In Part IV I have outlined a series of different programs to suit
individuals according to their current training, BOLT score, age, and overall
health. Choose the one that best matches your fitness level and abilities and
move on when you feel you have accomplished as much as possible from
each program. 
Would You Do Me a Favor? 
I am very optimistic that if you follow the principles outlined in this book
and work toward increasing your BOLT score, your health and sports
performance will improve in many ways.
Since 2002, I have observed tremendous improvements in the sporting
ability of both amateur and professional athletes who have applied the
concepts of the Oxygen Advantage program. I have also witnessed the
negative effects on respiratory, mental, and cardiovascular health from
chronic overbreathing. It is my aim to spread the word of these simple
techniques to provide an easy and effective way of improving the health and
well-being of readers.
And you can help me to generate awareness!
I would appreciate it greatly if you would try out these practices and
then spread the word to your friends and family who are interested in health
and sports, or who suffer from any of the problems described in this book.
You could also help by writing a review of The Oxygen Advantage on
Amazon.com.
Also, please share the book with anyone you think may benefit from the
techniques within the Oxygen Advantage program.
--- END PAGE 227 ---

--- PAGE 228 ---
Finally, if you have any questions, or would simply like to tell me about
your personal experience with the Oxygen Advantage program, please drop
me a line. I would love to hear from you. You can contact me directly at
patrick@OxygenAdvantage.com.
Best wishes and thanks again,
Patrick McKeown
Galway, Ireland
--- END PAGE 228 ---

--- PAGE 229 ---
PART IV 
Your Oxygen Advantage Program
--- END PAGE 229 ---

--- PAGE 230 ---
Summary and General Program Based on
BOLT Score and Health
E ach time I work with a client, I design a program of breathing exercises
and lifestyle guidelines to help him or her reach goals safely and in the
shortest time possible. When deciding on a program, it is necessary to take
into consideration each individual’s health and BOLT score. Having an
insight into a person’s lifestyle is also useful, as exercises can be tailored to
cause minimal disruption to work schedules and current training routines. I
fully understand the challenge of making time in a busy life to exercise,
which is why the Oxygen Advantage program offers quick, easy, and
achievable techniques that can fit around any existing routine. There is no
doubt that a low BOLT score can result in fatigue, reduced concentration,
and poor productivity, so by allocating just a half hour to one hour each day
to practice these exercises, your BOLT score will increase along with your
energy levels, well-being, and performance. I have seen the proof in
thousands of clients that spending a little time to improve body oxygenation
is a hugely beneficial investment.
The best way to approach the Oxygen Advantage program is to view it
as a lifestyle change and something to be incorporated into your way of life
as opposed to a set of exercises practiced formally throughout the day. This
way it will become part of your daily routine rather than a regular chore or
duty.
--- END PAGE 230 ---

--- PAGE 231 ---
Quick Reference Summary of the Oxygen
Advantage Program
H abitual overbreathing involves breathing more air than your body
requires during rest and exercise. Overbreathing leads to:
• A reduction of the gas carbon dioxide in the blood
• Mouth breathing and underutilization of the gas nitric oxide
• Impaired release of oxygen from red blood cells (see the Bohr
Effect.)
• Constriction of the smooth muscle in the blood vessels and
airways
• Adverse effects on blood pH
• Reduced oxygenation of working muscles and organs,
including the heart and brain
• Increased acidity and fatigue during exercise
• Limited sports performance
• Negative effects to overall health
Benefits of practicing the Oxygen Advantage program include:
--- END PAGE 231 ---

--- PAGE 232 ---
• Improved sleep and energy
• Easier breathing with reduced breathlessness during exercise
• Naturally increasing the production of EPO and red blood cells
• Improving oxygenation of working muscles and organs
• Reduction of lactic acid buildup and fatigue
• Improved running economy and VO2 max
• Improved aerobic performance
• Improved anaerobic performance
--- END PAGE 232 ---

--- PAGE 233 ---
Oxygen Advantage Exercise Summary
T he following BOLT measurement and exercises are explained in detail in
earlier chapters. 
Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT) 
1. Nose Unblocking Exercise 
2. Breathe Light to Breathe Right 
3. Breathe Light to Breathe Right—Jogging, Running, or Any Other
Activity 
4. Breathing Recovery, Improved Concentration 
5. Simulate High-Altitude Training—Walking 
6. Simulate High-Altitude Training—Running, Cycling, Swimming 
7. Advanced Simulation of High-Altitude Training 
Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT) 
Your progress can be determined by a reduction to breathlessness during
physical exercise, how you feel, and your BOLT score as follows:
--- END PAGE 233 ---

--- PAGE 234 ---
1. Take a small, silent breath in through your nose, and allow a
small, silent breath out through your nose. 
2. Hold your nose with your fingers to prevent air from entering
your lungs. 
3. Count the number of seconds until you feel the first definite
desire to breathe. 
4. At the first definite desire to breathe in, you may also feel the
first involuntary movements of your breathing muscles. (Your
abdomen may jerk and the area around your neck may
contract.) 
5. Release your nose and breathe in through it. 
6. Your inhalation at the end of the breath should be calm.
Your BOLT score is the length of time in seconds that you are able to
hold your breath until you feel the first physical signals to take a breath. To
increase your BOLT score, it is necessary to:
• Nose-breathe at all times, including during physical exercise
and sleep.
• Avoid taking large breaths while sighing, yawning, and talking.
• Practice Oxygen Advantage exercises appropriate to your
health and fitness.
--- END PAGE 234 ---

--- PAGE 235 ---
By incorporating the Oxygen Advantage exercises into your routine,
your BOLT score should increase by 3 to 4 seconds during the first week.
After continued practice for a number of weeks, you may find your BOLT
score remains stubbornly at about 20 seconds. Continue to practice and
incorporate breath holds into your physical exercise to increase your BOLT
score above 20 seconds. It can take 6 months for an individual to reach a
BOLT score of 40 seconds, but by then your health and fitness levels will
be at a totally different place than before. Enjoy the journey! 
1. Nose Unblocking Exercise 
( Please do not practice this exercise if your BOLT score is less than 10
seconds, or if you are pregnant or have high blood pressure, cardiovascular
issues, diabetes, or any serious health concerns. ) 
To unblock the nose, perform the following: 
1. Take a small, silent breath in and a small, silent breath out
through your nose. 
2. Pinch your nose with your fingers to hold your breath.
--- END PAGE 235 ---

--- PAGE 236 ---
3. Walk as many paces as possible with your breath held. Try to
build up a strong air shortage, without overdoing it, of course! 
4. When you resume breathing, do so only through your nose;
your breathing must be calmed immediately. 
5. After resuming your breathing, your first breath will usually
be bigger than normal. Make sure that you calm your
breathing as soon as possible by suppressing your second and
third breaths. 
6. You should be able to recover your breath within 2 to 3
breaths. If you cannot, you have held your breath for too long. 
7. Wait for about a minute or so and then repeat. 
8. Repeat this exercise 5 or 6 times until the nose is decongested. 
2. Breathe Light to Breathe Right 
1. Place one hand on your chest and the other just above your
navel to help you to follow your breathing. 
2. Breathe in and gently guide your abdomen outward.
--- END PAGE 236 ---

--- PAGE 237 ---
3. Breathe out and gently guide your abdomen inward. 
4. Observe your breathing pattern, noting the size and depth of
each breath. 
5. Apply gentle pressure with your hands to slightly reduce your
breathing movements. It should feel as if you are breathing
against your hands. 
6. Encourage the depth of each breath to reduce. 
7. Take in a smaller or shorter breath than you would like. 
8. Allow a relaxed breath out, exhaling gently, slowly, and
easily. 
9. Bring a feeling of relaxation to your breathing. 
10. Do not tense your body, hold your breath, or pause your
breathing. Continue to breathe smoothly but take in less air
than before. 
11. The objective of this exercise is to create a tolerable hunger
for air. Try to sustain this for 3 to 5 minutes at a time. If your
breathing rhythm becomes chaotic or if your breathing
muscles contract, then the air shortage you have created is too
much. If these signs occur, stop the exercise and return to it
when breathing is back to normal. 
3. Breathe Light to Breathe Right—Jogging, Running, or Any
Other Activity 
No matter what type of exercise you prefer, make sure that you observe
your breath and become aware of your inner body. Bring your entire
attention from your mind into your body. Move with every cell of your
body, from the top of your head to the tips of your toes.
--- END PAGE 237 ---

--- PAGE 238 ---
Allow your body to find its perfect work rate by breathing through your
nose in a steady and regular fashion. Continue to increase your pace to the
point where you can maintain steady and regular nasal breathing. If your
breathing rhythm becomes chaotic and it is necessary to open your mouth to
breathe, you will know that the intensity is too much. If necessary, slow
your pace to a walk for 2 to 3 minutes before resuming your jog.
As you run, feel each gentle connection between your feet and the
ground as you propel yourself forward. Avoid pounding the pavement as
this will lead to sore hips and joints and other possible injuries. Instead,
bring a feeling of lightness to your body and visualize yourself barely
touching the ground as your run. Imagine yourself running over thin twigs,
treading so softly that they do not break. The mantra to follow is: light foot
strikes, a relaxed body, and regular, steady breathing.
If you keep your mouth closed throughout your exercise, your breathing
will recover quickly. 
4. Breathing Recovery, Improved Concentration
--- END PAGE 238 ---

--- PAGE 239 ---
To recover from physical exercise and to help calm your breathing or mind,
practice the following exercise for 3 to 5 minutes: 
1. Exhale as normal through the nose. 
2. Pinch your nose with your fingers to hold the breath for 2 to 5
seconds. 
3. Breathe normally through the nose for 10 seconds. 
4. Repeat the first three steps. 
Important Note Regarding the “Simulate High-Altitude
Training” Exercises That Follow 
Please do not practice any exercise that simulates high-
altitude training if your BOLT score is less than 20 seconds (or
less than 30 seconds for advanced simulation of high-altitude
training) or if you are pregnant, have high blood pressure or
other cardiovascular issues, have diabetes, or have any serious
health concerns. While these exercises involve the creation of a
medium to strong air hunger, there is no point in overdoing it.
Upon completion of each breath hold, you should be able to
recover your breathing within 2 to 3 breaths. If while practicing
these exercises, you experience dizziness or any other negative
side effect, then please stop immediately. 
5. Simulate High-Altitude Training—Walking 
If you have a pulse oximeter, you might find it motivating to observe the
decrease to your oxygen saturation as you do this. Continue walking
throughout the exercise and hold your breath only until you feel a medium
hunger for air for the first 2 to 3 breath holds. For the remaining breath
--- END PAGE 239 ---

--- PAGE 240 ---
holds, it is beneficial to hold the breath until you feel a relatively strong
hunger for air. 
1. Walk for 1 minute or so while breathing through your nose. 
2. Gently exhale and hold your breath, followed by minimal
breathing for 15 seconds: Gently exhale, pinch your nose,
and walk while holding the breath until you feel a medium
hunger for air, then release your nose, inhale through it, and
minimize your breathing for 15 seconds by taking short
breaths. After 30 seconds of continued walking and nose
breathing, repeat the breath hold until you feel a medium
hunger for air. Minimize your breathing for 15 seconds, then
allow your breathing to return to normal and through the nose. 
3. Continue walking for 30 seconds and repeat: Continue
walking for around 30 seconds while breathing through your
nose, then gently exhale and pinch your nose with your
fingers. Walk while holding your breath until you feel a
--- END PAGE 240 ---

--- PAGE 241 ---
medium to strong hunger for air. Release your nose and
minimize your breathing by taking short breaths for about 15
seconds. Then resume breathing through your nose. 
4. Repeat breath holds 8 to 10 times: While continuing to
walk, perform a breath hold every minute or so in order to
create a medium to strong need for air. Minimize your
breathing for 15 seconds following each breath hold. Repeat
for a total of 8 to 10 breath holds during your walk.
A typical increase in the number of paces per breath hold might look
like this: 20, 20, 30, 35, 42, 47, 53, 60, 60, 55. 
6. Simulate High-Altitude Training—Running, Cycling,
Swimming 
Breath Holding During Running
--- END PAGE 241 ---

--- PAGE 242 ---
Breath holding can also be incorporated into more intense exercise, such
as running: 
1. 10 to 15 minutes into your run, gently exhale and hold your
breath until a strong air shortage is reached. The length of the
breath hold may range from 10 to 40 paces and will depend
on your running speed and BOLT score. 
2. Following the breath hold, continue to jog with nose breathing
for about 1 minute, until your breathing has partially
recovered. 
3. Repeat the breath hold 8 to 10 times for the duration of your
run. The breath hold should be a challenge and, at the same
time, should allow breathing to recover to normal within a
couple of breaths. 
Breath Holding During Cycling 
A similar practice can be employed during cycling:
• After your body has warmed up, exhale and hold your breath
for 5 to 15 pedal rotations.
• Resume nose breathing while continuing to cycle for about 1
minute.
• Repeat this exercise 8 to 10 times throughout your ride. 
Breath Holding During Swimming 
During swimming, increase the number of strokes between breaths. You
can do this in gradual increments, increasing the number of strokes between
breaths from 3 to 5 to 7 over a series of lengths. 
7. Advanced Simulation of High-Altitude Training
--- END PAGE 242 ---

--- PAGE 243 ---
For this exercise, it is necessary to monitor your blood oxygen saturation
with a pulse oximeter, ensuring that your SpO2 does not drop below 80
percent. 
1. Walk for a minute or so. Exhale and hold your breath for
approximately 40 paces, then take a sip of air into the lungs.
A “sip” is a tiny breath—just enough to reduce tension. Hold
the breath for a further 10 paces. 
2. Now take a sip of air in or out of the lungs. Hold for 10 paces
or so. 
3. Continue taking sips of air and repeating short breath holds
until you feel a fairly strong air shortage. 
4. If the air shortage is too strong, then reduce the hold to 5
paces or less. With each successive breath hold, oxygen
--- END PAGE 243 ---

--- PAGE 244 ---
saturation will continue to decrease. 
5. Challenge but do not stress yourself. 
6. Continue to monitor pulse oxygen saturation. Do not go
below 80 percent SpO2. 
7. Perform this exercise for 1 to 2 minutes.
--- END PAGE 244 ---

--- PAGE 245 ---
Breathe Light to Breathe Right (Advanced
Method)
T he advanced version of Breathe Light to Breathe Right is best practiced
after you have mastered the basic exercise as described on page 74. The
following will teach you how to combine reduced breathing with abdominal
breathing to increase your BOLT score.
Please note that just like any form of physical exercise, it is easier and
more beneficial if you practice reduced breathing exercises at least an hour
or more after eating a meal.
This exercise involves three simple stages: 
1. Activating and strengthening the diaphragm 
2. Merging your breathing with the movements of your abdomen 
3. Reducing your breathing to create an air shortage
By practicing abdominal breathing, you will allow it to become your
natural breathing method. This exercise is split into three parts to ensure
that you learn the technique correctly and to gradually incorporate
abdominal breathing into your normal breathing habits. First you must learn
to relax the diaphragm muscle so that it can be activated during breathing.
Second, you must learn to match the movements of the abdomen with the
breath to engage the diaphragm. And finally, you will be able to practice
breathing lightly with abdominal breathing to maximize body oxygenation
--- END PAGE 245 ---

--- PAGE 246 ---
during rest. Remember that to improve your breathing during exercise, you
must first learn how to breathe efficiently at rest. 
Stage 1: Relaxing and Activating the Diaphragm 
• Sit up straight but do not force yourself into a rigid upright
position, as doing so will only increase the tension in your
body. Instead, try to lengthen the distance between your navel
and sternum (chest); imagine a piece of string gently lifting you
up from the top of the back of your head.
--- END PAGE 246 ---

--- PAGE 247 ---
• As you guide your body upward, imagine the space between
your ribs becoming wider.
• Place one hand on your chest and one hand just above your
navel. At this point, do not concern yourself with how you are
breathing.
• Bring your attention to the movements of your lower hand.
While sitting up straight, gently guide your hand outward by
pushing your abdomen outward, just enough to feel the
movement. There is no need to make any changes to your
breathing at this point—this stage is primarily to encourage
abdominal movement.
• Now draw in your abdomen and watch your hand move gently
inward.
• Perform this simple exercise for a few minutes to help activate
a “stiff” diaphragm.
• Alternatively, you could perform this exercise while lying on
your back with both knees bent and your feet flat on the floor. 
Stage 1 in Brief 
• Gently push your abdomen out. Watch your hand move
outward.
• Gently draw your abdomen in. Watch your hand move inward.
If your diaphragm is particularly stiff due to years of breathing with the
upper chest, the following additional exercise will help to activate the
muscle and encourage better breathing:
• Take a gentle breath in through your nose.
--- END PAGE 247 ---

--- PAGE 248 ---
• Allow a gentle breath out through your nose.
• Hold your nose with your fingers and close your mouth to
prevent air from flowing.
• Now try to breathe in and out, while at the same time holding
your breath.
• As you try to breathe in and out, you may feel your stomach
move in and out as your breathing muscles contract to help
relax the diaphragm.
• When you feel a medium desire to breathe, let go of your nose
and resume breathing normally through your nose.
• Practice this exercise 2 or 3 times to help to relax the
diaphragm.
When you feel you can move your abdomen in and out easily at will,
proceed to Stage 2 , which incorporates these abdomen movements with
your breathing. 
Stage 2: Merging Abdominal Movements with Breathing 
• Sit up straight.
• Place one hand on your chest and the other hand on your
abdomen.
• As you breathe, allow your shoulders to relax into their natural
position.
• Gently encourage chest movements to reduce as you breathe,
using the guidance of your mind and your hand.
• At the same time, try to coordinate your abdomen movements
with your breathing.
--- END PAGE 248 ---

--- PAGE 249 ---
• As you breathe in, gently guide your abdomen outward.
Imagine you are breathing into your tummy. (Try not to make
the movement too big, as doing so may cause dizziness.)
• As you breathe out, gently draw your abdomen in.
• Your breathing should be gentle, silent, and calm.
• Perform this exercise for a few minutes to acclimatize yourself
to the movements of your diaphragm and your breath.
If you are finding this exercise difficult, you may find it easier to
activate abdominal breathing while lying on your back in a semi-supine
position. Try the following exercise lying on a mat with a small pillow
under your head and your knees bent, as shown on the following page. 
• Place a relatively large book on the area just above your navel.
• As you breathe in, bring your breathing into your abdomen by
gently guiding your abdomen to move the book upward.
--- END PAGE 249 ---

--- PAGE 250 ---
• As you breathe out, gently allow the abdomen to move back to
its original position.
• The inhalation is the active phase, and the exhalation is passive,
as you allow the air to leave the body naturally and effortlessly.
While breathing in, imagine inflating your tummy with a light
amount of air and watch the book rise. While breathing out,
imagine a balloon slowly deflating of its own accord. 
Stage 2 in Brief 
• Breathe in. Gently guide your abdomen out.
• Breathe out. Gently draw your abdomen in.
When you are confident that you are able to match your breathing with
the movements of your diaphragm, proceed to Stage 3 . 
Stage 3: Reducing Breathing Volume Using Abdominal
Breathing 
If you have tried Stages 1 and 2 but still find you are unable to switch from
upper-chest to abdominal breathing, don’t be concerned—it can take time to
readjust to a new way of breathing after years of breathing from the upper
chest. You can still proceed to Stage 3 —simply keep practicing all three
stages until it becomes easier. The more you use these exercises, the greater
your tolerance of carbon dioxide will become.
Reducing your breathing is about lowering the amount of air you take
into your lungs during each minute. As you reduce your breathing, there
will be a slight accumulation of carbon dioxide in the blood, assisting with
the relaxation of the diaphragm. If you have already mastered
diaphragmatic breathing through the first two stages, then you will find that
it is a lot easier to reduce your breathing volume toward normal as you
practice Stage 3 .
--- END PAGE 250 ---

--- PAGE 251 ---
There are two main approaches to reducing breathing volume using
diaphragmatic breathing. The first is to bring a feeling of relaxation to the
body, to gently allow your breathing movements to slow down and become
softer. As your body relaxes, your breathing will automatically reduce in
response. The second approach is to tune in to your breathing pattern,
noting the size of each inhalation and exhalation. By concentrating on the
rhythm of your breathing for a minute or two, you will gain a sense of how
much air you are taking into your body. As you follow your breathing,
gently encourage it to slow down so that your breathing movements
gradually reduce to the point where you feel a subtle need for air.
This urge to breathe is the core of reduced breathing exercises and is a
sign that you are actively altering your breathing habits toward a healthier,
more effective level. When you first attempt reduced breathing exercises,
you may find the sensation of air shortage difficult to maintain, but it is
essential to keep practicing if you want to bring about changes to your body
and improve your sporting performance. The following sentence is the most
important point of this entire book, and something I explain to my students
daily: 
The only way to know you are reducing your breathing volume is
feeling as if you would like to take in a bigger breath.
--- END PAGE 251 ---

--- PAGE 252 ---
The need to take a bigger breath is similar to the feeling you will have
experienced during your measurement of BOLT. This urge for air should
not be stressful, but should be similar to what you might experience during
a normal walk.
In Stage 3, we will bring abdominal breathing and reduced breathing
together. To practice this exercise, it can be very helpful to sit in front of a
mirror to observe and follow your breathing movements:
• Sit up straight.
--- END PAGE 252 ---

--- PAGE 253 ---
• Place one hand on your chest and one hand on your abdomen.
• Imagine a piece of string guiding you upward from the top of
the back of your head. Imagine the space between your ribs
gently widening.
• As you breathe in, gently guide your abdomen out. Keep your
chest movements to a minimum.
• As you breathe out, gently guide your abdomen in, still keeping
your chest movements small.
• Follow each breath in and out through your nose.
• Tune in to the amplitude of each inhalation and exhalation. Try
to get a sense of the size and frequency of each breath.
• As you breathe, exert gentle pressure with your hands against
your abdomen and chest. This should create extra resistance to
your breathing.
• Breathe against your hands, concentrating on making the size of
each breath smaller.
• With each breath, take in less air than you would like to. Make
the in-breath smaller or shorter.
• Breathe out with a relaxed exhalation. Allow the natural
elasticity of your lungs and diaphragm to play their role in each
exhalation. Imagine a balloon slowly and gently deflating of its
own accord.
• When the in-breath becomes smaller and the out-breath is
relaxed, visible breathing movements will be reduced. You may
be able to notice this in a mirror.
--- END PAGE 253 ---

--- PAGE 254 ---
By using a simple exercise like this you can reduce your breathing
movements by 20 to 30 percent. If your stomach muscles start to feel tense,
contract, or jerk, or if your breathing rhythm becomes disrupted or out of
control, then the air shortage is too intense. In this situation, abandon the
exercise for 15 seconds or so and return to it when the air shortage has
disappeared.
The most common mistake is to deliberately tense the muscles of the
chest or abdomen to restrict breathing movements. If you find this
happening, then take a break from the exercise for 15 seconds or so. When
you return to it, encourage your breathing to reduce by exerting gentle
pressure on your chest and abdomen with your hands, encouraging your
breathing to slow and diminish using relaxation rather than force.
Do not be concerned about the number of breaths you take per minute.
Ideally, this should not increase. However, if your BOLT score is less than
20 seconds, you may find that your breathing rate increases during the
exercise. If this happens, try to slow down your breathing and keep it calm.
As your BOLT score increases it will become much easier to maintain
control of your breathing during reduced breathing exercises.
At first, you may only be able to maintain an air shortage for 20 seconds
before the urge to breathe is too strong. With practice, you will be able to
maintain an air shortage for longer periods. Remember, you are trying to
create an air shortage that is tolerable but not stressful. Aim to maintain this
tolerable air hunger for 3 to 5 minutes at a time. Practicing 2 sets of 5-
minute exercises is enough to help you reset your breathing center and
improve your body’s tolerance of carbon dioxide.
--- END PAGE 254 ---

--- PAGE 255 ---
During reduced breathing exercises it is vital that you create a hunger
for air in order to bring about an accumulation of carbon dioxide in the
blood. When this happens, the respiratory center in the brain is reset toward
a calmer and more normal breathing volume. In order to reset the
respiratory center by just a little, it is necessary to experience an air hunger
for about 10 minutes. You can divide most of the exercises in this book into
2 sets of 5-minute sessions, or, if you feel you are confident and
experienced in reduced breathing, you may practice for 10 minutes straight. 
The Oxygen Advantage: Encompassing Many Factors to Improve
Health and Fitness
--- END PAGE 255 ---

--- PAGE 256 ---
General Program Based on BOLT and
Health
P lease note: Oxygen Advantage exercises that involve holding the breath
to create a medium to strong air shortage during walking, jogging, or
running create a similar effect to high-intensity training. As a result, they
are not suitable if you are elderly, pregnant, or have high blood pressure,
cardiovascular disease, type 1 diabetes, kidney disease, depression, cancer,
or any serious health concern. Instead, practice nasal breathing and the
gentle Breathe Light to Breathe Right exercise until these conditions are
resolved.
Similar to physical exercise, it is recommended to practice the Oxygen
Advantage exercises at least two hours after eating.
--- END PAGE 256 ---

--- PAGE 257 ---
Program for BOLT Score of Less Than 10
Seconds (or an Unhealthy or Older
Person) 
• Measure your BOLT score each morning after waking.
• Breathe through the nose both day and night. To ensure nasal
breathing at night, it will be necessary to wear paper tape
across your lips during sleep.
• Practice the Breathing Recovery Exercise throughout the day,
ideally spending 10 minutes 6 times per day doing small breath
holds of between 2 and 5 seconds.
• Another option to help recover breathing is to exhale through
your nose, pinch your nose with your fingers, and walk while
holding the breath for 5 to 10 paces. Rest for 1 minute and
repeat 10 times.
• Engage in 10 to 15 minutes of slow walking each day with the
mouth closed. If you need to breathe through your mouth, you
must stop walking to recover your breath.
• When your BOLT score increases to 15 seconds, you will find it
a lot easier to bring relaxation to your body and to Breathe
Light to Breathe Right. It is more beneficial to practice this
exercise than Breathing Recovery once your BOLT score has
--- END PAGE 257 ---

--- PAGE 258 ---
reached 15 seconds. The minimum time required for an
individual for such a low BOLT score is to practice Breathing
Light to Breathe Right for 1 hour per day (6 sets of 10 minutes
each).
• As your BOLT score increases, it will become a lot easier to
engage in physical exercise. Your expected progress is to
increase your BOLT score to 25 seconds within 6 to 8 weeks.
• Fill in the following chart to mark your progress. 
Sixty-five-year-old Michael enjoys slow walking. He has chronic
asthma and suffers from symptoms such as coughing, breathlessness, and
--- END PAGE 258 ---

--- PAGE 259 ---
wheezing. Michael’s BOLT is 7 seconds. This program emphasizes quality
over quantity.
At the beginning, given Michael’s low BOLT score, he will find it
difficult to Breathe Light to Breathe Right because the air hunger may
destabilize his breathing. Therefore, a better initial option for him is to
concentrate on breathing only through the nose both during the day and at
night, and to practice many small breath holds (Breathing Recovery
Exercise) throughout the day. It will also be very helpful for Michael to
relax his body and encourage his breathing to soften, as long as doing so is
not stressful and does not destabilize his breathing.
Gentle walking alone will be sufficient for Michael to generate a
tolerable air shortage. He will not need to hold his breath during his walk
unless he feels comfortable doing so. Sometimes, holding the breath during
a walk is a good way to overcome chest tightness and to help increase one’s
BOLT score. If Michael practices breath holds during his slow walks, they
should be limited to no more than 10 paces. He should not hold his breath
beyond the point at which he loses control of his breathing, as doing so will
disrupt his breathing and possibly cause asthma symptoms.
Practicing the exercise Breathe Light to Breathe Right is very
worthwhile and will be a lot easier for Michael to apply when his BOLT
score reaches 15 seconds. Michael’s BOLT score will continue to increase
as long as he dedicates 10 minutes by 6 times daily to his reduced
breathing. This may sound like a lot of hard work, but living with asthma is
extremely hard work in itself and will already be costing Michael a lot in
terms of reduced quality of life and productivity. Reducing his breathing
throughout the day will be the best investment in time that Michael has ever
made.
--- END PAGE 259 ---

--- PAGE 260 ---
Program for BOLT Score of 10 to 20
Seconds 
• Measure your BOLT score each morning after waking.
• Breathe through the nose at all times. Wear paper tape across
your lips during sleep to ensure nasal breathing at night.
• Regularly observe your breathing throughout the day to ensure
it stays calm and soft.
• Swallow or hold the breath any time you feel a sigh coming. If
you miss a sigh, then gently exhale through your nose and hold
your breath for 5 to 10 seconds to compensate.
• Practice the Breathe Light to Breathe Right or Breathing
Recovery exercise for 10 minutes, 3 times a day: once in the
morning, once during the afternoon, and once before bed.
• Practice Breathe Light to Breathe Right—Walking for between
30 and 60 minutes per day; you can slow jog if your BOLT
score is greater than 15 seconds.
• Fill in the following chart to mark your progress.
--- END PAGE 260 ---

--- PAGE 261 ---
Jennifer works as a sales and marketing manager for a UK-based
clothing store. Her work can be demanding, resulting in long hours spent in
her car or in front of the computer. Travel takes up a large amount of her
time, both to and from the head office and from store to store. Because of
her busy schedule, Jennifer has gotten out of the habit of regular physical
exercise. As she approaches her thirty-fifth birthday, she has become more
conscious of her health and fitness and has decided to embark on a new
exercise program.
Jennifer’s starting BOLT score was 12 seconds, with no apparent health
concerns. In the beginning, it was important to avoid the common mistake
of overdoing it. In an effort to make up for years of not exercising, there is
often a temptation to plunge straight into intensive exercise, but performing
beyond your ability can lead to increased breathlessness and feelings of
failure. This can sometimes be enough to put you off a new program
completely when you would have made much better progress by simply
taking exercises at your own pace. The mantra for beginning any exercise
program should always be: slow and steady, increasing the intensity and
duration by no more than 10 percent each week.
I started Jennifer off very gently, matching specific exercises to her
BOLT score and fitness level. To gently condition her body to a greater
--- END PAGE 261 ---

--- PAGE 262 ---
tolerance of carbon dioxide, Jennifer increased her daily walks to a light jog
as soon as her BOLT score reached 20 seconds. During her first week of
jogging, she alternated between 2 minutes of walking and 2 minutes of
jogging. In the second and third weeks, she began jogging for 3 minutes
followed by walking for 1 minute. By the fourth week she had achieved her
long-awaited goal of jogging for a half hour straight, and more important
she was able to do this comfortably with her mouth closed. All in all,
Jennifer’s commitment to nasal breathing, gentle reduced breathing
exercises, and regular physical exercise achieved impressive benefits with
no risk of injury or feeling defeated from overtraining. By intelligently
adapting a new exercise program to her needs, Jennifer was able to enjoy
her newfound fitness in a way that fit easily around her work and routine.
--- END PAGE 262 ---

--- PAGE 263 ---
Program for BOLT Score of 20 to 30
Seconds 
• Measure your BOLT score each morning after waking.
• Breathe through your nose both day and at night, including
wearing tape over the mouth during sleep.
• Reduce breathing using the Breathe Light to Breathe Right
exercise for 10 minutes, 3 times per day, once in the morning,
once in the afternoon, and last thing at night.
• Warm up for 10 minutes by walking and performing a breath
hold to achieve a medium to strong air hunger every minute or
so to Simulate High-Altitude Training.
• Breathe Light to Breathe Right during a fast walk or jog for 30
to 60 minutes daily with a relaxed body, abdominal breathing,
and nasal breathing to create an air shortage.
• Simulate High-Altitude Training during walking or jogging by
practicing 8 to 10 breath holds.
• After physical exercise, practice the Breathing Recovery
Exercise.
• Fill in the following chart to mark your progress.
--- END PAGE 263 ---

--- PAGE 264 ---
David is twenty-three years old and a keen athlete. He trains four times
per week and plays rugby for his hometown. His BOLT score is 20 seconds.
David has been mouth breathing and sighing regularly for several years.
He snores during his sleep and wakes up most mornings with a dry mouth,
nasal congestion, and fatigue. He also finds that during training his
breathing is noisier than that of his teammates (who uncharitably call him
“the train”). David’s heavy breathing can be heard long before he makes a
tackle, with his opponents receiving advance warning that he is in pursuit.
When I first met David I took note of his narrow facial structure, flaccid
lower lip, and slightly protruding and crooked nose, indicating that he had
been breathing through his mouth since childhood.
Like many athletes who have invested many years training to maintain
their fitness, David was at first a little reluctant to make a drastic change to
his regimen. To help dispel any fears, I sat him down and we discussed
basic physiology, the importance of optimal breathing for sports success,
--- END PAGE 264 ---

--- PAGE 265 ---
the theory behind BOLT measurement, and the benefits of simulating high-
altitude training.
David is able to maintain breathing through his nose while jogging
lightly. However, during intense training, he finds doing nasal breathing too
difficult. Training using nasal breathing creates resistance to breathing
simply because the nose is a smaller area to breathe through than the mouth.
David’s fear is that he may lose muscle conditioning because of the
decrease in training intensity resulting from having to keep his mouth
closed. Taking this situation into account, the best approach for David is to
apply 90 percent of the Oxygen Advantage program in order to improve his
BOLT score. This includes simulating a high altitude during jogging,
breathing through the nose at all times, and reducing his breathing by
relaxing during both rest and regular training. The only exception to nasal
breathing should be when training becomes so intense that he needs to
periodically breathe through his mouth. In time, as David’s BOLT score
increases, he will be able to maintain nasal breathing during high-intensity
exercise. In the meantime, he is able to check whether he is overbreathing
during training by comparing his BOLT score before training and 1 hour
after completing his exercise. His BOLT score after training should be
approximately 25 percent higher than before. If it is lower, David should
reduce the intensity of his training to the point at which he can maintain
strictly nasal breathing.
David’s goal is to reach a BOLT score of 40 seconds within 12 weeks.
Physical training with a larger air hunger is the key to achieving this goal.
--- END PAGE 265 ---

--- PAGE 266 ---
Program for BOLT Score of 30 Seconds
Plus 
• Measure your BOLT score each morning after waking.
• Breathe through your nose both day and night, including
wearing tape over the mouth during sleep.
• Warm up for 10 minutes by walking and performing a breath
hold every minute or so to Simulate High-Altitude Training.
• Breathe Light to Breathe Right during the run by increasing the
intensity of exercise while maintaining nasal breathing to
develop a reasonably strong air shortage.
• Continue with running and nasal breathing for 20 minutes to 1
hour.
• Midway through the run, practice breath holds to Simulate
High-Altitude Training. Exhale and hold the breath for 10 to 40
steps while running at a good pace.
• After the breath hold, resume nasal breathing while
simultaneously relaxing the body. Continue to intersperse
breath holds every few minutes throughout the run.
• After physical exercise, practice the Breathing Recovery
Exercise.
--- END PAGE 266 ---

--- PAGE 267 ---
• Practice one session of Advanced Simulation of High Altitude
every other day.
• Reduce breathing using the Breathe Light to Breathe Right
exercise for 15 minutes last thing at night.
• Fill in the following chart to mark your progress. 
Brenda is thirty-two years old, in perfect health, and runs ten miles, four
days a week. She is a competitive long-distance runner with a BOLT score
of between 35 and 40 seconds. In order to maintain a high BOLT score,
physical exercise with a medium to strong air hunger is necessary.
When Brenda feels that she wants to push her body harder and faster,
she increases her pace to run as fast as she can with her mouth closed.
Often, she is able to maintain nasal breathing while running at her
maximum pace. As Brenda’s BOLT score is close to 40 seconds, her body
--- END PAGE 267 ---

--- PAGE 268 ---
can perform high-intensity exercise without needing to revert to breathing
through her mouth. Since her breathing is already so efficient, opening the
mouth provides no advantage to her performance. Brenda’s current training
regimen is sufficient to ensure maintenance of her BOLT score. 
Oxygen Advantage Program Summary for a BOLT Score of 10
to 30 Seconds Plus 
With continued practice each week culminating in an improvement to your
BOLT score, more intense exercises can be employed to reach even greater
heights. Using the following illustrations, you can check your pathway to
success.
--- END PAGE 268 ---

--- PAGE 269 ---

--- END PAGE 269 ---

--- PAGE 270 ---

--- END PAGE 270 ---

--- PAGE 271 ---
Program for Weight Loss or Obesity
(suitable for all BOLT scores) 
• Permanently switch to nasal breathing during both day and
night.
• Wear tape across the mouth during sleep (see: Breathe through
your nose).
• Become conscious of your breathing during everyday tasks,
allowing it to be calm, relaxed, and quiet.
• Practice Breathe Light to Breathe Right for 10 to 15 minutes, 5
times each day. This can be divided into the following:
• 10 minutes before work
• 10 minutes during lunch
• 10 minutes after work
• 10 minutes (or more) while watching TV in the evening
• 15 minutes before bed
• Breathe Light to Breathe Right during walking for 30 to 60
minutes per day.
--- END PAGE 271 ---

--- PAGE 272 ---
• For those with a BOLT of over 20 seconds, and who are suited
to performing breath holds, Simulate High-Altitude Training by
incorporating 8 to 10 breath holds to achieve a medium air
hunger throughout the walk.
• Pay particular attention to hunger sensations, asking yourself
whether you really need to eat at that time and stopping when
satisfied.
• Fill in the following chart to mark your progress. 
Earlier on in the book we were introduced to Donna, whose major
bugbear was the frustration and feeling of self-defeat when she found her
weight increasing again after a successful period of weight loss. To help
Donna get her health back on track and to achieve her ideal weight, I asked
--- END PAGE 272 ---

--- PAGE 273 ---
her to do just three exercises: Breathe Light to Breathe Right, walking with
her mouth closed, and practicing breath holds during walking.
Her starting BOLT was 12 seconds, which is typical of someone in a
stressful and demanding job with little time devoted to physical exercise.
And although Donna did breathe through her nose during the day, she woke
up most mornings with a dry mouth, indicating mouth breathing during
sleep. Another factor related to her low BOLT score was her difficulty
falling asleep. Although she went to bed at a reasonable hour, it often took
her two to three hours to finally fall asleep. The result was that she woke up
feeling lethargic and unrefreshed, not an ideal scenario when work and
family life demanded alertness.
My main goal for Donna was to increase her BOLT score, experience a
natural suppression to appetite, and improve her sleep and energy levels.
The most important time for Donna to Breathe Light with a tolerable air
hunger was the session directly before she went to sleep. It was not
necessary for her to practice this in bed. Instead, Donna usually had some
downtime late in the evening when she watched TV, and this was an
excellent time for her to reduce her breathing without having to devote
special time to the exercise. I suggested that Donna not watch the news or
any program involving violence or aggression. This exercise offers an
opportunity for the body to relax, not to invoke a stress response.
Because she breathed lightly right before she went to bed, Donna’s
sleep became deeper, enabling her to wake up 15 minutes earlier to begin
her first set for the day. It was also vital that she made a conscious effort to
breathe lightly at various times throughout the day. This just involved
bringing attention to her breathing, calming it and quieting it so that she felt
a light to medium need for air.
Donna found it a challenge to keep her mouth closed during sleep, but
within a few nights her body adapted to this new way of breathing. After
the fourth night, she found herself sleeping all the way through, requiring
less sleep, waking up earlier, and feeling more refreshed.
In addition to practicing her breathing exercises, it was important that
Donna paid attention to her sensations of hunger and thirst. Improving the
oxygenation of tissues and organs results in the body using food more
efficiently, with this leading to a natural suppression of appetite. The advice
I gave to Donna was to eat only when hungry and stop when satisfied. By
--- END PAGE 273 ---

--- PAGE 274 ---
following this simple rule, she automatically had less need for snacking
during the day, and even found herself taking lunch at a later time. Eating
according to bodily needs is much more important than eating according to
a specific time of the day. It is unfortunate that society has dictated when
we eat more so than when we actually need the food. Another beneficial
side effect that Donna experienced was an increased thirst and demand for
water.
Donna experienced a noticeable reduction to her appetite, and her
progress with the breathing exercises was reflected in a higher BOLT score.
Within two weeks, her BOLT score had increased from 12 to 20 seconds
and she had lost six pounds. I encouraged Donna to quicken her progress by
incorporating 8 to 10 breath holds into her 20-minute walk to create a
medium air hunger. Doing this exercise temporarily lowers oxygen levels to
simulate high-altitude training, resulting in a further natural suppression of
appetite.
Many people with a low BOLT score, including Donna, avoid physical
exercise, as they get breathless far too quickly, making exercise a
burdensome chore. As Donna’s BOLT score increased to 20 seconds, she
felt the need to do more physical exercise. This further helped with her
weight normalization, increased energy, and self-esteem.
I told Donna what I tell everyone else: Breathing Light to Breathe Right
isn’t just an exercise; it’s a way of life. How we breathe at all times during
the day influences how we feel and our health. When Donna incorporated
this into her way of life and maintained a BOLT of 25-plus seconds, her
days of yo-yo dieting were over. To her delight, she currently weighs 145
pounds (from a top weight of 175 pounds), and the increased energy and
feel-good factor is a great motivator to continue.
--- END PAGE 274 ---

--- PAGE 275 ---
Program for Children and Teenagers 
• The Nose Unblocking exercise is the best exercise for children
as it is easy, quick, and measurable.
• Practice the Nose Unblocking Exercise a total of 12 times per
day, divided into 2 sets of 6 repetitions. Practice 6 repetitions
before breakfast and 6 during the day. The number of paces
that a child is able to do should increase by 10 every week,
with a goal of reaching a score of 80 to 100 paces.
• While practicing the Nose Unblocking Exercise, I often
encourage children to wear paper tape over their mouth. This
ensures that the mouth is closed during the exercise, with no air
sneaking.
• Wearing the tape while watching TV or going about the house
can also be very helpful for a child to get used to breathing
through his or her nose only.
• Breathe through the nose throughout the day with the tongue
placed in the roof of the mouth. To find out more about mouth
breathing and development of the growing face, I suggest that
you read my book Buteyko Meets Dr. Mew: Buteyko Method
for Children and Teenagers. 
• Fill in the following chart to mark your progress.
--- END PAGE 275 ---

--- PAGE 276 ---
Marc is seven years old, with nasal obstruction and continuous mouth
breathing. Although Marc’s physician ruled out asthma, his breathing is
audible during rest and eating (much to his parents’ consternation). He gets
very breathless while playing football, having to take a break from the
match to get his breathing back. Furthermore, he snores each night.
Children are great responders to breathing retraining, although a lot of
observation is required from parents. I always say that the success of a
--- END PAGE 276 ---

--- PAGE 277 ---
child’s retraining is dependent on the motivation of the parents. At my
courses, I motivate parents by discussing the importance of nasal breathing
for facial development, concentration, sleep, and overall health. I use my
own example of mouth breathing during childhood and how it detrimentally
affected my concentration in high school and college. Such an innocuous
habit has devastating consequences.
To keep it simple for children and teenagers, I suggest only one exercise
and a couple of guidelines to make good progress.
Marc loves football, and the promise of improving his sports
performance is the main motivator to put the exercises into practice. When
Marc is able to hold his breath for 80 to 100 paces, all he has to do is to
practice enough repetitions to maintain this figure. For example, after a few
weeks Marc should be able to maintain 80 paces by just doing 3 repetitions
of paces each day.
An example of Marc’s progress is as follows:
Week 1: 32 paces
Week 2: 37 paces
Week 3: 49 paces
Week 4: 58 paces
Week 5: 70 paces
Week 6: 81 paces
Week 7: 83 paces
Week 8: 79 paces
Week 9: 82 paces
Week 10: 85 paces
Marc’s progress on the number of paces that he can hold his breath for
will also depend on his everyday breathing. If he does not breathe through
his nose, or regularly takes big breaths during the day, then his progress
with increasing the number of paces while holding his breath will be a lot
slower. Therefore, in addition to practicing the paces, it is vital to ensure
nasal and quiet breathing during the day. To help with this, Marc’s parents
can gently encourage him to breathe quietly any time they hear his
breathing. An added incentive for his parents to continue with the exercises
is that Marc will have silent breathing during eating, not finding it
--- END PAGE 277 ---

--- PAGE 278 ---
necessary to gulp large breaths through his mouth while having a mouth full
of food.
--- END PAGE 278 ---

--- PAGE 279 ---
Appendix
Upper Limits and Safety of Breath
Holding
W hen you hold your breath, you prevent oxygen from entering into your
lungs and excess carbon dioxide from been expelled. During a maximum
breath hold, the partial pressure of oxygen decreases in the blood, which
causes the body to conserve any available oxygen for the heart and brain by
constricting the blood vessels that supply nonessential organs. For example,
your arms and legs may feel cold as the blood vessels close and the body
diverts blood away from them. Another effect is bradycardia, which is the
slowing of the heart, causing peripheral blood vessels to constrict, blood
pressure to increase, and the spleen to contract, resulting in the “diving
response.” The diving response is experienced by all air-breathing
vertebrates and is an automatic response to a drop in oxygen supply. It is
what allows babies and young children to instinctively hold their breath
when underwater, and is generally more pronounced in adults who regularly
practice breath holding.
During breath holding, the arterial partial pressure of oxygen decreases
from its normal level (100 mmHg) while carbon dioxide increases to above
its normal level (40 mmHg). Breaking point, or the point at which an
individual must release a breath hold, is when oxygen decreases to 62
mmHg and carbon dioxide is 54 mmHg. While it is extremely difficult for
adults to hold their breath to the point of fainting, it has been estimated that
consciousness is lost when the oxygen drops to below 27 mmHg and carbon
dioxide increases to between 90 and 120 mmHg. The body uses built-in
--- END PAGE 279 ---

--- PAGE 280 ---
safety mechanisms such as the diving response and fainting to ensure that
we do not deprive the brain of oxygen for too long, as doing so can result in
brain injury.
The breath-hold exercises described in this book are absolutely safe so
long as they are practiced within tolerable limits. However, individuals with
high blood pressure, cardiac conditions, type 1 diabetes, or any other
serious health concern should not practice holding their breath either during
rest or while exercising.
To simulate high-altitude training, it is necessary to hold your breath
until you feel a relatively strong air hunger. At the same time, there is no
point in overdoing it. It is important to recover your breathing within 2 to 3
breaths. Before practicing breath holding during intense exercise, it is
advisable to first achieve a BOLT score of at least 20 seconds. Until then,
gentler breath-hold exercises during rest and mild to moderate activity can
help you to improve your BOLT score to 20 seconds or more.
Although breath-hold training increases tolerance of carbon dioxide, it
is interesting to note that it does not blunt the brain’s safety reaction to
oxygen deprivation. This is where deliberate breath-hold exercises differ
vastly from the physiological condition of sleep apnea, where the breath is
held unintentionally during sleep, sometimes leading to severe health
problems. If these frightening results are a side effect of breath holding, it
may be supposed that intentional breath holding might have the same
effects, but studies of elite breath holders have found the results to be quite
the opposite. Research by Ivancev and colleagues looked at the breath-
holding ability and carbon dioxide sensitivity of breath-hold divers, whose
sport potentially puts them at risk of severe oxygen deprivation. With
repeated practice, these divers are able to sustain very long breath holds,
inducing a severe drop in oxygen without causing brain injury or blackouts.
A further study by Joulia and colleagues showed that divers displayed a
more pronounced diving response, less of a decrease in oxygen saturation,
and greater blood flow. 
Stages of Breath Holding
--- END PAGE 280 ---

--- PAGE 281 ---
A breath hold can be distinguished by three stages of air shortage ranging
from easy to moderate to strong.
In the first stage there is no stimulus by the breathing muscles to resume
breathing because carbon dioxide has not yet reached threshold limits. This
is known as an easy air shortage.
The second stage is a moderate air shortage. As the breath hold
lengthens, carbon dioxide continues to increase in the blood until the
concentration reaches your threshold, stimulating the breathing muscles to
contract or jerk in an attempt to draw air in. The longer the breath is held,
the more frequent are the contractions of the breathing muscles as the body
attempts to draw air into the lungs.
The third stage is when the desire to breathe becomes so strong that the
individual must resume breathing. This is known as a strong air shortage.
• Easy air shortage: no sensation to breathe.
• Moderate air shortage: from the first involuntary contraction of
the breathing muscles until contractions become frequent.
• Strong air shortage: urge to breathe is strong, leading to
termination of the breath hold. 
Influences on Length of Breath-Hold Time 
The three factors that determine the length of breath-hold time are:
metabolic rate, tolerance to asphyxia (decreased oxygen levels), and total
body gas storage in lungs, blood, and tissues.
Metabolic rate can be reduced through relaxation before and during the
breath hold, whereas tolerance to asphyxia is improved by practicing
regular breath holds. Other activities that influence breath-hold time are:
• Distraction
• Whether the breath hold follows an inhalation or exhalation
• Whether the athlete hyperventilates before the breath hold
--- END PAGE 281 ---

--- PAGE 282 ---
Holding the breath following an inhalation results in a longer breath-
hold time since carbon dioxide is diluted in a larger volume of air, meaning
the brain’s receptors to carbon dioxide are not activated as quickly.
Breath-hold time increases if you take a number of big breaths
immediately prior to holding your breath, but this effect is especially
dangerous when practiced by swimmers. Taking big breaths immediately
before a swim will significantly reduce carbon dioxide in the blood but has
little effect on increasing oxygen stores. Because the brain’s signal to
resume breathing is depleted by this technique, oxygen levels can drop to
very low levels before the swimmer feels the need to breathe. This situation
can result in the swimmer losing consciousness underwater and in worst-
case scenarios can cause death by drowning. The U.S. Navy Seals website
warns against this dangerous practice: 
Important Alert: It has come to our attention that many
men preparing for Special Operations Forces training are
practicing breath holding underwater, and there have been
several cases of drowning and near drowning recently. 
Please do not practice breath holding (under water)
without professional supervision.
--- END PAGE 282 ---

--- PAGE 283 ---
Notes 
1. The Oxygen Paradox 
22 When levels of carbon dioxide: Cheung S. Advanced Environmental
Exercise Physiology . Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics; 2009.
26 “The carbon dioxide pressure”: Bohr C, Hasselbalch K, Krogh A.
Concerning a biologically important relationship—the influence of the
carbon dioxide content of blood on its oxygen binding. Skand Arch
Physiol 1904;16:401–12; www
.udel.edu/chem/white/C342/Bohr%281904%29.html (accessed August
2012).
26 “an exercising muscle is hot”: West JB. Respiratory Physiology: The
Essentials. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1995.
27 In general, blood flow: Magarian GJ, Middaugh DA, Linz DH.
Hyperventilation syndrome: A diagnosis begging for recognition. West
J Med . 1983 May; 138(5):733–36.
27 A study by Dr. Daniel M. Gibbs: Gibbs DM. Hyperventilation-induced
cerebral ischemia in panic disorder and effects of nimodipine. Am J
Psychiatry. 1992 Nov;149(11):1589–91.
27 It is well documented that habitual mouth breathing: Kim EJ, Choi JH,
Kim KW, et al. The impacts of open-mouth breathing on upper airway
space in obstructive sleep apnea: 3-D MDCT analysis. Eur Arch
Otorhinolaryngol. 2011 Apr;268(4):533–9. Kreivi HR, Virkkula P,
Lehto J, Brander P. Frequency of upper airway symptoms before and
during continuous positive airway pressure treatment in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Respiration. 2010;80(6):488–94.
Ohki M, Usui N, Kanazawa H, Hara I, Kawano K. Relationship
between oral breathing and nasal obstruction in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea . Acta Otolaryngol Suppl. 1996;523:228–30.
--- END PAGE 283 ---

--- PAGE 284 ---
Lee SH, Choi JH, Shin C, Lee HM, Kwon SY, Lee SH. How does
open-mouth breathing influence upper airway anatomy? 
Laryngoscope. 2007 Jun;117(6):1102–6. Scharf MB, Cohen AP.
Diagnostic and treatment implications of nasal obstruction in snoring
and obstructive sleep apnea. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 1998
Oct;81(4):279–87; quiz 287–90. Wasilewska J, Kaczmarski M.
Obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome in children. Wiad Lek. 
2010;63(3):201–12. Rappai M, Collop N, Kemp S, deShazo R. The
nose and sleep-disordered breathing: What we know and what we do
not know. Chest. 2003 Dec;124(6):2309–23.
28 However, an increase of carbon dioxide opens: A study by Dr. van den
Elshout from the department of pulmonary diseases at the University
of Nijmegen in the Netherlands explored the effect on airway
resistance when there is an increase of carbon dioxide ( hypercapnia ) or
a decrease ( hypocapnia ). Altogether, fifteen healthy people and thirty
with asthma were involved. The study found that an increase of carbon
dioxide resulted in a “significant fall” in airway resistance in both
normal and asthmatic subjects. This simply means that the increase of
carbon dioxide opened the airways to allow a better oxygen transfer to
take place. Interestingly, individuals without asthma also experienced
better breathing. Van den Elshout FJ, van Herwaarden CL, Folgering
HT. Effects of hypercapnia and hypocapnia on respiratory resistance in
normal and asthmatic subjects. Thorax . 1991;46(1):28–32.
28 Maintaining normal blood pH: Casiday R, Frey R. Blood, Sweat, and
Buffers: pH Regulation During Exercise. Acid-Base Equilibria
Experiment . www.chem
istry.wustl.edu/~edudev/LabTutorials/Buffer/Buffer.html (accessed
August 20, 2012).
31 As the late chest physician Claude Lum: Lum LC. Hyperventilation:
The tip and the iceberg. J Psychosom Res . 1975;19(5–6):375–83. 
2. How Fit Are You Really? The Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT) 
32 In fact, studies have shown: A study by Japanese researchers Miharu
Miyamura and colleagues from Nagoya University, of ten marathon
runners and fourteen untrained individuals found that athletes had a
significantly greater tolerance to carbon dioxide at rest when compared
--- END PAGE 284 ---

--- PAGE 285 ---
with untrained individuals. The study found that for the same amount
of exercise, athletes experienced 50 to 60 percent less breathlessness
than that of untrained individuals. Miyamura M, Yamashina T, Honda
Y. Ventilatory responses to CO2 rebreathing at rest and during exercise
in untrained subjects and athletes. Jpn J Physiol. 1976;26(3):245–54.
34 Oxidative stress occurs when: Finaud J, Lac G, Filaire E. Oxidative
stress: Relationship with exercise and training. Sports Med .
2006;36(4):327–58.
34 It has been said that one: One difference between endurance athletes
and nonathletes is decreased ventilatory responsiveness to hypoxia
(low oxygen) and hypercapnia (higher carbon dioxide). Scoggin CH,
Doekel RD, Kryger MH, Zwillich CW, Weil JV. Familial aspects of
decreased hypoxic drive in endurance athletes. J Appl Physiol . 1978
Mar;44(3):464–8.
In a paper entitled “Low exercise ventilation in endurance athletes”
that was published in Medicine and Science in Sports, the authors
found that nonathletes breathe far heavier and faster to changes in
oxygen and carbon dioxide when compared with endurance athletes at
equal workloads. The authors observed that the lighter breathing of the
athlete group may explain the link between “low ventilatory
chemosensitivity and outstanding endurance athletic performance.”
Martin BJ, Sparks KE, Zwillich CW, Weil JV. Low exercise ventilation
in endurance athletes. Med Sci Sports . 1979 Summer;11(2):181–5.
35 Studies have shown that athletic ability: In a study published in the 
Journal of Applied Physiology that compared thirteen athletes and ten
nonathletes, the athletes’ response to increased carbon dioxide was 47
percent of that recorded by the nonathlete controls. The authors noted
that athletic ability to perform during lower oxygen pressure and
higher carbon dioxide pressure corresponded to maximal oxygen
uptake or VO2 max. Byrne-Quinn E, Weil JV, Sodal IE, Filley GF,
Grover RF. Ventilatory control in the athlete. J Appl Physiol . 1971
Jan;30(1):91–8. In another study conducted at the Research Centre of
Health, Physical Fitness and Sports at Nagoya University in Japan,
researchers evaluated nine initially untrained college students. Five out
of the nine students took up physical training for three hours a day,
--- END PAGE 285 ---

--- PAGE 286 ---
three times a week for four years. The researchers found that VO2 max
increased after training and the response of breathing to increased
arterial carbon dioxide decreased significantly during each training
period. Moreover, CO2 responsiveness was found to correlate
negatively with maximum oxygen uptake in four out of the five trained
subjects. Similarly to the previous study, subjects with reduced
sensitivity to CO2 experienced increased delivery of oxygen to
working muscles. Miyamura M, Hiruta S, Sakurai S, Ishida K, Saito
M. Effects of prolonged physical training on ventilatory response to
hypercapnia. Tohoku J Exp Med . 1988 Dec;156 Suppl:125–35.
35 There is a strong association: Saunders PU, Pyne DB, Telford RD,
Hawley JA. Factors affecting running economy in trained distance
runners. Sports Med . 2004;34(7):465–85.
36 Researchers investigating reduced breathing found that running
economy: Scientists investigated whether controlling the number of
breaths during swimming could improve both swimming performance
and running economy. A paper published in the Scandinavian Journal
of Medicine and Science in Sports involved eighteen swimmers, ten
men and eight women, who were assigned to two groups. The first
group was required to take only 2 breaths per length and the second
group 7 breaths. As swimming is one of the few sports that naturally
limits breath intake, it is often of interest to scientists since reducing
the amount of air consumed during training adds an additional
challenge to the body and may lead to improvements in respiratory
muscle strength. Interestingly, the researchers found that running
economy improved by 6 percent in the group that performed reduced
breathing during swimming. Lavin KM, Guenette JA, Smoliga JM,
Zavorsky GS. Controlled-frequency breath swimming improves
swimming performance and running economy. Scand J Med Sci
Sports. 2015 Feb;25(1):16–24.
37 As far back as 1975: Stanley NN, Cunningham EL, Altose MD, Kelsen
SG, Levinson RS, Cherniack NS. Evaluation of breath holding in
hypercapnia as a simple clinical test of respiratory chemosensitivity. 
Thorax . 1975 Jun;30 (3):337–43.
--- END PAGE 286 ---

--- PAGE 287 ---
Japanese researcher Nishino acknowledged breath holding as one of
the most powerful methods to induce the sensation of breathlessness,
and that the breath hold test “gives us much information on the onset
and endurance of dyspnea (breathlessness).” The paper noted two
different breath-hold tests as providing useful feedback on
breathlessness. According to Nishino, because holding of the breath
until the first definite desire to breathe is not influenced by training
effect or behavioral characteristics, it can be deduced to be a more
objective measurement of breathlessness. Nishino T. Pathophysiology
of dyspnea evaluated by breath-holding test: Studies of furosemide
treatment. Respir Physiol Neurobiol . 2009 May 30;167(1):20–5.
39 Since carbon dioxide is the primary: Stanley et al. 1975, 337–43.
40 “ If a person breath holds after a normal exhalation”: McArdle W,
Katch F, Katch V. Exercise Physiology: Energy, Nutrition, and Human
Performance . 7th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
2010:289.
40 Breath-hold measurements have also been used: The department of
physiotherapy at the University of Szeged, Hungary, conducted a study
that investigated the relationship between breath-hold time and
physical performance in patients with cystic fibrosis. Eighteen patients
with varying stages of cystic fibrosis were studied to determine the
value of the breath-hold time as an index of exercise tolerance. The
breath-hold times of all patients were measured. Oxygen uptake (VO2)
and carbon dioxide elimination were measured breath by breath as the
patients exercised. The researchers found a significant correlation
between breath-hold time and VO2 (oxygen uptake), concluding “that
the voluntary breath-hold time might be a useful index for prediction
of the exercise tolerance of CF patients.” Taking this one step further,
increasing the BOLT of patients with CF corresponds to greater
oxygen uptake and reduced breathlessness during physical exercise.
Barnai M, Laki I, Gyurkovits K, Angyan L, Horvath G. Relationship
between breath-hold time and physical performance in patients with
cystic fibrosis. Eur J Appl Physiol . 2005 Oct;95(2–3):172–8. Results
from a study of thirteen patients with acute asthma concluded that the
magnitude of breathlessness, breathing frequency, and breath-hold
--- END PAGE 287 ---

--- PAGE 288 ---
time was correlated with severity of airflow obstruction and, secondly,
that breath-hold time varies inversely with the magnitude of
breathlessness when it is present at rest. In simple terms, the lower the
breath-hold time of asthmatics, the greater the breathing volume and
breathlessness. Pérez-Padilla R, Cervantes D, Chapela R, Selman M.
Rating of breathlessness at rest during acute asthma: Correlation with
spirometry and usefulness of breath-holding time. Rev Invest Clin .
1989 Jul–Sep;41(3):209–13. 
3. Noses Are for Breathing, Mouths Are for Eating 
52 Mouth breathing activates the upper chest: Swift AC, Campbell IT,
McKown TM. Oronasal obstruction, lung volumes, and arterial
oxygenation. Lancet. 1988 Jan;1(8577):73–75.
52 Dentists and orthodontists have also: Harari D, Redlich M, Miri S,
Hamud T, Gross M. The effect of mouth breathing versus nasal
breathing on dentofacial and craniofacial development in orthodontic
patients. Laryngoscope . 2010 Oct;120(10):2089–93. D’Ascanio L,
Lancione C, Pompa G, Rebuffini E, Mansi N, Manzini M. Craniofacial
growth in children with nasal septum deviation: A cephalometric
comparative study. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol . 2010
Oct;74(10):1180–83. Baumann I, Plinkert PK. Effect of breathing
mode and nose ventilation on growth of the facial bones. HNO . 1996
May;44(5):229–34. Tourne LP. The long face syndrome and
impairment of the nasopharyngeal airway. Angle Orthod. 1990
Fall;60(3):167–76.
52 One of his observations: Price W (ed.). Nutrition and Physical
Degeneration. 8th ed. La Mesa, CA: Price-Pottenger Nutrition
Foundation; 2008:55.
53 In comparison, Catlin: Catlin G (ed.). Letters and Notes on the
Manners, Customs, and Condition of the North American Indians. 
New York: Wiley & Putnam; 1842.
53 Most high-performance cars cannot: Sutcliffe S. Bugatti Veyron online
review (2005) . www.autocar.co.uk/car-review/bugatti/veyron/first-
drives/bugatti-veyron (accessed September 2, 2014).
54 With such incredible efficiency: Burton M, Burton R. (eds.). The
International Wildlife Encyclopedia . 3rd ed. New York: Marshall
--- END PAGE 288 ---

--- PAGE 289 ---
Cavendish Corp.; 2002:403.
54 The same is true: Morgan E. Aquatic Ape Theory. Primitivism.
www.primitiv ism.com/aquatic-ape.htm (accessed September 2, 2014).
54 Charles Darwin was: Ibid.
54 Birds, for example: Pelecaniformes. Wikipedia.
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pelecani formes (accessed September 2, 2014).
54 Guinea pigs and rabbits: Nixon JM. Breathing pattern in the guinea-pig. 
Lab Anim. 1974;8:71–7. Hernandez-Divers SJ. The rabbit respiratory
system: Anatomy, physiology, and pathology . Proceedings of the
Association of Exotic Mammal Veterinarians Scientific Program.
Providence, RI; 2007:61–8.
55 Experience tells the: Jackson PGG, Cockcroft PD (eds.). Clinical
Examination of Farm Animals. Oxford, UK, and Malden MA:
Blackwell Science; 2002:70.
55 The late Dr. Maurice Cottle: Timmons BH, Ley R (eds.). Behavioral
and Psychological Approaches to Breathing Disorders . New York:
Springer; 1994.
56 In the yoga: Ramacharaka Y (ed.). Nostril vs. mouth breathing. In: The
Hindu-Yogi Science of Breath . Waiheke Island, New Zealand: Floating
Press; 1903.
56 Nose breathing imposes: Timmons, Ley (eds.), Behavioral and
Psychological Approaches .
56 Nasal breathing warms: Fried R (ed.). Hyperventilation Syndrome:
Research and Clinical Treatment (Johns Hopkins Series in
Contemporary Medicine and Public Health). Baltimore, MD: Johns
Hopkins University Press; 1987.
57 Nasal breathing removes: Ibid.
57 Nasal breathing during physical: Morton AR, King K, Papalia S,
Goodman C, Turley KR, Wilmore JH. Comparison of maximal oxygen
consumption with oral and nasal breathing. Aust J Sci Med Sport . 1995
Sep;27(3):51–5.
57 As discussed in the next section: Vural C, Güngör A. Nitric oxide and
the upper airways: Recent discoveries. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 1999
Nov 10;119(27): 4070–2. Doctors Maria Belvisi and Peter Barnes and
colleagues from the National Heart and Lung Institute in the United
Kingdom demonstrated that one of the roles of nitric oxide includes
--- END PAGE 289 ---

--- PAGE 290 ---
dilation of the smooth muscles surrounding the airways. Belvisi MG,
Stretton CD, Yacoub M, Barnes PJ. Nitric oxide is the endogenous
neurotransmitter of bronchodilator nerves in humans. Eur J
Pharmacol . 1992 Jan 14;210(2):221–2. Djupesland PG, Chatkin JM,
Qian W, Haight JS. Nitric oxide in the nasal airway: A new dimension
in otorhinolaryngology. Am J Otolaryngol . 2001 Jan–Feb; 22(1):19–
32. Lundberg JO. Nitric oxide and the paranasal sinuses. Anat Rec
(Hoboken) . 2008 Nov;291(11):1479–84. Vural C, Güngör A. Nitric
oxide and the upper airways: Recent discoveries. Kulak Burun Bogaz
Ihtis Derg . 2003 Jan;10(1):39–44.
57 Mouth-breathing children are at greater risk: Okuro RT, Morcillo AM,
Ribeiro MÂ, Sakano E, Conti PB, Ribeiro JD. Mouth breathing and
forward head posture: Effects on respiratory biomechanics and
exercise capacity in children. J Bras Pneumol . 2011 Jul–
Aug;37(4):471–9. Conti PB, Sakano E, Ribeiro MA, Schivinski CI,
Ribeiro JD. Assessment of the body posture of mouth-breathing
children and adolescents. J Pediatr (Rio J) . 2011 Jul–Aug;87(4):357–
63.
57 A dry mouth also increases acidification: Orthodontists online
community. Mouth Breathing. orthofree.com/fr/default.asp?
contentID=2401 (accessed January 7, 2015).
57 Mouth breathing causes: Ibid.
57 Breathing through the mouth: Kim et al . 2010, 533–9. Kreivi et al.
2010, 488–94. Ohki et al . 1996, 228–30. Lee et al . 2007 Jun, 1102–6.
Scharf, Cohen 1998 Oct, 279–87; quiz 287–90.
58 When the first article appeared discussing: Chang, HR (ed.). Nitric
Oxide, the Mighty Molecule: Its Benefits for Your Health and Well-
Being . Jacksonville, FL: Mind Society; 2011.
58 And although nitric oxide: Ibid.
58 In 1992, nitric oxide: Culotta E, Koshland DE Jr. NO news is good
news. Science . 1992 Dec 18;258(5090):1862–5.
58 In 1998, Robert F. Furchgott: Raju, TN. The Nobel chronicles. 1998:
Robert Francis Furchgott (b 1911), Louis J Ignarro (b 1941), and Ferid
Murad (b 1936). Lancet. 2000 Jul 22;356(9226):346. Rabelink, AJ.
Nobel prize in medicine and physiology 1998 for the discovery of the
--- END PAGE 290 ---

--- PAGE 291 ---
role of nitric oxide as a signalling molecule. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 
1998 Dec 26;142(52):2828–30.
58 When I first began: Ignarro L. NO More Heart Disease: How Nitric
Oxide Can Prevent—Even Reverse—Heart Disease and Strokes . Rprt.
New York: St. Martin’s Press; 2006. Cartledge J, Minhas S, Eardley I.
The role of nitric oxide in penile erection. Expert Opin Pharmacother .
2001 Jan;2(1):95–107. Toda N, Ayajiki K, Okamura T. Nitric oxide
and penile erectile function. Pharmacol Ther. 2005 May;106(2):233–
66. Chang, Nitric Oxide, the Mighty Molecule ; 2012.
58 Nitric oxide is produced: Lundberg JO, Weitzberg E. Nasal nitric oxide
in man. Thorax . 1999;(54):947–52. Chang, Nitric Oxide, the Mighty
Molecule; 2012. Lundberg JO. Airborne nitric oxide: Inflammatory
marker and aerocrine messenger in man. Acta Physiol Scand Suppl. 
1996;633:1–27.
58 Scientific findings have shown: Maniscalco M, Sofia M, Pelaia G.
Nitric oxide in upper airways inflammatory diseases. Inflamm Res. 
2007 Feb;56(2):58–69. Lundberg 1996, 1–27. Lundberg, Weitzberg
1999, 947–52.
59 “During inspiration through the nose”: Lundberg, Weitzberg 1999,
947–52.
59 This short-lived gas: Roizen MF, Oz MC. You on a Diet: The Owner’s
Manual for Waist Management. Rev. ed. New York: Free Press; 2009.
59 It helps to prevent high blood pressure: Ignarro, NO More Heart
Disease; 2006.
59 The potency of nitric oxide: Cartledge, Minhas, Eardley 2001, 95–107.
Toda, Ayajiki, Okamura 2005 May, 233–66.
60 In a study of a group of thirty-three: Gunhan K, Zeren F, Uz U, Gumus
B, Unlu H. Impact of nasal polyposis on erectile dysfunction. Am J
Rhinol Allergy . 2011 Mar–Apr;25(2):112–5.
60 And women can benefit: Roizen, Oz, You on a Diet, 2009.
60 In addition to improving your sex: Chang, Nitric Oxide, the Mighty
Molecule ; 2012.
60 Most important for athletes: Fried (ed.), Hyperventilation Syndrome, 
1987.
60 They concluded that humming: Weitzberg E, Lundberg JO. Humming
greatly increases nasal nitric oxide. Am J Respir Crit Care Med . 2003
--- END PAGE 291 ---

--- PAGE 292 ---
Jul 15;166(2):144–5.
61 The results were an amazing: Three months following the instruction,
results as published in the leading European rhinitis journal Clinical
Otolaryngology showed a 70 percent reduction of symptoms such as
nasal stuffiness, poor sense of smell, snoring, trouble breathing
through the nose, trouble sleeping, and having to breathe through the
mouth. Adelola OA, Oosthuiven JC, Fenton JE. Role of Buteyko
breathing technique in asthmatics with nasal symptoms. Clin
Otolaryngol . 2013 Apr;38(2):190–1. 
4. Breathe Light to Breathe Right 
68 “And the third level”: Pei C. Qi Gong for Beginners . DVD. Body
Wisdom; 2009.
68 The traditional Chinese philosophy: Blofeld J. Taoism: The Road to
Immortality . Boulder, CO: Shambhala; 1978.
68 While the kid’s manners: Lavell Crawford kids on fat people .
www.youtube.com/all_comments?v=U6rFzngemUE (accessed
September 2, 2014).
68 Authentic professional yoga: Researcher Miharu Miyamura
investigated the sensitivity to carbon dioxide during respiration of 1
breath per minute for an hour by a professional Hatha yogi. Results
showed that authentic yoga practitioners have reduced sensitivity to
carbon dioxide. Miyamura M, Nishimura K, Ishida K, Katayama K,
Shimaoka M, Hiruta S. Is man able to breathe once a minute for an
hour? The effect of yoga respiration on blood gases. Jpn J Physiol .
2002 Jun;52(3):313–6. 
5. Secrets of Ancient Tribes 
80 Tom theorized that: Tom Piszkin. Personal e-mail to Patrick McKeown,
August 2014.
80 His results showed: Babbitt B. Gun shot at the Oakland Coliseum .
Competitor Magazine. 1988. www.ttinet.com/tf/about2.htm (accessed
July 1, 2012).
80 When researchers studied: Douillard J. Perfect Health for Kids: Ten
Ayurvedic Health Secrets Every Parent Must Know. Berkeley, CA:
North Atlantic Books; 2004.
--- END PAGE 292 ---

--- PAGE 293 ---
81 To date, he: Sebring L. What does it really feel like to be a healthy
human? Whole Human (blog). the-whole-human.com/article/lane-
sebring-md/what-does-it-really-feel-be-healthy-human (accessed June
10, 2013).
81 Just like our ancestors: Ibid.
84 Incorporating this concept: Woorons X, Mollard P, Pichon A, Duvallet
A, Richalet JP, Lamberto C. Effects of a 4-week training with
voluntary hypoventilation carried out at low pulmonary volumes. 
Respir Physiol Neurobiol . 2008 Feb 1;160(2):123–30.
86 The vast majority of sports: LaBella CR, Huxford MR, Grissom J, Kim
KY, Peng J, Christoffel KK. Effect of neuromuscular warm-up on
injuries in female soccer and basketball athletes in urban public high
schools: Cluster randomized controlled trial. Arch Pediatr Adolesc
Med . 2011 Nov;165(11):1033–40. Woods K, Bishop P, Jones E. Warm-
up and stretching in the prevention of muscular injury. Sports Med .
2007;37(12):1089–99. Shellock FG, Prentice WE. Warming-up and
stretching for improved physical performance and prevention of
sports-related injuries. Sports Med . 1985 Jul–Aug;2(4):267–78.
92 Having successfully completed forty: Danny Dreyer, Founder &
President. ChiRunning. www.chirunning.com/about/staff-
profile/danny-dreyer (accessed September 2, 2014).
92 A firm exponent of nasal breathing: Dreyer D, Dreyer K. ChiRunning:
A Revolutionary Approach to Effortless, Injury-Free Running . Rev. ed.
New York: Simon & Schuster; 2009:54. 
6. Gaining the Edge—Naturally 
95 According to the United States: Wilber RL. Application of
altitude/hypoxic training by elite athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2007
Sep;39(9):1610–24.
96 This addition of blood: Ekblom BT. Blood boosting and sport. 
Baillieres Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab . 2000 Mar;14(1):89–
98.
96 By the early 1990s: Sawka MN , Joyner MJ, Miles DS, Robertson RJ,
Spriet LL, Young AJ. American College of Sports Medicine position
stand: The use of blood doping as an ergogenic aid. Med Sci Sports
Exerc. 1996 Jun;28(6):i–viii.
--- END PAGE 293 ---

--- PAGE 294 ---
97 Early reports involved: Walsh D. From Lance to Landis: Inside the
American Doping Controversy at the Tour de France . New York:
Ballantine Books; 2007.
97 During the race: Fotheringham W. Put Me Back on My Bike: In Search
of Tom Simpson. New ed. London: Yellow Jersey Press; 2007. The
death of Tom Simpson . BBC World Service.
www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00hts7t (accessed September 2, 2014).
97 With a determined effort: Remembering a sensation . BBC.
www.bbc.co.uk/insideout/northeast/series6/cycling.shtml (accessed
September 2, 2014).
97 Later, investigators would: Ibid.
97 “To Lance’s way”: Ungoed-Thomas J. Lance Armstrong “given drugs
in lunch bag,” claims teammate Tyler Hamilton. Sunday Times. 
September 2, 2012.
98 Summed up in the statement: USADA. Statement from USADA CEO
Travis T. Tygart Regarding the U.S. Postal Service Pro Cycling Team
Doping Conspiracy. cyclinginvestigation.usada.org (accessed January
14, 2015).
98 When Winfrey asked: Oprah Winfrey. Interview with Lance
Armstrong. www.oprah.com/own/Lance-Armstrong-Confesses-to-
Oprah-Video (accessed September 2, 2014).
98 Looking back, Swart: Pegden E. Swart vindicated by Armstrong report. 
Waikato Times. October 12, 2012. Available at
www.stuff.co.nz/sport/other-sports/7805732/Swart-vindicated-by-
Armstrong-report (accessed January 14, 2015).
99 “I’ve always understood”: Rough Rider . RTE Television.
www.rte.ie/tv/programmes/roughrider.html (accessed September 2,
2014).
100 Levels of hemoglobin: Hemoglobin. MedlinePlus.
www.nlm.nih.gov/medlin eplus/ency/article/003645.htm (accessed
August 15, 2012).
100 Hematocrit is usually: Hematocrit. MedlinePlus.
www.nlm.nih.gov/medline plus/ency/article/003646.htm (accessed
April 20, 2013).
101 Athletes still use: Levine BD, Stray-Gundersen J. A practical approach
to altitude training: Where to live and train for optimal performance
--- END PAGE 294 ---

--- PAGE 295 ---
enhancement. Int J Sports Med . 1992 Oct;13 Suppl 1:209–12.
101 To limit the detraining: Levine BD. Intermittent hypoxic training: Fact
and fancy. High Alt Med Biol . 2002 Summer;3(2):177–193. Levine
BD. Should “artificial” high altitude environments be considered
doping? Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2006 Oct;16(5):297–301. Levine BD,
Stray-Gundersen J. “Living high-training low”: Effect of moderate-
altitude acclimatization with low-altitude training on performance. J
Appl Physiol . 1997 Jul;83(1):102–12.
102 Levine and Stray-Gundersen: Levine, Stray-Gundersen 1997, 102–12.
102 These improvements were: Ibid.
102 Furthermore, the increase: Stray-Gundersen J, Chapman RF, Levine
BD. “Living high–training low” altitude training improves sea level
performance in male and female elite runners. J Appl Physiol . 2001
Sep;91(3):1113–20.
102 During the 2006 Torino: Wallechinsky D. The Complete Book of the
Winter Olympics . Turin 2006 ed. Wilmington, DE: Sport Media
Publishing; 2005.
103 The authors of the study concluded that although: Moderate-intensity
aerobic training that improves the maximal aerobic power does not
change anaerobic capacity, and adequate high-intensity intermittent
training may improve both anaerobic and aerobic energy supplying
systems significantly. Tabata I, Nishimura K, Kouzaki M, et al. Effects
of moderate-intensity endurance and high-intensity intermittent
training on anaerobic capacity and VO2 max. Med Sci Sports Exerc .
1996 Oct;28(10):1327–30.
103 Posttrial results: Bailey SJ, Wilkerson DP, Dimenna FJ, Jones AM.
Influence of repeated sprint training on pulmonary O2 uptake and
muscle deoxygenation kinetics in humans. J Appl Physiol . 2009
Jun;106(6):1875–87.
103 This means that the athletes: Jones A. Understand the body’s use of
oxygen during exercise: Oxygen kinetics—start smart for a mean
finish! Sports Performance Bulletin. 
www.pponline.co.uk/encyc/understand-the-bodys-use-of-oxygen-
during-exercise-36326 (accessed April 20, 2013). Hagberg JM,
Hickson RC, Ehsani AA, Holloszy JO. Faster adjustment to and
--- END PAGE 295 ---

--- PAGE 296 ---
recovery from submaximal exercise in the trained state. J Appl Physiol
Respir Environ Exerc Physiol . 1980 Feb;48(2):218–24.
105 For hundreds of thousands of years: Rahn H, Yokoyama T. Physiology
of Breath-Hold Diving and the Ama of Japan . Washington, D.C.:
National Academy of Sciences–National Research Council; 1965:369.
105 and some evolutionary theorists: Hardy A. Was man more aquatic in
the past? New Scientist . March 17, 1960. Hardy A. Was there a Homo
aquaticus ? Zenith. 1977;15(1): 4–6.
106 Generally, most humans: World records. Association Internationale
pour le Développement de l’Apnée.
www.aidainternational.org/competitive/worlds-records (accessed July
6, 2012).
106 A number of studies have sought: Isbister JP. Physiology and
pathophysiology of blood volume regulation. Transfus Sci . 1997
Sep;18(3):409–23. Koga T. Correlation between sectional area of the
spleen by ultrasonic tomography and actual volume of the removed
spleen. J Clin Ultrasound . 1979 Apr;7(2):119–20. Erika Schagatay is
the director of research at Mid Sweden University. Her interest in
physiology began after she met native breath-hold divers from several
tribes, including Japanese ama and Indonesian Suku Laut and Bajau,
who were able to hold their breath for far longer than medical
literature stated was possible. Schagatay has completed a number of
studies on the effects of holding the breath on both trained and
untrained breath-hold divers. People. Mid Sweden University.
www.miun.se/en/Research/Our-Research/Research-groups/epg/About-
EPG/People (accessed August 29, 2012).
One of Schagatay’s studies involved twenty healthy volunteers,
including ten who had their spleens removed, to determine the
adaptations caused by short-term breath holding. The volunteers
performed 5 breath holds of maximum duration (as long as possible for
each individual) with a 2-minute rest in between each. The results
found that the volunteers with spleens showed a 6.4 percent increase in
hematocrit (Hct) and a 3.3 percent increase in hemoglobin
concentration (Hb) following the breath holds. This means that after
just 5 breath holds, the oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood was
significantly improved. However, for the individuals who had their
--- END PAGE 296 ---

--- PAGE 297 ---
spleens removed, there were no recorded changes to the blood
resulting from breath holding. Schagatay E, Andersson JP, Hallén M,
Pålsson B. Selected contribution: Role of spleen emptying in
prolonging apneas in humans. Journal of Applied Physiology . 2001
Apr;90(4):1623–9.
During a separate study by Schagatay, seven male volunteers
performed 2 sets of 5 breath holds to near maximal duration, one in air
and the other with their faces immersed in water. Each breath hold was
separated by 2 minutes of rest and each set separated by 20 minutes.
Both Hct and Hb concentration increased by approximately 4 percent
across both series of breath holds—in air and in water. Schagatay E,
Andersson JP, Nielsen B. Hematological response and diving response
during apnea and apnea with face immersion. Eur J Appl Physiol . 2007
Sep;101(1):125–32.
106 The spleen is an organ: Isbister 1997, 409–23.
106 This means that after as few: Schagatay, Andersson, Nielsen 2007 Sep,
125–32.
106 breath-hold divers peaked: A study by Bakovic ́ et al. from University
of Split School of Medicine, Croatia, was conducted to investigate
spleen responses resulting from 5 maximal breath holds. Ten trained
breath-hold divers, ten untrained volunteers, and seven volunteers who
had their spleen removed were recruited. The subjects performed 5
maximum breath holds with their face immersed in cold water, and
each breath hold was separated by a 2-minute rest. The duration of the
breath holds peaked at the third attempt, with breath-hold divers
reaching 143 seconds, untrained divers reaching 127 seconds, and
splenectomized persons achieving 74 seconds. Spleen size decreased
by a total of 20 percent in both breath-hold divers and the untrained
volunteers. Researchers concluded that the results show rapid,
probably active contraction of the spleen in response to breath hold in
humans. Rapid spleen contraction and its slow recovery may
contribute to prolongation of successive, briefly repeated breath-hold
attempts. Bakovic ́ D, Valic Z, Eterovic ́ D, et al. Spleen volume and
blood flow response to repeated breath-hold apneas. J Appl Physiol .
2003 Oct;95(4):1460–6.
106 Not only that but: Ibid.
--- END PAGE 297 ---

--- PAGE 298 ---
107 While these studies generally: In a paper by Dr. Espersen and
colleagues from Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark, splenic contraction was found to take place even with very
short breath holds of 30 seconds. However, the strongest contraction of
the spleen was as it released blood cells into circulation, occurring
when a subject held their breath for as long as possible. Espersen K,
Frandsen H, Lorentzen T, Kanstrup IL, Christensen NJ. The human
spleen as an erythrocyte reservoir in diving-related interventions. J
Appl Physiol . 2002 May;92(5):2071–9.
107 However, the strongest contractions: Ibid.
107 Another useful piece of: This study in particular provides pertinent
information about the consequence of breath holding: Since there was
no visible increase in the results of breath holding with the subjects’
faces immersed in water, the authors concluded that the breath hold, or
its consequences, is the major stimulus evoking splenic contraction.
Schagatay, Andersson, Nielsen 2007 Sep, 125–32.
107 Performing just 3 to 5 breaths: Ibid.
108 While this reduces the: In his doctoral thesis entitled “Haematological
changes arising from spleen contraction during breath hold and altitude
in humans,” Matt Richardson investigated the role played by higher
levels of carbon dioxide.
Eight non-divers performed 3 sets of breath holds on three separate
days under different starting conditions, varying the levels of carbon
dioxide available to the subjects before each test. The first test was
preceded by the breathing of 5 percent CO2 in oxygen (hypercapnic),
the second with pre-breathing of 100 percent oxygen (normocapnic),
and the third with hyperventilation of 100 percent oxygen
(hypocapnic).
The duration of each breath hold was kept constant in all 3 sets, and
baseline values of Hb and Hct were the same for all conditions. After
the 3 breath holds, the increase in Hb in the hypercapnic (higher
carbon dioxide) trial was 9.1 percent greater than in the normal carbon
dioxide trial (normocapnic) and 71.1 percent greater than in the lower
carbon dioxide trial (hypocapnic). Richardson concluded that an
increased capnic stimulus during breath hold may elicit a stronger
--- END PAGE 298 ---

--- PAGE 299 ---
spleen response and subsequent Hb increase than breath hold preceded
by hyperventilation. Richardson, MX. Hematological changes arising
from spleen contraction during apnea and altitude in humans. Doctoral
dissertation. Mid Sweden University; 2008.
108 Higher levels of carbon dioxide: Ibid.
108 By exhaling and holding the breath: Dillon WC, Hampl V, Shultz PJ,
Rubins JB, Archer SL. Origins of breath nitric oxide in humans. Chest .
1996 Oct;110(4):930–8.
109 One of the functions of EPO: Joyner MJ. VO2MAX, blood doping, and
erythropoietin. Br J Sports Med. 2003 Jun;37(3):190–191. Lemaître F,
Joulia F, Chollet D. Apnea: A new training method in sport? Med
Hypotheses . 2010 Mar;74(3):413–5.
109 Breath holding is an effective: Lemaître, Joulia, Chollet 2010 Mar,
413–5.
109 The concentration of EPO: De Bruijn and colleagues from the
department of natural sciences, Mid Sweden University, investigated
whether subjecting the body to lower oxygen levels by holding the
breath could increase EPO concentration. The study involved ten
healthy volunteers performing 3 sets of 5 maximum duration breath
holds, with each set separated by 10 minutes of rest. Results showed
that EPO concentration increased by 24 percent, peaking three hours
after the final breath hold and returning to baseline two hours later. De
Bruijn R, Richardson M, Schagatay E. Increased erythropoietin
concentration after repeated apneas in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol. 
2008 Mar;102(5):609–13.
109 A clear example: Cahan C, Decker MJ, Arnold JL, Goldwasser E,
Strohl KP. Erythropoietin levels with treatment of obstructive sleep
apnea. J Appl Physiol . 1995 Oct;79(4):1278–85. A study by Winnicki
and colleagues from the Medical University of Gdansk, Poland, tested
the hypothesis that the repetitive lowering of oxygen levels from
breath holds during sleep apnea increase EPO. The study involved
eighteen severe and ten very mild patients. Results showed a 20
percent increase to EPO in patients with severe obstructive sleep
apnea, which decreased following elimination of the breath holds by
treatment. Winnicki M, Shamsuzzaman A, Lanfranchi P, et al.
--- END PAGE 299 ---

--- PAGE 300 ---
Erythropoietin and obstructive sleep apnea. Am J Hypertens . 2004
Sep;17(9):783–6.
111 As U.S. Army general: Patton GS Jr. Third Army, Standard Operating
Procedures, 1944 . historicaltextarchive.com/sections.php?
action=read&artid=384 (accessed September 2, 2014).
112 Studies with athletes have demonstrated: Lemaître F, Polin D, Joulia F,
et al. Physiological responses to repeated apneas in underwater hockey
players and controls. Undersea Hyperb Med. 2007 Nov–
Dec;34(6):407–14. Woorons X, Bourdillon N, Vandewalle H, et al.
Exercise with hypoventilation induces lower muscle oxygenation and
higher blood lactate concentration: Role of hypoxia and hypercapnia. 
Eur J Appl Physiol . 2010 Sep;110(2):367–77.
114 Dr. Joseph Mercola: Mercola J. Baking soda uses: To remove splinters
—and to address many other health needs . Mercola.com. August 27,
2012. articles.mer cola.com/sites/articles/archive/2012/08/27/baking-
soda-natural-remedy.aspx (accessed June 10, 2013).
114 The therapeutic potential: Marty Pagel, PhD, awarded $2 million NIH
grant to study impact of baking soda on breast cancer . University of
Arizona Cancer Center. March 21, 2012. azcc.arizona.edu/node/4187
(accessed August 10, 2012).
114 Over the years many: J. Edge and colleagues at the University of
Australia in Perth conducted a study of the effects of bicarbonate of
soda on the ability of muscles to neutralize the acid that accumulates
during high-intensity training. In Edge’s study, sixteen recreationally
active women were recruited and randomly placed in two groups of
eight. One group ingested bicarbonate of soda and the other ingested a
placebo. The results showed that the bicarbonate group experienced
greater improvements in lactate threshold and time to fatigue. Their
working muscles were better able to neutralize the acid resulting from
training, showing improvements to endurance performance. Edge J,
Bishop D, Goodman C. Effects of chronic NaHCO3 ingestion during
interval training on changes to muscle buffer capacity, metabolism,
and short-term endurance performance. J Appl Physiol . 2006
Sep;101(3):918–25.
In a study at the University of Bedfordshire in the UK, researchers
investigated the effects of sodium bicarbonate on maximum breath-
--- END PAGE 300 ---

--- PAGE 301 ---
hold time. Eight recreational breath-hold divers were recruited to
partake in two bouts of 3 monitored breath holds while their faces
were immersed in water. Following the study, the authors suggested
that ingestion of bicarbonate of soda before breath holds prolongs
maximum breath-hold time by approximately 8.6 percent. Sheard PW,
Haughey H. Sodium bicarbonate and breath-hold times. Effects of
sodium bicarbonate on voluntary face immersion breath-hold times. 
Undersea Hyperb Med . 2007 Mar–Apr;34(2):91–7.
Researchers from the Academy of Physical Education in Katowice,
Poland conducted a study to evaluate the effects of oral administration
of sodium bicarbonate on swim performance in competitive youth
swimmers. The swimmers completed two time trials: one after
ingestion of bicarbonate and one after ingestion of a placebo. Total
time for the 4 x 50m test trial improved from 1.54.28 to 1.52.85 s. In
addition, bicarbonate had a significant effect on resting blood pH.
Researchers concluded that the ingestion of sodium bicarbonate in
youth athletes is an effective buffer during high-intensity interval
swimming and suggested that such a procedure may be used in youth
athletes to increase training intensity and swimming performance in
competition at distances from 50 to 200m. Zajac A, Cholewa J,
Poprzecki S, Waskiewicz Z, Langfort J. Effects of sodium bicarbonate
ingestion on swim performance in youth athletes. J Sports Sci Med .
2009 Mar 1;8(1):45–50.
114 During high-intensity: Edge, Bishop, Goodman 2006 Sep, 918–25.
114 By ingesting bicarbonate: Ibid.
114 The ingestion of bicarbonate: Sheard, Haughey. 2007 Mar–Apr, 91–7.
114 Researchers who have investigated: Zajac, Cholewa, Poprzecki,
Waskiewicz, Langfort 2009 Mar 1, 45–50.
114 These benefits have even: Siegler and Hirscher from the department of
sport, health, and exercise science, University of Hull, UK, conducted
a study to observe “the ergogenic potential of sodium bicarbonate
(NaHCO3) ingestion on boxing performance.” Ten amateur boxers
were prematched for weight and boxing ability, and ingested either
bicarbonate or a placebo. Sparring bouts consisted of four 3-minute
rounds, each separated by a 1-minute rest. The paper concluded that a
standard dose of bicarbonate “improves punch efficacy during 4
--- END PAGE 301 ---

--- PAGE 302 ---
rounds of sparring performance.” Siegler JC, Hirscher K. Sodium
bicarbonate ingestion and boxing performance. J Strength Cond Res .
2010 Jan;24(1):103–8.
116 Marathon runners are: Almond CS, Shin AY, Fortescue EB, et al.
Hyponatremia among runners in the Boston Marathon. N Eng J Med .
2005 Apr 14;352(15):1550–6.
116 In a 2002 study: Ibid.
116 The state medical: Smith S. Marathon runner’s death linked to
excessive fluid intake. Boston Globe . August 13, 2002.
www.remembercynthia.com/Hypona tremia_BostonGlobe.htm
(accessed September 2, 2014).
116 Commenting on the tragedy: Doctors: Marathoner died from too much
water, hyponatremia a danger in long-distance sports. WCVB 5.
August 13, 2002. www.wcvb.com/Doctors-Marathoner-Died-From-
Too-Much-Water/11334548#!bOn 5pH (accessed September 2, 2014).
117 In his book Facing Up : Grylls B. Facing Up: A Remarkable Journey to
the Summit of Everest . London: Pan; 2001:29.
118 Almost half of those: Maggiorini M. Mountaineering and altitude
sickness. Ther Umsch . 2001 Jun;58(6):387–93.
119 At least one study shows: In a dissertation by Dr. Zubieta-Calleja,
entitled “Human adaptation to high altitude and to sea level,” the
author noted that “patients with high hematocrit values had nearly
twice as long breath holding times as normal and were able to sustain
desaturation (of oxygen) at very low levels.” Zubieta-Calleja G. 
Human Adaptation to High Altitude and to Sea Level: Acid-Base
Equilibrium, Ventilation and Circulation in Chronic Hypoxia. 
Copenhagen: VDM; 2010.
119 The air in mountainous: Gallagher SA, Hackett PH. High-altitude
illness. Emerg Med Clin North Am . 2004 May;22(2):329–55.
120 Other symptoms arising: Hackett PH, Roach RC. High-altitude illness. 
N Engl J Med. 2001 Jul 12;345(2):107–14.
120 This is a common occurrence: Moloney E, O’Sullivan S, Hogan T,
Poulter LW, Burke CM. Airway dehydration: A therapeutic target in
asthma? Chest . 2002 Jun;121(6):1806–11. 
7. Bring the Mountain to You
--- END PAGE 302 ---

--- PAGE 303 ---
121 World-renowned Brazilian: Lee F. Breathe right and win.
Viewzone.com. www .viewzone.com/breathing.html (accessed August
15, 2012).
121 De Oliveira’s goal was to: Ibid.
121 De Oliveira’s techniques: Tom Piszkin. Interview with Luiz de
Oliveira. Personal e-mail to Patrick McKeown, November 2012.
122 In total, the athletes: Ibid.
122 “But if you use my drill”: Lee, Breathe right and win.
122 Maintaining form during: Ibid.
122 According to de Oliveira: Tom Piszkin. Interview with Luiz de
Oliveira. Personal e-mail to Patrick McKeown, November 2012.
122 By the end of 1984: Joaquim Cruz. Wikipedia.
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joaquim_Cruz (accessed April 20, 2013).
122 The legendary Czech: Litsky F. Emil Zatopek, 78, ungainly running
star, dies . New York Times. November 23, 2000.
www.nytimes.com/2000/11/23/sports/emil-zatopek-78-ungainly-
running-star-dies.html (accessed September 2, 2014).
122 On the first day: Vaughan D. “Running”: A great Czech athlete inspires
a French novelist. Radio Praha. August 24, 2013.
www.radio.cz/en/section/books/running-a-great-czech-athlete-inspires-
a-french-novelist (accessed September 2, 2014).
122 On the second day: Ibid.
123 Rupp’s headphones: Fairbourn J. Farah “confused” when making 2
hour claim says Salazar. Eightlane (blog). October 6, 2013.
eightlane.org/farah-confused-making-2-hour-claim-salazar/ (accessed
September 2, 2014).
131 However, unlike some: Sheila Taormina. Personal e-mail to Patrick
McKeown, December 9, 2013.
131 After breath-hold training: French researcher Lemaître found that
breath holds could also improve swimming coordination. After breath-
hold training, swimmers showed increases in VO2 peak as well as an
increase in the distance traveled with each swimming stroke. The
researchers concluded that their studies indicated that “breath-hold
training improves effectiveness at both peak exercise and submaximal
exercise and can also improve swimming technique by promoting
--- END PAGE 303 ---

--- PAGE 304 ---
greater propulsive continuity.” Lemaître F, Seifert L, Polin D, Juge J,
Tourny-Chollet C, Chollet D. Apnea training effects on swimming
coordination. J Strength Cond Res. 2009 Sep;23(6):1909–14.
132 Researchers investigating: In addition to studying the effects of breath-
hold training on swimming coordination, Lemaître and colleagues also
investigated the effects of short repeated breath holds on breathing
pattern in trained underwater hockey players (UHP) and untrained
subjects (controls). Twenty male subjects were recruited, with ten
members of a national underwater hockey team allocated to the UHP
group, and ten subjects with little training and no breath hold
experience allocated to the control group.
The subjects performed 5 breath holds while treading water with
their faces immersed. The breath holds were spaced 5 minutes apart
and performed after a deep but not maximal inhalation. The
underwater hockey players were noted to have reduced breathlessness
and higher concentration of CO2 in exhaled breath after the test
(ETCO2). Lemaître et al. 2007 Nov–Dec, 407–14.
132 In addition, lactate: Ibid.
132 The effect of this method: Researchers from the Human Performance
Laboratory, University of Calgary, Canada, conducted a study to
investigate the relationship between a decrease of oxygen
concentration during exercise and erythropoietin (EPO) production.
Five athletes cycled for 3 minutes at an intensity greater than maximal
(supramaximal) at two different elevations: 1,000m and 2,100m.
Oxygen saturation of hemoglobin was lower than 91 percent for
approximately 24 seconds during exercise at 1,000 meters and for 136
seconds during exercise at 2,100 meters, with EPO levels increasing
by 24 percent and 36 percent respectively following the exercise.
Roberts D, Smith DJ, Donnelly S, Simard S. Plasma-volume
contraction and exercise-induced hypoxaemia modulate erythropoietin
production in healthy humans. Clin Sci . 2000 Jan;98(1):39–45.
Korean researchers Choi et al. carried out a study on 263 subjects to
determine the relationship between hematocrit levels and obstructive
sleep apnea (involuntary holding of the breath during sleep). Patients
with severe sleep apnea had significantly higher levels of hematocrit
--- END PAGE 304 ---

--- PAGE 305 ---
than mild and moderate OSA. Study findings showed that hematocrit
levels were significantly correlated with percent of time spent at
oxygen saturation of below 90 percent, as well as average oxygen
saturation. Choi JB, Loredo JS, Norman D, et al. Does obstructive
sleep apnea increase hematocrit? Sleep Breath . 2006 Sep;10(3):155–
60.
132 Lowering oxygen saturation: Roberts, Smith, Donnelly, Simard 2000,
39–45.
135 Maintaining an oxygen: Ibid.
136 Performing just 5 maximum: Lemaître et al. 2007 Nov–Dec, 407–14.
Schagatay E, Haughey H, Reimers J. Speed of spleen volume changes
evoked by serial apneas . Eur J Appl Physiol. 2005 Jan;93(4):447–52.
137 Breath-hold divers: Resting Hb mass in trained breath-hold divers was
5 percent higher than in untrained divers. In addition, breath-hold
divers showed a larger relative increase to Hb after three apneas. The
paper noted that “the long-term effect of apnea training on Hb mass
might be implicated in elite divers’ performance.” Lemaître, Joulia,
Chollet 2010, 413–5.
137 In addition, experienced: Matt Richardson investigated the
hematological responses to maximal apneas performed by three
groups: elite apneic divers, elite cross-country skiers, and untrained
subjects. Pretest hemoglobin tended to be higher in the diver group
than both skiers and untrained individuals. Each subject was required
to perform 3 maximal breath holds separated by 2 minutes of rest and
normal breathing. Following the breath holds, all groups responded
with increased hemoglobin, with divers showing the largest increase.
The duration of the third breath-hold time was 187 seconds in divers,
111 seconds in skiers, and 121 seconds in untrained individuals. The
authors observed that the higher Hb concentration in divers “suggests
that regular apnea practice could impart a specific training effect,
effecting haematological responses to apnea in a manner that differs
from that of exercise training.” Richardson M, de Bruijn R, Holmberg
HC, Björklund G, Haughey H, Schagatay E. Increase of hemoglobin
concentration after maximal apneas in divers, skiers, and untrained
humans. Can J Appl Physiol . 2005 Jun;30(3):276-81.
--- END PAGE 305 ---

--- PAGE 306 ---
Splenic size was measured before and after repetitive breath-hold
dives to approximately 6 meters in ten Korean ama (diving women)
and in three Japanese males who were not experienced in breath
holding. Following the breath holds, splenic size and hematocrit were
unchanged in the Japanese male divers. In the ama, splenic volume
decreased 19.5 percent, hemoglobin increased by 9.5 percent, and
hematocrit increased 9.5 percent. The study showed that long-term
repeated apneas induce a stronger spleen contraction and resultant
hematological response. Hurford WE, Hong SK, Park YS, et al.
Splenic contraction during breath-hold diving in the Korean ama . J
Appl Physiol . 1990 Sep;69(3):932–6.
138 For example, a study: Andersson and colleagues from Lund University
in Sweden conducted a study involving fourteen healthy volunteers
who performed a series of 5 maximal duration breath holds while their
faces were immersed in water. The authors observed that breath-hold
time increased by 43 percent across the series of breath holds.
Andersson JP, Schagatay E. Repeated apneas do not affect the
hypercapnic ventilatory response in the short term . Eur J Appl Physiol. 
2009 Mar;105(4):569–74.
138 Another study found: French researchers Joulia et al. observed that
trained divers who had 7–10 years of experience in breath-hold diving
were able to hold their breath for up to 440 seconds at rest, compared
with inexperienced individuals who held their breath for 145 seconds
at most. Joulia F, Steinberg JG, Wolff F, Gavarry O, Jammes Y.
Reduced oxidative stress and blood lactic acidosis in trained breath-
hold human divers. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2002 Oct;133(1–2):121–
30.
138 Similarly, the duration: Joulia F, Steinberg JG, Faucher M, et al.
Breath-hold training of humans reduces oxidative stress and blood
acidosis after static and dynamic apnea. Respir Physiol Neurobiol .
2003 Aug 14;137(1):19–27. 
8. Finding the Zone 
141 “Your whole being is involved”: Geirland J. Go with the flow. Wired .
September 1996.
--- END PAGE 306 ---

--- PAGE 307 ---
143 Recounting the race: Bentley R, Langford R. Inner Speed Secrets:
Mental Strategies to Maximize Your Racing Performance. Osceola,
WI: MBI Pub. Co.; 2000.
143 We no longer give: Kevin Kelly. Personal e-mail to Patrick McKeown,
August 15, 2013.
144 Selker suggests: Turning into digital goldfish . BBC. February 22, 2002.
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/1834682.stm (accessed September 2, 2014).
144 Reading a piece: Bilton N. Steve Jobs was a low-tech parent. New York
Times. September 10, 2014.
www.nytimes.com/2014/09/11/fashion/steve-jobs-apple-was-a-low-
tech-parent.html?_r=0 (accessed January 24, 2015).
144 “They haven’t used it”: Ibid.
145 “The focus on oneself”: Giggsy doing it for himself. Yahoo Eurosport
UK. November 28, 2013. Available at
sg.newshub.org/giggsy_doing_it_for_himself_ 53525.html (accessed
September 2, 2014).
145 Earl Woods believed: Carter B. Tiger emerges from Woods as golfing
icon. ESPN Classic.
espn.go.com/classic/biography/s/woods_tiger.html (accessed
September 2, 2014).
145 In the film: The Legend of Bagger Vance movie review. Movieguide.
www.movieguide.org/reviews/the-legend-of-bagger-vance.html
(accessed September 2, 2014).
146 In an interview: Isaacson W. Steve Jobs . CD. Simon & Schuster Audio;
2011.
146 Eight Marine infantry: Johnson DC, Thom N, Stanley E, et al.
Modifying resilience mechanisms in at-risk individuals: A controlled
study of mindfulness training in marines preparing for deployment. Am
J Psychiatry . 2014 Aug;171(8):844–53.
146 In other studies with: Hruby P. Marines expanding use of meditation
training. Washington Times. December 5, 2012.
www.washingtontimes.com/news/2012/dec/5/marines-expanding-use-
of-meditation-training (accessed December 3, 2014).
147 Until recently: Congleton C, Hölzel BK, Lazar SW. Mindfulness can
literally change your brain. Harvard Business Review. January 8, 2015.
--- END PAGE 307 ---

--- PAGE 308 ---
hbr.org/2015/01/mindfulness-can-literally-change-your-brain (accessed
January 24, 2015).
147 A team of scientists: Ibid.
162 However, in a: ROG—The Ronan O’Gara Documentry [ sic ] . RTE
Television. www.rte.ie/tv/programmes/rog.html (accessed September
2, 2014).
167 A study investigating: The results showed that hyperventilation
significantly affects mental performance. Bruno Balke and colleagues
from the U.S. Air Force School of Aviation at Randolph Field, Texas,
researched the effect of hyperventilation among jet pilots and whether
it was a possible cause of unexplainable aircraft accidents. The
objective of the study was to investigate the affect of hyperventilation
on muscular activity that required mental processing. Six healthy male
individuals were tested on a U.S. Air Force coordination apparatus
before, during, and after hyperventilation of 30 minutes duration. Lung
carbon dioxide decreased to 12–15 mmHg during, hyperventilation
(normal PaCO2 is 40 mmHg). The researchers found that mental
performance deteriorated by 15 percent when the concentration of
arterial carbon dioxide reduced to 20 to 25 mmHg, and by 30 percent
when carbon dioxide concentration in arterial blood lowered to 14
mmHg. Balke B, Lillehei JP. Effect of hyperventilation on
performance. J Appl Physiol . 1956 Nov 1;9(3):371–4.
167 Another study found: Researchers from the department of psychology,
University of Leuven, Belgium, investigated the effect of reduced
carbon dioxide on performance that required attention. The paper
reported that hyperventilation that reduces arterial concentration of
carbon dioxide is associated with physiological changes in the brain
and with subjective symptoms of dizziness and concentration
problems. The researchers found that more errors were made and
progressively slower reaction times were observed during recovery
from lower pressure of carbon dioxide. Van Diest I, Stegen K, Van de
Woestijne KP, Schippers N, Van den Bergh O. Hyperventilation and
attention: Effects of hypocapnia on performance in a stroop task. Biol
Psychol. 2000 Jul;53(2–3):233–52.
--- END PAGE 308 ---

--- PAGE 309 ---
167 A study from the department: Ley and colleagues from the department
of psychology and statistics at the University at Albany in New York
found that students with high anxiety had lower levels of end-tidal
carbon dioxide and faster respiration frequency than low-anxiety
students. The study found that the “high-test-anxiety group reported a
greater frequency of symptoms of hyperventilation and a larger drop in
level of end-tidal CO2 during testing than low-test-anxiety group.”
Ley R, Yelich G. Fractional end-tidal CO2 as an index of the effects of
stress on math performance and verbal memory of test-anxious
adolescents. Biol Psychol . 2006;Mar;71(3):350–1.
168 Sleep apnea: Kim et al. 2010, 533–9. Kreivi et al. 2010, 488–94. Ohki
et al . 1996, 228–30. Lee et al . 2007 Jun, 1102–6. Scharf, Cohen 1998
Oct, 279–87; quiz 287–90. Wasilewska, Kaczmarski 2010, 201–12.
Rappai, Collop, Kemp, deShazo 2003, 2309–23. Izu SC, Itamoto CH,
Pradella-Hallinan M, et al. Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS)
in mouth breathing children. Braz J Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Sep–
Oct;76(5):552–6. 
9. Rapid Weight Loss Without Dieting 
179 Sherpas and others: Ghose T. Altitude causes weight loss without
exercise. Wired. February 4, 2010.
www.wired.com/wiredscience/2010/02/high-altitude-weight-loss
(accessed August 1, 2013).
179 Based on this observation: Wasse LK, Sunderland C, King JA,
Batterham RL, Stensel DJ. Influence of rest and exercise at a simulated
altitude of 4,000 m on appetite, energy intake, and plasma
concentrations of acylated ghrelin and peptide YY. J Appl Physiol .
2012 Feb;112(4):552–9. Kayser B, Verges S. Hypoxia, energy balance
and obesity: From pathophysiological mechanisms to new treatment
strategies. Obes Rev . 2013 Jul;14(7):579–92. Lippl FJ, Neubauer S,
Schipfer S, et al. Hypobaric hypoxia causes body weight reduction in
obese subjects. Obesity (Silver Spring) . 2010 Apr;18(4):675–81.
Westerterp-Plantenga MS, Westerterp KR, Rubbens M, Verwegen CR,
Richelet JP, Gardette B. Appetite at “high altitude” [Operation Everest
III (Comex-’97)]: A simulated ascent of Mount Everest. J Appl
--- END PAGE 309 ---

--- PAGE 310 ---
Physiol . 1999 Jul;87(1):391–9. Pugh, LGCE. Physiological and
medical aspects of the Himalayan Scientific and Mountaineering
Expedition, 1960–61 . Br Med. J . 1962 Sep 8;2(5305):621–7. Rose MS,
Houston CS, Fulco CS, Coates G, Sutton JR, Cymerman A. Operation
Everest II: Nutrition and body composition. J. Appl. Physiol. 1988
Dec;65(6):2545–51.
179 In tests with mice: Ling Q, Sailan W, Ran J, et al. The effect of
intermittent hypoxia on bodyweight, serum glucose and cholesterol in
obesity mice. Pak J Biol Sci . 2008 Mar 15;11(6):869–75.
179 Researchers concluded: Qin L, Xiang Y, Song Z, Jing R, Hu C, Howard
ST. Erythropoietin as a possible mechanism for the effects of
intermittent hypoxia on bodyweight, serum glucose and leptin in mice. 
Regul Pept . 2010 Dec 10;165(2–3):168–73.
179 Of course, living: Kayser, Verges 2013 Jul, 579–92.
180 Incorporating both aerobic: Mercola J. Do shorter, higher intensity
workouts for better results with the Peak 8 Fitness Interval Training
Chart. Mercola.com. fitness.mercola.com/sites/fitness/Peak-8-fitness-
interval-training-chart.aspx (accessed August 1, 2013). Rev up your
workout with interval training . Mayo Clinic.
www.mayoclinic.com/health/interval-training/SM00110 (accessed
August 1, 2013).
180 is well documented: Ng DM, Jeffery RW. Relationships between
perceived stress and health behaviors in a sample of working adults. 
Health Psychol. 2003 Nov;22(6):638–42. Epel E, Lapidus R, McEwen
B, Brownell K. Stress may add bite to appetite in women: A laboratory
study of stress-induced cortisol and eating behavior .
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2001 Jan;26(1):37–49. Oliver G, Wardle J,
Gibson EL. Stress and food choice: A laboratory study. Psychosom
Med . 2000 Nov–Dec;62(6):853–65. Grunberg NE, Straub RO. The
role of gender and taste class in the effects of stress on eating. Health
Psychol . 1992;11(2):97–100.
180 relationship issues: Wheeler C. Eliminate emotional overeating and
shed unwanted pounds. Mercola.com. May 20,
2006.articles.mercola.com/sites/articles/archive/2006/05/20/eliminate-
emotional-overeating-and-shed-unwanted-pounds.aspx (accessed
August 1, 2013).
--- END PAGE 310 ---

--- PAGE 311 ---
180 Results showed that high: Ng, Jeffery 2003; 638–42.
181 These practices of meditation: Tapper K, Shaw C, Ilsley J, Hill AJ,
Bond FW, Moore L. Exploratory randomised controlled trial of a
mindfulness-based weight loss intervention for women. Appetite. 2009
Apr;52(2):396–404. Hepworth NS. A mindful eating group as an
adjunct to individual treatment for eating disorders: A pilot study. Eat
Disord . 2011 Jan–Feb;19(1):6–16. Kristeller JL, Hallett CB. An
exploratory study of a meditation-based intervention for binge eating
disorder. J Health Psychol . 1999 May;4(3):357–63. Dalen J, Smith
BW, Shelley BM, Sloan AL, Leahigh L, Begay D. Pilot study: Mindful
Eating and Living (MEAL): Weight, eating behavior, and
psychological outcomes associated with a mindfulness-based
intervention for people with obesity. Complement Ther Med . 2010
Dec;18(6):260–4.
181 Controlling stress: Wing RR, Phelan S. Long-term weight loss
maintenance. Am J Clin Nutr . 2005 Jul;82(1 Suppl):222–5. 
10. Reduce Physical Injury and Fatigue 
186 To investigate the relationship: Oxford University Press. Famous
performers and sportsmen tend to have shorter lives. ScienceDaily .
April 17, 2013. www.science
daily.com/releases/2013/04/130417223631.htm (accessed September
2, 2014).
187 premature aging: Gruber J, Schaffer S, Halliwell B. The mitochondrial
free radical theory of ageing—where do we stand? Front Biosci . 2008
May 1;13:6554–79.
187 damage to the heart: Patil HR, O’Keefe JH, Lavie CJ, Magalski A,
Vogel RA, McCullough PA. Cardiovascular damage resulting from
chronic excessive endurance exercise. Mo Med . 2012 Jul–
Aug;109(4):312–21.
187 dementia: Bennett S, Grant MM, Aldred S. Oxidative stress in vascular
dementia and Alzheimer’s disease: A common pathology. J Alzheimers
Dis . 2009;17(2):245–57.
187 Free radicals are: Devasagayam TP, Tilak JC, Boloor KK, Sane KS,
Ghaskadbi SS, Lele RD. Free radicals and antioxidants in human
--- END PAGE 311 ---

--- PAGE 312 ---
health: Current status and future prospects. J Assoc Physicians India .
2004 Oct;52:794–804.
187 During physical exercise: Urso ML, Clarkson PM. Oxidative stress,
exercise, and antioxidant supplementation. Toxicology . 2003 Jul
15;189(1–2):41–54. Powers SK, Jackson MJ. Exercise-induced
oxidative stress: Cellular mechanisms and impact on muscle force
production. Physiol Rev . 2008 Oct;88(4):1243–76. Finaud, Lac, Filaire
E 2006, 327–58.
187 Investigations into physical: Powers SK, Nelson WB, Hudson MB.
Exercise-induced oxidative stress in humans: Cause and consequences. 
Free Radic Biol Med . 2011 Sep 1;51(5):942–50. Kanter M. Free
radicals, exercise and antioxidant supplementation. Proc Nutr Soc .
1998 Feb;57(1):9–13. A study by Jackson from the department of
medicine in the University of Liverpool noted that 30 minutes of
excessive muscular activity in rats resulted in increased free radical
activity. The researchers suggested that this phenomenon might play a
role in causing muscle damage. Jackson MJ. Reactive oxygen species
and redox-regulation of skeletal muscle adaptations to exercise. Philos
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci . 2005 Dec 29;360(1464):2285–91.
Machefer G, Groussard C, Rannou-Bekono F, et al. Extreme running
competition decreases blood antioxidant defense capacity. J Am Coll
Nutr . 2004 Aug;23(4):358–64.
Researchers at the department of medicine at the University of
Helsinki in Finland conducted a study to determine the effects of
physical training on free radical production. Nine fit male subjects
were studied before and after three months of running and were found
to have significantly decreased levels of all circulating antioxidants
except for ascorbate during training. The conclusion reached was that
“relatively intense aerobic training decreases circulating antioxidant
concentrations.” Bergholm R, Mäkimattila S, Valkonen M, et al.
Intense physical training decreases circulating antioxidants and
endothelium-dependent vasodilatation in vivo. Atherosclerosis . 1999
Aug;145(2):341–9.
188 Blood samples were: Machefer G, Groussard C, Rannou-Bekono F, et
al. 2004, 358–64.
--- END PAGE 312 ---

--- PAGE 313 ---
188 At first glance: Clarkson PM. Antioxidants and physical performance. 
Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr . 1995 Jan;35(1–2):131–41. Clarkson PM,
Thompson HS. Antioxidants: What role do they play in physical
activity and health? Am J Clin Nutr . 2000 Aug;72(2 Suppl):637–46.
Urso, Clarkson 2003 Jul 15, 41–54. Sacheck JM, Blumberg JB. Role
of vitamin E and oxidative stress in exercise. Nutrition . 2001
Oct;17(10):809–14.
188 Research has shown that: A paper published in the Journal of
Respiratory Physiology and Neurobiology reported on a three-month
breath-hold program that was superimposed onto the regular training
of triathletes. The researchers found that by incorporating breath
holding into physical exercise, “blood acidosis was reduced and the
oxidative stress no more occurred.” The paper concluded that “these
results suggest that the practice of breath-holding improves the
tolerance to hypoxemia (inadequate level of oxygen in the blood)
independently from any genetic factor.” Joulia et al. 2003, 19–27.
Another study tested whether repeated breath holds by elite breath-
hold divers to reduce oxygen pressure in the blood could result in
reduced blood acidosis and oxidative stress. Trained divers with seven
to ten years of experience in breath hold diving, and with an ability to
hold their breath for up to 440 seconds during rest, were compared
with a second group of non-divers who had at most a 145 second
breath-hold time.
Both groups performed a breath hold during rest, followed by 2
minutes of forearm exercises during which the diver group performed
a breath hold and the second group breathed as normal. Interestingly,
the group who breathed as normal showed an increase in blood lactic
acid concentration and oxidative stress. In the diver group, the changes
in both lactic acid and oxidative stress were markedly reduced after
both breath holds and exercise. The paper concluded that humans who
are involved in a long-term training program of breath-hold diving
have reduced blood acidosis and oxidative stress following breath
holds and exercise. Joulia, Steinberg, Wolff, Gavarry, Jammes 2002,
121–30.
For those of you who might be concerned that reducing the effects
of free radicals only relates to elite breath-hold divers, let me resolve
--- END PAGE 313 ---

--- PAGE 314 ---
your fears with the results of one final study. A 2008 paper published
in the journal Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise investigated
the effects of breath holding on oxidative stress using two groups of
people: a group of trained divers and a group of people with no diving
experience at all. Results showed significant improvements in
antioxidant activity across both groups, with little difference between
the divers and non-divers. Bulmer AC, Coombes JS, Sharman JE,
Stewart IB. Effects of maximal static apnea on antioxidant defenses in
trained free divers. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2008 Jul;40(7):1307–13.
189 Athletes with long: Joulia, Steinberg, Wolff, Gavarry, Jammes 2002,
121–30.
189 Research spanning thirty: Fisher-Wellman K, Bloomer RJ. Acute
exercise and oxidative stress: A 30 year history. Dyn Med . 2009 Jan
13;8:1.
189 Exercising several times: Radak Z, Chung HY, Goto S. Systemic
adaptation to oxidative challenge induced by regular exercise. Free
Radic Biol Med. 2008 Jan 15;44(2):153–9. Campbell PT, Gross MD,
Potter JD, et al. Effect of exercise on oxidative stress: A 12-month
randomized, controlled trial. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2010
Aug;42(8):1448–53. Majerczak J, Rychlik B, Grzelak A, et al. Effect
of 5-week moderate intensity endurance training on the oxidative
stress, muscle specific uncoupling protein (UCP3) and superoxide
dismutase (SOD2) contents in vastus lateralis of young, healthy men. J
Physiol Pharmacol. 2010 Dec;61(6):743–51.
189 More rigorous training: Finaud, Lac, Filaire 2006, 327–358.
189 Studies show that: Shing CM, Peake JM, Ahern SM, et al. The effect of
consecutive days of exercise on markers of oxidative stress. Appl
Physiol Nutr Metab . 2007 Aug; 32(4):677–85. Gomez-Cabrera MC,
Domenech E, Viña J. Moderate exercise is an antioxidant:
Upregulation of antioxidant genes by training . Free Radic Biol Med. 
2008 Jan 15;44(2):126–31.
191 The naked mole rat: Veselá A, Wilhelm J. The role of carbon dioxide in
free radical reactions of the organism. Physiol Res . 2002;51(4):335–9.
191 This might also explain: Buffenstein R. Negligible senescence in the
longest living rodent, the naked mole-rat: Insights from a successfully
--- END PAGE 314 ---

--- PAGE 315 ---
aging species. J Comp Physiol B. 2008 May;178(4):439–45. Veselá,
Wilhelm 2002, 335–9.
191 develop cancer: Rathi A. Cancer immunity of strange underground rat
revealed . Conversation. June 19, 2013. theconversation.com/cancer-
immunity-of-strange-underground-rat-revealed-15358 (accessed
September 2, 2014).
191 “Even when scientists”: Ibid.
191 Although a few days’ rest: Researchers in the United States
investigated the effects of detraining in collegiate competitive
swimmers who commonly take a month off from training following a
major competition. The study measured aerobic fitness, resting
metabolism, mood state, and blood lipids in each swimmer during two
tests: one in a trained state, and another after a resting period of five
weeks. The results of the second test clearly showed an increase of
body weight, fat mass, and waist circumference, and a decrease of
VO2 peak. The authors suggested, therefore, that coaches and athletes
ought to be aware of the negative consequences of detraining from
swimming. Ormsbee MJ, Arciero PJ. Detraining increases body fat
and weight and decreases VO2peak and metabolic rate. J Strength
Cond Res. 2012 Aug; 26(8):2087–95.
Koutedakis Y. Seasonal variation in fitness parameters in
competitive athletes. Sports Med . 1995 Jun;19(6):373–92.
A study of senior rugby league players found that a period of six
weeks of inactivity produced a significant decrease in VO2 max. Allen
GD. Physiological and metabolic changes with six weeks detraining. 
Aust J Sci Med Sport . 1989;21(1): 4–9. Godfrey RJ, Ingham SA,
Pedlar CR, Whyte GP. The detraining and retraining of an elite rower:
A case study. J Sci Med Sport . 2005 Sep;8(3):314–20. Mujika I,
Padilla S. Detraining: Loss of training-induced physiological and
performance adaptations. Part II: Long term insufficient training
stimulus. Sports Med . 2000 Sep;30(3):145–54.
192 For some, high-intensity: Toumi H, Best T. The inflammatory response:
Friend or enemy for muscle injury? Br J Sports Med. 2003
Aug;37(4):284–6.
--- END PAGE 315 ---

--- PAGE 316 ---
11. Improve Oxygenation of Your Heart 
193 The same tragedy: Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart
disease and stroke statistics—2014 update: A report from the
American Heart Association. Circulation . 2014 Jan 21;129(3):e28–
e292.
194 “Isn’t it the irony”: Ringertz N. Alfred Nobel’s health and his interest in
medicine. Nobelprize.org. December 1, 1998.
www.nobelprize.org/alfred_nobel/biographical/articles/ringertz
(accessed September 2, 2014).
194 In 1896 Alfred Nobel: Ibid.
194 In an ironic twist: The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1998.
NobelPrize.org.
www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1998 (accessed
September 2, 2014).
195 Sometimes referred: Chang, Nitric Oxide, the Mighty Molecule, 201. 
Dr Louis Ignarro on nitric oxide 1. www.youtube.com/watch?
v=FsA04n2k6xY (accessed September 2, 2014). Ignarro, NO more
heart disease; 2006.
195 Nitric oxide sends: Ibid.
195 If the blood clots: Ibid. Ignarro, NO more heart disease; 2006. Dr Louis
Ignarro on nitric oxide 2 . www.youtube.com/watch?v=B4KHlP8Bttw
(accessed September 2, 2014).
195 Nitric oxide plays: Ibid . 
195 According to Nobel: Dr Louis Ignarro on nitric oxide 2 .
195 As we breathe in through the nose: Lundberg, Weitzberg 1999, 947–52.
196 Dr. David Anderson: Breathe deep to lower blood pressure, doc says.
Associated Press. July 31, 2006. Available at
www.nbcnews.com/id/14122841/ns/health-heart_health/t/breathe-
deep-lower-blood-pressure-doc-says (accessed September 2, 2014).
196 A plausible explanation: Mourya M, Mahajan AS, Singh NP, Jain AK.
Effect of slow- and fast-breathing exercises on autonomic functions in
patients with essential hypertension. J Altern Complement Med. 2009
Jul;15(7):711–7. Pramanik T, Sharma HO, Mishra S, Mishra A,
Prajapati R, Singh S. Immediate effect of slow pace bhastrika
pranayama on blood pressure and heart rate. J Altern Complement
Med. 2009 Mar;15(3):293–5.
--- END PAGE 316 ---

--- PAGE 317 ---
196 But the middle path: Goto C, Higashi Y, Kimura M, et al. Effect of
different intensities of exercise on endothelium-dependent vasodilation
in humans: Role of endothelium-dependent nitric oxide and oxidative
stress. Circulation . 2003 Aug 5;108(5):530–5.
197 In conclusion, the researchers: University of Exeter. Beetroot juice
boosts stamina, new study shows. ScienceDaily . August 7, 2009.
www.sciencedaily.com/re leases/2009/08/090806141520.htm
(accessed September 2, 2014).
197 In 1909, American: Dr. Henderson, 70, physiologist, dies; Director of
Yale Laboratory, expert on gases, devised methods of revival New York
Times . February 20, 1944. Henderson Y. Acapnia and shock: I. Carbon
dioxide as a factor in the regulation of the heart rate. Amer Jour Phys .
1908 Feb;21(1):126–56.
197 In a paper entitled: Henderson 1908 Feb, 126–56.
198 The one thing: Lum 1975, 375–83.
200 This state of hypocapnia: Rutherford JJ, Clutton-Brock TH, Parkes MJ.
Hypocapnia reduces the T wave of the electrocardiogram in normal
human subjects. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005
July;289(1):R148–55. Hashimoto K, Okazaki K, Okutsu Y. The effect
of hypocapnia and hypercapnia on myocardial oxygen tension in
hemorrhaged dogs. Masui . 1990 Apr;39(4):437–41. Kazmaier S,
Weyland A, Buhre W, et al. Effects of respiratory alkalosis and
acidosis on myocardial blood flow and metabolism in patients with
coronary artery disease. Anesthesiology. 1998 Oct;89(4):831–7. Neill
WA, Hattenhauer M. Impairment of myocardial O2 supply due to
hyperventilation. Circulation. 1975 Nov;52(5):854–8.
200 Since low levels: Neill, Hattenhauer 1975, 854–8.
200 On March 2, 2004: Cormac Trust. www.thecormactrust.com (accessed
December 12, 2012).
200 Tributes to Cormac: Ibid.
201 In search of the reasons: Dr. Domenico Corrado from the department of
cardiac, thoracic, and vascular sciences at the University of Padvoa,
Italy, presented to the 2009 European Society of Cardiology congress
in Barcelona. The title of his presentation was “Electrical
repolarization changes in young athletes: What is abnormal?” Dr.
--- END PAGE 317 ---

--- PAGE 318 ---
Corrado recognized that ECG changes in athletes are common and
usually reflect remodeling of the heart as an adaptation to regular
physical training. However, although an abnormal ECG reading of T-
wave inversion is rarely observed in healthy athletes, it was found to
be a potential expression of an underlying heart disease, presenting a
risk of sudden death from cardiac arrest during sport. Corrado D.
Electrical repolarization changes in young athletes: What is abnormal?
ESC Congress 2009. Barcelona. August 31, 2009.
spo.escardio.org/eslides/view.aspx?eevtid=33&id=2616 (accessed
April 15, 2013).
In a 2008 paper published in the New England Journal of Medicine, 
researchers examined a database of 12,550 trained athletes. From this,
a total of 81 athletes who had no apparent cardiac disease were
identified as having ECG abnormalities of deeply inverted T-waves. Of
the 81 athletes with abnormal ECGs, 1 died suddenly at the age of 24
years from cardiac failure. Of the 80 surviving athletes, 3 developed
heart disease at the ages of 27, 32, and 50, including 1 who had an
aborted cardiac arrest. The researchers concluded that markedly
abnormal ECGs in young and apparently healthy athletes may
represent the initial expression of underlying cardiac disease, and that
athletes with such ECG patterns merit continued clinical surveillance.
Pelliccia A, Di Paolo FM, Quattrini FM, et al. Outcomes in athletes
with marked ECG repolarization abnormalities. N Eng J Med. 2008
Jan 10;358:152–61.
Laukkanen and colleagues from the University of Kuopio, Finland,
investigated the association between ST depression and the risk of
sudden cardiac death in a population-based sample of 1,769 men.
During the eighteen years of follow-up, a total of 72 deaths occurred
due to sudden cardiac death in those found with asymptomatic ST
segment depression. The risk of sudden cardiac death was found to
have increased among men with asymptomatic ST segment depression
during exercise and during the recovery period. It was noted
“asymptomatic ST-segment depression was a very strong predictor of
sudden cardiac death in men with any conventional risk factor but no
previously diagnosed coronary heart disease.” Laukkanen JA,
Mäkikallio TH, Rauramaa R, Kurl S. Asymptomatic ST-segment
--- END PAGE 318 ---

--- PAGE 319 ---
depression during exercise testing and the risk of sudden cardiac death
in middle-aged men: A population-based follow-up study. Eur Heart J. 
2009 Mar;30(5):558–65.
201 When this happens: Kasper DL, Harrison TR. Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill Medical Publishing
Division; 2005.
201 In assessing ECG: Thompson PD. Exercise and the heart: The good,
the bad, and the ugly. Dialog Cardiovasc Med . 2002;7(3):143–62.
201 Studies have found: Corrado. Electrical repolarization changes in
young athletes.
201 However, certain abnormal: Ibid.
201 Markedly abnormal: Pelliccia, Di Paolo, Quattrini, et al. 2008 Jan 10,
152–61.
202 ST segment depression: Kligfield P, Lauer MS. Exercise
electrocardiogram testing beyond the ST segment. Circulation.
2006;114:2070–82.
202 In a study including: Laukkanen, Mäkikallio, Rauramaa, Kurl 2009,
558–65.
202 A study conducted by: Alexopoulos D, Christodoulou J, Toulgaridis T,
et al. Repolarization abnormalities with prolonged hyperventilation in
apparently healthy subjects: Incidence, mechanisms and affecting
factors. Eur Heart J. 1996 Sep;17(9):1432–7.
204 Dr. Lum was well known: Laurence Claude Lum . Royal College of
Physicians. munksroll.rc plondon.ac.uk/Biography/Details/6079
(accessed September 2, 2014).
204 Dr. Lum dedicated: Ibid.
204 Both activities increase breathing: Rutherford, Clutton-Brock, Parkes
2005, R148–55. Hashimoto, Okazaki, Okutsu 1990, 437–41. Kazmaier
et al. 1998, 831–7. Neill, Hattenhauer 1975, 854–8.
205 Up to 10 percent: Chelmowski MK, Keelan MH Jr. Hyperventilation
and myocardial infarction. Chest . 1988 May;93(5): 1095–6.
205 In one particular study: Ibid.
205 A study of twenty patients: Elborn JS, Riley M, Stanford CF, Nicholls
DP. The effects of flosequinan on submaximal exercise in patients with
chronic cardiac failure. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1990 May;29(5):519–24.
--- END PAGE 319 ---

--- PAGE 320 ---
206 This research: Buller NP, Poole-Wilson PA. Mechanism of the
increased ventilatory response to exercise in patients with chronic
heart failure. Br Heart J. 1990 May;63(5):281–3. The authors
observed that patients with breathing problems had reduced arterial
carbon dioxide and increased breathing volume per minute.
Furthermore, patients with problem breathing had greater impaired
cardiac function. Fanfulla FM, Mortara A, Maestri R, et al. The
development of hyperventilation in patients with chronic heart failure
and Cheyne-Stokes respiration: A possible role of chronic hypoxia. 
Chest . 1998 Oct;114(4):1083–90. Vasiliauskas D, Jasiukeviciene L.
Impact of a correct breathing stereotype on pulmonary minute
ventilation, blood gases and acid-base balance in post–myocardial
infarction patients. Eur J Cardiovasc Prev Rehabil . 2004
Jun;11(3):223–7.
206 In a 2004 study published: Vasiliauskas, Jasiukeviciene 2004 June,
223–7.
206 Based on improvements: Ibid.
206 Other studies confirm: Patients who practiced breathing exercises for
reversing chronic hyperventilation evidenced significantly higher
carbon dioxide levels and lower respiratory rates when compared with
pretreatment levels measured three years earlier. The authors
concluded, “Breathing retraining has lasting effects on respiratory
physiology, and is highly correlated with a reduction in reported
functional cardiac symptoms.” DeGuire S, Gevirtz R, Kawahara Y,
Maguire W. Hyperventilation syndrome and the assessment of
treatment for functional cardiac symptoms. Am J Cardiol. 1992 Sep
1;70(6):673–7.
207 We know that hyperventilation: Researchers from the division of
cardiology, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Japan,
investigated the hyperventilation test as a clinical tool to induce
coronary artery spasm (narrowing of blood vessels to the heart). The
study involved 206 patients with coronary spasm and 183 patients
without angina at rest (nonspasm). Each patient performed
hyperventilation for 6 minutes. Of the spasm group, 127 showed
positive responses to the test, including electrocardiographic changes
attributable to reduced blood flow. No one in the nonspasm group
--- END PAGE 320 ---

--- PAGE 321 ---
showed any ischemia (narrowing of blood flow). When clinical
characteristics were compared, high disease activity and severe
arrhythmias were significantly higher in the hyperventilation test
positive patients than in the negative patients (69 percent vs. 20
percent). The authors concluded that “hyperventilation is a highly
specific test for the diagnosis of coronary artery spasm, and that
hyperventilation test-positive patients are likely to have life-
threatening arrhythmias during attacks.” Nakao K, Ohgushi M,
Yoshimura M, et al. Hyperventilation as a specific test for diagnosis of
coronary artery spasm. Am J Cardiol. 1997 Sep 1;80(5):545–9.
207 but studies have: In the aptly titled paper “Death by Hyperventilation:
A Common and Life-Threatening Problem During Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation,” researchers tested the hypothesis that excessive
ventilation rates during the performance of CPR by overzealous but
well-trained rescue personnel increases the likelihood of death. The
paper investigated thirteen adult deaths where manual CPR with an
average of 30 breaths per minute was administered to patients. The
paper also documented a study investigating ventilation per minute and
survival rate during cardiac arrest in pigs. Three groups of seven pigs
were treated with 12 breaths, 30 breaths, or 30 breaths plus carbon
dioxide per minute. Survival rates in the groups were as follows: six
out of seven pigs treated with 12 breaths per minute, one out of seven
pigs treated with 30 breaths per minute, and one out of seven pigs
treated with 30 breaths per minute plus carbon dioxide. The authors
commented that “despite seemingly adequate training, professional
rescuers consistently hyperventilated patients during out-of-hospital
CPR,” and that “additional education of CPR providers is urgently
needed to reduce these newly identified and deadly consequences of
hyperventilation during CPR.” Aufderheide TP, Lurie KG. Death by
hyperventilation: A common and life-threatening problem during
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Crit Care Med . 2004 Sep;32(9
Suppl):345–51.
In a paper entitled “Do We Hyperventilate Cardiac Arrest Patients?”
published in the journal Resuscitation in 2007, researchers studied data
from twelve patients who had received manual ventilation by a self-
inflating bag in the emergency department of a UK hospital. Results
--- END PAGE 321 ---

--- PAGE 322 ---
showed that the number of manual breaths administered to the patients
varied from 9 to 41 per minute, with an average of 26. The
corresponding median volume of air per minute was 13 liters. The
researchers noted that while guidelines on the number of breaths to
administer during CPR are well known, “it would appear that in
practice they are not being observed.” O’Neill JF, Deakin CD. Do we
hyperventilate cardiac arrest patients? Resuscitation . 2007
Apr;73(1):82–5.
207 Researchers investigated instances: Ibid.
207 One study concluded: Ibid. 
12. Eliminate Exercise-Induced Asthma 
210 Exercise-induced asthma: Rundell KW, Im J, Mayers LB, Wilber RL,
Szmedra L, Schmitz HR. Self-reported symptoms and exercise-
induced asthma in the elite athlete. Med Sci Sports Exerc . 2001
Feb;33(2):208–13.
210 Interestingly, one study: Sidiropoulou MP, Kokaridas DG, Giagazoglou
PF, Karadonas MI, Fotiadou EG. Incidence of exercise-induced asthma
in adolescent athletes under different training and environmental
conditions. J Strength Cond Res . 2012 Jun;26(6):1644–50.
211 Tackling asthma from: Zinatulin SN. Healthy Breathing: Advanced
Techniques . Novosibirsk, Russia: Dinamika Publishing House; 2003.
212 Normal breathing volume: Johnson BD, Scanlon PD, Beck KC.
Regulation of ventilatory capacity during exercise in asthmatics. J
Appl Physiol . 1995 Sep;79(3):892–901. Chalupa DC, Morrow PE,
Oberdörster G, Utell MJ, Frampton MW. Ultrafine particle deposition
in subjects with asthma. Environ Health Perspect. 2004
Jun;112(8):879–82. Bowler SD, Green A, Mitchell CA. Buteyko
breathing techniques in asthma: A blinded randomised controlled trial. 
Med J Aust. 1998 Dec 7–21;169(11–12):575–8.
212 of air per minute: Pulmonary structure and function. In: McArdle,
Katch, Katch, Exercise Physiology, 263.
212 During an exacerbation of asthma: GINA Report, Global Strategy for
Asthma Management and Prevention . Global Initiative for Asthma;
2014:74. www.gin asthma.org/guidelines-gina-report-global-strategy-
for-asthma.html (accessed December 27, 2012).
--- END PAGE 322 ---

--- PAGE 323 ---
213 A study at the Mater Hospital: Bowler, Green, Mitchell 1998, 575–8.
214 The reason for this: Ibid.
214 Further studies reinforced: McHugh P, Aitcheson F, Duncan B,
Houghton F. Buteyko Breathing Technique for asthma: An effective
intervention. N Z Med J . 2003 Dec 12;116(1187):U710. Cowie RL,
Conley DP, Underwood MF, Reader PG. A randomised controlled trial
of the Buteyko technique as an adjunct to conventional management of
asthma. Resp Med . 2008 May;102(5);726–32.
214 Based on the fact: Ibid. Bowler, Green, Mitchell 1998, 575–8.
215 People diagnosed with asthma: Hallani M, Wheatley JR, Amis TC.
Initiating oral breathing in response to nasal loading: Asthmatics
versus healthy subjects. Eur Respir J . 2008 Apr;31(4):800–6. A paper
published in the medical journal Chest noted that “asthmatics may
have an increased tendency to switch to oral (mouth) breathing, a
factor that may contribute to the pathogenesis of their asthma.”
Kairaitis K, Garlick SR, Wheatley JR, Amis TC. Route of breathing in
patients with asthma. Chest . 1999 Dec;116(6):1646–52.
215 Air taken in through: Fried (ed.), Hyperventilation Syndrome, 1987.
215 The mouth is simply: Ibid.
216 Unlike nasal breathing: Djupesland PG, Chatkin JM, Qian W, Haight
JS. Nitric oxide in the nasal airway: A new dimension in
otorhinolaryngology. Am J Otolaryngol . 2001 Jan–Feb;22(1):19–32.
Scadding G. Nitric oxide in the airways. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg . 2007 Aug;15(4):258–63. Vural C, Güngör A. Nitric oxide
and the upper airways: Recent discoveries. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen .
2003 Jan;10(1):39–44.
216 Taking all these factors: Hallani M, Wheatley JR, Amis TC. Enforced
mouth breathing decreases lung function in mild asthmatics. 
Respirology . 2008 Jun;13(4):553–8.
216 The paper concluded: Shturman-Ellstein R, Zeballos RJ, Buckley JM,
Souhrada JF. The beneficial effect of nasal breathing on exercise-
induced bronchoconstriction. Am Rev Respir Dis . 1978 Jul;118(1):65–
73.
216 In simple terms: Researchers studied the effects of nasal breathing and
oral breathing on exercise-induced asthma. Fifteen people were
recruited for the study and asked to breathe only through their nose.
--- END PAGE 323 ---

--- PAGE 324 ---
The study found that “the post-exercise bronchoconstrictive response
was markedly reduced as compared with the response obtained by oral
(mouth) breathing during exercise, indicating a beneficial effect of
nasal breathing.” Mangla PK, Menon MP. Effect of nasal and oral
breathing on exercise-induced asthma. Clin Allergy . 1981
Sep;11(5):433–9.
217 The difference between: In the words of respiratory consultant Dr. Peter
Donnelly, which were published in the medical journal the Lancet, “In
most land based forms of exercise, patterns of breathing are not
constrained, ventilation increases proportionately throughout exercise
and end tidal CO2 tensions are either normal or low. Therefore, there
is no hypercapnic (increased carbon dioxide) stimulus for
bronchodilation (airway opening) and asthmatics have no protection.”
Donnelly PM. Exercise induced asthma: The protective role of CO2
during swimming. Lancet . 1991 Jan 19;337(8734):):179–80.
217 At the beginning of this chapter: Sidiropoulou, Kokaridas,
Giagazoglou, Karadonas, Fotiadou 2012 Jun, 1644–50.
217 Although the act of: Uyan ZS, Carraro S, Piacentini G, Baraldi E.
Swimming pool, respiratory health, and childhood asthma: Should we
change our beliefs? Pediatr Pulmonol . 2009 Jan;44(1):31–7.
Fjellbirkeland L, Gulsvik A, Walløe A. Swimming-induced asthma. 
Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 1995 Jun 30;115(17):2051–3. Bernard A,
Carbonnelle S, Michel O, et al. Lung hyperpermeability and asthma
prevalence in schoolchildren: Unexpected associations with the
attendance at indoor chlorinated swimming pools. Occup Environ
Med. 2003 Jun;60(6):385–94. Nickmilder M, Bernard A. Ecological
association between childhood asthma and availability of indoor
chlorinated swimming pools in Europe. Occup Environ Med . 2007
Jan;64(1):37–46. 
13. Athletic Endeavor—Nature or Nurture? 
221 In 1704: Cooper C. The Stud: Why retirement will be a full-time job
for Frankel. Independent. October 26, 2012.
www.independent.co.uk/sport/racing/the-stud-why-retirement-will-be-
a-fulltime-job-for-frankel-8228820.html (accessed June 10, 2013).
--- END PAGE 324 ---

--- PAGE 325 ---
221 Geneticist Patrick Cunningham: Cunningham EP, Dooley JJ, Splan RK,
Bradley DG. Microsatellite diversity, pedigree relatedness and the
contributions of founder lineages to thoroughbred horses. Anim Genet. 
2001 Dec;32(6):360–4.
222 Although the natural: Abreu RR, Rocha RL, Lamounier JA, Guerra AF.
Prevalence of mouth breathing among children. J Pediatr (Rio J) .
2008;84(5):467–70.
223 It has been well: Tourne LP. The long face syndrome and impairment of
the nasopharyngeal airway. Angle Orthod. 1990 Fall;60(3):167–76.
Deb U, Bandyopadhyay SN. Care of nasal airway to prevent
orthodontic problems in children. J Indian Med Assoc. 2007
Nov;105(11):640, 642. Harari D, Redlich M, Miri S, Hamud T, Gross
M. The effect of mouth breathing versus nasal breathing on dentofacial
and craniofacial development in orthodontic patients. Laryngoscope .
2010 Oct;120(10):2089–93.
224 Yogi Bhajan: Bhajan. The Living Chronicles of Yogi Bhajan aka the
Siri Singh Sahib of Sikh Dharma . WhoAreTheSikhs.com.
www.harisingh.com/LifeAc cordingToYogiBhajan.htm.
224 The ancient Buddhist: Mallinson J. The Khecarîvidyâ of Adinathâ. 
London and New York: Routledge; 2007:17–19.
225 In a paper written by researchers: Wong EM, Ormiston ME, Haselhuhn
MP. A face only an investor could love: CEOs’ facial structure predicts
their firms’ financial performance. Psychol Sci . 2011
Dec;22(12):1478–83.
225 In a separate study: Ibid.
226 Chronic, habitual mouth: Okuro RT, Morcillo AM, Sakano E,
Schivinski CI, Ribeiro MÂ, Ribeiro JD. Exercise capacity, respiratory
mechanics and posture in mouth breathers. Braz J Otorhinolaryngol .
2011 Sep–Oct;77(5):656–62. Okuro RT, Morcillo AM, Ribeiro MÂ,
Sakano E, Conti PB, Ribeiro JD. Mouth breathing and forward head
posture: Effects on respiratory biomechanics and exercise capacity in
children. J Bras Pneumol . 2011 Jul–Aug;37(4):471–9. Conti, Sakano,
Ribeiro, Schivinski, Ribeiro 2011, 471–9.
226 “Many of these children”: Jefferson Y. Mouth breathing: Adverse
effects on facial growth, health, academics and behavior. Gen Dent .
2010 Jan–Feb;58(1):18–25.
--- END PAGE 325 ---

--- PAGE 326 ---
226 Dr. Egil Peter Harvold: Harvold EP, Tomer BS, Vargervik K, Chierici
G. Primate experiments on oral respiration. Am J Orthod . 1981
Apr;79(4):359–72. Miller AJ, Vargervik K, Chierici G. Sequential
neuromuscular changes in rhesus monkeys during the initial adaptation
to oral respiration. Am J Orthod . 1982 Feb;81(2):99–107. Moses AJ.
Airways and appliances . CDS Rev . 1989 Mar;82(2):50–7. Available at:
www.tmjchicago.com/uploads/airwaysandappli ances.pdf (accessed
September 2, 2014).
227 Dr. Harvold’s: Vargervik K. Egil Peter Harvold, Orthodontics: San
Francisco. Calisphere, University of California. texts.cdlib.org/view?
docId=hb0h4n99rb &doc
.view=frames&chunk.id=div00029&toc.depth=1&toc.id= (accessed
September 2, 2014).
227 Research has suggested: Trabalon M, Schaal B. It takes a mouth to eat
and a nose to breathe: Abnormal oral respiration affects neonates’ oral
competence and systemic adaptation. Int J Pediatr . 2012;2012:207605.
O’Hehir T, Francis A. Mouth vs. nasal breathing . Hygientown. 
September 2012. www.hygienetown.com/hygienetown/article.aspx?
i=297&aid=4026 (accessed September 2, 2014).
229 Development of the lower jaw: Meridith HV. Growth in head width
during the first twelve years of life. Pediatrics. 1953 Oct;12(4):411–
29.
230 The detrimental effects: Schreiner C. Nasal airway obstruction in
children and secondary dental deformities . University of Texas
Medical Branch, Department of Otolaryngology, Grand Rounds
Presentation . 1996. 
14. Exercise as if Your Life Depends on It 
232 Dozens of studies: Blair SN, Cheng Y, Holder JS. Is physical activity or
physical fitness more important in defining health benefits? Med Sci
Sports Exerc. 2001 Jun;33(6 Suppl):379–99. Crespo CJ, Palmieri MR,
Perdomo RP, et al. The relationship of physical activity and body
weight with all-cause mortality: Results from the Puerto Rico Heart
Health Program. Ann Epidemiol. 2002 Nov;12(8):543–52. Oguma Y,
Sesso HD, Paffenbarger RS Jr, Lee IM. Physical activity and all cause
--- END PAGE 326 ---

--- PAGE 327 ---
mortality in women: A review of the evidence. Br J Sports Med . 2002
Jun;36(3):162–72.
232 Not only this: A most interesting study investigating the relationship
between regular physical exercise and cardiovascular health was
conducted as far back as 1952 by Scottish epidemiologist Dr. Jeremy
Morris. Commonly, known as the “bus conductor study,” Dr. Morris
and colleagues investigated the incidence of heart attacks across
31,000 male transport workers between the ages of 35 and 65 who
worked during the years 1949 and 1950. Morris JN, Heady JA, Raffle
PA, Roberts CG, Parks JW. Coronary heart-disease and physical
activity of work. Lancet 1953 Nov 21;265(6795):1053–7.
232 The same study: Andrade J, Ignaszewski A. Exercise and the heart: A
review of the early studies, in memory of Dr R.S. Paffenbarger. B C
Med J . 2007 Dec;49(10):540–6. 
Appendix: Upper Limits and Safety of Breath Holding 
290 Another effect is bradycardia: Lindholm P, Lundgren CE. The
physiology and pathophysiology of human breath-hold diving. J Appl
Physiol. 2009 Jan;106(1):284-92. Espersen, Frandsen, Lorentzen,
Kanstrup, Christensen 2002 May, 2071–9.
290 Breaking point: Lin YC, Lally DA , Moore TO, Hong SK. Physiological
and conventional breath-hold break points . J Appl Physiol. 1974
Sep;37(3):291–6 . 
290 While it is extremely: Nunn JF. Applied Respiratory Physiology. 
London and Boston: Butterworths; 1987.
291 Research by Ivancev: Ivancev et al. investigated whether repetitive
breath holding blunts the chemoreceptors, resulting in reduced
reactivity to carbon dioxide. Blunted chemoreceptors are recognized as
a common result of obstructive sleep apnea. Ivancev et al. tested the
hypothesis that repeated breath holds, which are an integral part of
breath-hold diving, blunt cerebrovascular reactivity to hypercapnia.
Two groups of seven elite breath-hold divers and seven non-divers
were involved in the test. The study noted that breath-hold divers had a
greater tolerance to carbon dioxide, largely the result of lower
breathing frequency. The findings of the study were “that the
regulation of the cerebral circulation in response to hypercapnia is
--- END PAGE 327 ---

--- PAGE 328 ---
intact in elite breath-hold divers, potentially as a protective mechanism
against the chronic intermittent cerebral hypoxia and/or hypercapnia
that occurs during breath-hold diving.” Therefore, regular breath-hold
practice does not impair cerebrovascular reactivity to high carbon
dioxide pressure. Ivancev V, Palada I, Valic Z, et al. Cerebrovascular
reactivity to hypercapnia is unimpaired in breath-hold divers. J
Physiol. 2007 Jul 15;582(Pt 2):723–30.
291 A further study by Joulia: With repeated practice, elite breath-hold
divers are able to sustain very long breath holds that induce a severe
drop in oxygen without causing brain injury or blackouts. A study of
the circulatory effects of apnea in elite breath-hold divers by Joulia et
al. showed that bradycardia and peripheral vasoconstriction were
accentuated in breath-hold divers compared with non-divers. In
addition, a decrease in oxygen saturation was less and carotid arteries
blood flow was greater among the breath-hold divers during apnea.
Joulia F, Lemaître F, Fontanari P, Mille ML, Barthelemy P. Circulatory
effects of apnea in elite breath-hold divers. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2009
Sep;197(1):75–82.
293 “Please do not practice”: Preparation. Navy Seals.
www.navyseals.com/prepara tion (accessed August 20, 2012).
--- END PAGE 328 ---

--- PAGE 329 ---
Acknowledgments 
T his book would not have been possible without the spirited support of
Oxygen Advantage coaches and athletes and gifted advice from a number
of extraordinary people. In particular, I would like to thank my book agent,
Doug Abrams, and his team, including Lara Love, who spurred me on to
rewrite the entire original manuscript, providing insights, clarity, and
editing to help ensure that I communicated my message just “as if I were
talking to a fellow down at the pub.” To Cassie Jones and the publishing
team at William Morrow, thank you so much for your dedicated support and
commitment in making this book a reality. Thank you, Claudia Connal and
colleagues from Piatkus and Little Brown Book Group, for getting this
book into the hands of readers throughout Europe, South Africa, Australia,
and New Zealand.
Also helping me along this journey was Jo Gatford, who weaved her
magic through 95,000 words, knitting the final manuscript into a readable
and digestible form.
To my colleagues, including Dr. Alan Ruth, whose attention to detail
astounds me, Tom Herron, Eoin Burns, Carol Baglia, Don Gordon, Eugenia
Malyshev, Dr. Charles Florendo, Tom Piszkin, and William L. Robbins—
thank you so much for dropping your work to read through the manuscript,
providing honest and direct feedback on what needed to be changed and
where. James O’Toole, Eamon Howley, and Danny Dreyer—thank you for
providing encouragement and belief that the message imparted in this book
would be valuable to athletes.
Thank you to Sarah Gallagher for her expertise in checking papers,
adding studies, and clarifying others to ensure that I interpreted the
information on cardiovascular health accurately. Special thanks to Dr.
--- END PAGE 329 ---

--- PAGE 330 ---
Joseph Mercola, who has devoted his life’s work to educating the public
about simple, safe, and effective preventative measures to ensure good
health. Dr. Mercola, the world needs more people like you!
To soccer coach Don O’Riordan and the dedicated players of Galway
WFC, thank you for your assistance in tailoring the Oxygen Advantage
program to a team sport environment.
I must also thank my illustrator, Rebecca Burgess, who always comes
out on top with beautiful images that communicate the content visually.
Thanks also to my wife, Sinead, who, with her great sense of humor,
insisted that my acknowledgment to her shouldn’t be as boring as my usual
ones. Well, you can be the judge of that! To my beautiful daughter, Lauren,
may you grow up as a nasal breather.
And finally, thank you to my readers for taking a chance on me by
buying and reading this book. I hope you derive lifelong benefits from the
words within.
--- END PAGE 330 ---

--- PAGE 331 ---
About OxygenAdvantage.com 
Visit our website for app downloads, coaching, Skype consultations, and
webinars.
By now, I hope that you have begun to put the Oxygen Advantage
program into practice. For some, the theory and exercises in this book will
be enough to completely revolutionize their exercise routine and health. For
others, practical experience may be needed to help them to apply their
knowledge and understanding of the Oxygen Advantage program. As you
make progress, you may wish to take advantage of the personal services of
our expert Oxygen Advantage coaches or our online Skype course and
webinar.
• Oxygen Advantage coaches are available in several locations
throughout the United States, Europe, Australia, and New
Zealand. Our coaches are specifically trained to help you make
the best progress possible, safely and quickly.
• Skype courses offer the opportunity to benefit from a one-to-
one consultation with the author. During the Skype course, you
will receive expert guidance, feedback, a specifically tailored
program, and the motivation you need to ensure you make
optimal progress.
• Our Oxygen Advantage webinar shows Patrick teaching each of
the exercises to athletes, allowing you to see how the
techniques are practically applied in real time.
--- END PAGE 331 ---

--- PAGE 332 ---
If you would like to find out more or get in touch, please visit
OxygenAdvantage.com. Your feedback and suggestions are
greatly appreciated.
--- END PAGE 332 ---

--- PAGE 333 ---
Index 
The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from
which it was created. To locate a specific entry, please use your e-book
reader’s search tools. 
A 
Abdominal breathing, 51, 52, 59, 184–85
benefits of, 72–74
deep breath myth and, 69–70
the diaphragm and, 71–74
exercise to encourage. See Breathe Light to Breathe Right
following the breath to enter the zone, 156–58
Acclimatization, 102, 117–18
Acid-forming foods, 52–53, 177–79
Active mind, 143–44, 152–54
Advanced Breathe Light to Breathe Right, 255–65
merging abdominal movements with breathing, 259–61, 260 
reducing breathing volume using abdominal breathing, 261–65
relaxing and activating the diaphragm, 257–58
Advanced simulation of high-altitude training, 132–35, 133, 253, 253–54
guidelines before beginning, 132–33
guidelines for, 133–34, 253–54
Aerobic capacity and VO2 max, 34–35, 57, 96, 100, 103–4
Aerobic exercise, 103–4, 180. See also High-intensity training
Affluence, and asthma rates, 211–12
Air intake. See also Breathing volume
cardiac arrest and strenuous exercise, 202
diet and, 53
--- END PAGE 333 ---

--- PAGE 334 ---
reducing during physical exercise, 84–86
Air shortage, 78, 110, 124–25. See also Breathing exercises
benefits of Oxygen Advantage breathing techniques, 46, 220
following the breath, 156–58
headaches during, 110, 113
holding breath during warm-up, 88
Airways, 58–59
asthma and, 212, 213, 215–16, 296 n 
BOLT score and size of, 82
dilation and constriction of, 25, 27–28, 38, 120, 217
facial structure and size of, 83–84, 222, 223, 225, 226
nitric oxide and, 60, 82, 195
Alcohol, 97, 175
Ali, Muhammad, xi, 140–41
Alkaline-forming foods, 52–53, 178–79
Altitude acclimatization, 102, 117–18
Altitude sickness, 118
Altitude training. See High-altitude training
Alveoli, 19, 20 
American Rhinologic Society, 55–56
Anaerobic exercise, 103–4, 114, 180
Ancient tribal secrets, 79–81
Anderson, David, 196
Angina pectoris, 194
Animals, breathing in, 53–55
Antioxidants, 34, 187–90, 318 n 
Anxiety, 167–68
Apnea. See Sleep apnea
Appetite suppression, 173–74, 175, 177
Aristotle, 225
Armstrong, Lance, 97–98
Arrhythmia, 201, 203, 204, 325 n 
Asthma, 209–20
author’s symptoms, 214–15
BOLT score and, 217–18
breath-hold time and, 40, 41
--- END PAGE 334 ---

--- PAGE 335 ---
breathing volume and, 211–14, 213 
causes of, 211–14
Doug’s case, 10–11
exercise for stopping symptoms, 218, 219, 220
exercise-induced. See Exercise-induced asthma
Julian’s case, 209–10
Michael’s case, 220
nasal breathing for, 215–16
origins of term, 210–11
rate of, 210–11
swimming for, 216–17
Asthma Care, 215
Attention deficit disorder (ADD), 226
Attention spans, 143–44
Automatic bodily functions, 158 
B 
Bailey, Stephen, 103–4
Baking soda. See Bicarbonate of soda
Beet juice, 196–97
Bicarbonate of soda, 113–16, 308–9 n 
how to take, 115–16
Big breaths, 39, 45–46, 68–69, 168, 244
Bilton, Nick, 144
Birds, breathing in, 54
Blocked nose, 40, 124, 215, 234
Nose Unblocking Exercise, 61–63, 62, 244–45, 245 
Blood
circulation of, 27–28
composition of, 100–101
delivery of oxygen to muscles and organs from, 19–20, 24, 26–27, 108,
109
Blood cells, red. See Red blood cells
Blood clotting, 195
Blood doping, 95–99
Blood flow, 5, 72–73, 195–96
--- END PAGE 335 ---

--- PAGE 336 ---
Blood pH, 74, 108, 177–78
bicarbonate of soda for, 113–14
regulation of, 28–31, 29 
Blood pressure, 196
high. See Hypertension
Blood sugar, 174, 176, 177, 179
Blood transfusions, 96–99
Blood vessels, 20, 22
carbon dioxide and, 29, 32–33, 34
dilation and constriction of, 5, 25, 27–28
nitric oxide and, 58–60
Body detoxification, 49–50
Body Oxygen Level Test (BOLT), 22, 37–49, 242–44
how it works, 39–40
measuring, 37–39
scores. See BOLT scores
sports performance and, 44–45
Bohr, Christian, 26
Bohr, Niels, 26
Bohr Effect, 5, 24, 26–27, 108
BOLT. See Body Oxygen Level Test
Bolt, Usain, 221
BOLT scores, 243–44, 268–81
10 seconds or less, 41–42, 42, 48, 82, 179
program for, 268–70, 280
10 to 20 seconds, program for, 271–73, 280
20 seconds or less, 40, 42, 43, 44–45, 48, 56, 82, 167, 233, 249
program for, 271–73, 280
20 to 30 seconds, program for, 274–76, 281
30 seconds, 43, 43, 44, 48, 82
program for, 277–79, 281
40 seconds, 40, 43, 43, 49, 82, 167, 233, 281
air shortage and, 78, 110
asthma and, 217–18
body detoxification and, 49–50
breathing volume and, 41–43, 44, 138
--- END PAGE 336 ---

--- PAGE 337 ---
breathlessness during sports and, 40–41
exercise ability general guidelines, 82–83
how it works, 39–40
increasing. See Increasing BOLT scores
measuring, 37–39, 91–92
Boston Marathon, 116
Boxing, 140–41, 309–10 n 
Brahmari, 60–61
Brain, 146–47
oxygenation of the, 165–68
Breast cancer, bicarbonate of soda therapy, 114
Breathe Light to Breathe Right, 74–76, 75, 246–47, 266 
advanced method. See Advanced Breathe Light to Breathe Right
Anna’s case, 199
appetite and weight loss, 179–80
asthma and, 217–18
bodily changes from, 76
Eamon’s case, 175–76
following the breath meditation, 156–58, 181
guidelines for, 74–75, 246–47
jogging or running, 89–90, 247, 266 
for quality sleep, 169
Breath hold (holding), 105–13, 121–35
after an exhalation, 108
bicarbonate of soda and, 114, 309 n 
carbon dioxide and, 33, 39
in children, 124
de Oliveira’s techniques, 121–22
exercises. See Breath-holding exercises
to improve respiratory muscle strength, 110–11
increasing EPO naturally, 109
influences on length of time, 292–93
to prepare for ascent to high altitude, 117–19
to reduce lactic acid, 111–12
running economy and, 36
Rupp’s method, 123
--- END PAGE 337 ---

--- PAGE 338 ---
science of, 104–7, 108, 188–89
stages of, 292
testing, 37. See also Body Oxygen Level Test
upper limits and safety of, 290–91
Zátopek’s method, 122–23
Breath-hold divers, 105–7, 137, 138, 305–6 n, 307 n, 319 n, 330–31 n 
Breath-holding exercises, 125–36, 188–89, 244–65. See also Breathe Light
to Breathe Right
advanced simulated high-altitude training, 132–35, 133, 253, 253–54, 
266 
BOLT scores and, 41–43, 44, 48–49, 180, 190
Breathing Recovery, 91, 166, 166–67, 175, 248
Nose Unblocking Exercise, 61–63, 62, 244–45, 245 
pulse oximeters for, 125–26
simulated high-altitude training while cycling, 130, 252
simulated high-altitude training while jogging or running, 129, 129–30,
251–52, 266 
simulated high-altitude training while swimming, 131–32, 252
simulated high-altitude training while walking, 126–29, 127, 249–51, 
250, 266 
warm-up and, 85, 87–88
Breathing
from the abdomen. See Abdominal breathing
in animals, 53–55
bell jar experiment, 70, 70 
big breaths, 39, 45–46, 68–69, 168, 244
breaths per minute, 21–22, 76–78
chronic overbreathing. See Chronic overbreathing
deep, 18, 21, 52, 69–70
the diaphragm and, 71–74
facial structure and, 83–84, 221–27, 229–30
heart rate and, 197–200
“less is more” theory of, 68, 191
by mouth. See Mouth breathing
nitric oxide and, 58–61
by nose. See Nasal breathing
--- END PAGE 338 ---

--- PAGE 339 ---
the nose and, 55–61
overview of, 5–6, 19–21
philosophy of effortless, 67–69
physiology of, 51–52
rate of, 21, 22
regulation of, 21–25
respiratory system. See Respiratory system
timing your, 76–78
upper-chest, 42, 52, 69, 71, 72
Breathing exercises, 67–68. See also Breathe Light to Breathe Right;
Breath-holding exercises
asthma and, 214
following the breath, 156–58, 181
“Breathing-friendly” foods, 53
Breathing Recovery Exercise, 91, 166, 166–67, 175, 248
Breathing volume, 21–25. See also Body Oxygen Level Test
asthma and, 211–14, 213 
BOLT score and, 41–43, 44, 51
carbon dioxide and, 22–25
timing your breathing, 76–78
Breathlessness, 32, 33, 124
asthma and, 28, 213
BOLT score and, 40–41
carbon dioxide and, 32, 33
Bronchi, 19, 20 
Bronchioles, 19, 20 
Bugatti Veyron, 53–54
Buteyko, Konstantin, 7, 215 
Buteyko Meets Dr. Mew: Buteyko Method for Children and Teenagers 
(McKeown), 230, 286 
C 
Calorie restriction, xiii
Cancer, 58, 114, 191
Capillaries, 20, 20
--- END PAGE 339 ---

--- PAGE 340 ---
Carbon dioxide (CO2), 5–6, 22–23, 25, 32–34
breath holding and, 33, 39, 108
functions in human body, 22–23, 25, 74
hemoglobin and, 26–27
improving tolerance of, 46, 108
regulation of blood pH, 28–31, 29 
stop losses of, 45–46
Cardiac arrest, 207, 325 n 
in athletes, 200–204, 322–23 n 
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 201
hyperventilation during, 207–8, 325 n 
Cardiovascular disease, 59, 200–208, 232–33
Cardiovascular health, 193–200
Cardiovascular system, and nitric oxide, 58, 193–96
Catlin, George, 53
Cheetah, 53–54, 161
Chemnitz University of Technology, 147
Chest tightness, 28, 41, 213, 218, 270
Chi (qi), 67–68
Children
asthma and, 41, 124, 211, 214
breath holding in, 124
mouth breathing in, 57, 222–24, 227, 229
Oxygen Advantage program for, 44, 286–89
Chi-Running, 92
Chlorinated pools, and asthma, 217
Cholesterol, 59, 179, 195, 201
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 24 n 
Chronic overbreathing (hyperventilation), 3–6, 23, 24–25
Alison’s case, 29–31
anxiety and, 167–68
asthma and, 215
during CPR, 207–8
David’s case, 8–9
diet’s role, 52–53
--- END PAGE 340 ---

--- PAGE 341 ---
Doug’s case, 10–11
heart disease and, 202–4, 205–6
impact of, 4–5
quiz to determine, 3–4
reduced blood flow and, 27–28
Concentrated and undivided mind, 161–65
Concentration, 141–45, 148–49, 152–53
Breathing Recovery Exercise, 166–67, 248
“going with the flow,” 140–43
mindfulness meditation, 146–47
observing your thoughts, 149–52
Cooldown, 91
Corrado, Domenico, 322 n 
Cortisone, 98
Cottle, Maurice, 55–56
Couch potato lifestyle, 231, 232–33
Coughs (coughing), 11, 41, 118, 124, 211, 218
Craniofacial anomalies, 226–27, 229
Crawford, Lavell, 68
Croke Park Arena (Dublin), 8
Cruz, Joaquim, 121–22
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 141
Cunningham, Patrick, 221
Cycling, 17–18, 29–30, 135–36, 190
breath holding during, 130, 252
Tour de France and blood doping, 96–99
Cystic fibrosis, 298–99 n 
D 
Dark chocolate, 197
Darley Arabian (horse), 221
Darwin, Charles, 54
Davis, Wade, 81
Decker, Mary, 121–22
Deep breaths, 18, 21, 52, 69–70
Deer, breathing in, 55
--- END PAGE 341 ---

--- PAGE 342 ---
Defibrillation, 201
Dehydration, preventing with nasal breathing, 119–20
De Oliveira, Valério Luiz, 121–22
Depression, 147, 181, 185
Detoxification. See Body detoxification
Detraining, 191–92
Diabetes, 174–75, 232
Diaphragm, 71–74, 110–11
relaxing and activating, 257–58
Diet. See also Weight loss
alkaline- vs. acid-forming foods, 52–53, 177–79
appetite suppression and, 173–74, 175, 177
chronic overbreathing and, 52–53
Donna’s case, 11–13, 284–85
Eamon’s case, 174–76
Tessy’s case, 182–85
Distracting thoughts, 142, 148, 152, 181
Divers. See Breath-hold divers; Pearl divers
Dizziness, 27, 30, 76, 167–68
Dogs, breathing in, 54
Donnelly, Peter, 327 n 
Doping, 95–99
Downes, John, 196–97
Dreyer, Danny, 92
Dreyer, Katherine, 92
Drinking water, 116
Dynamite, 194 
E 
Effortless breathing, 67–68
Eightlane.org, 123
Einstein, Albert, 194
Elder persons, Oxygen Advantage program for, 268–70
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 200–202
Endorphins, 90
Epstein, Catherine, 186–87
--- END PAGE 342 ---

--- PAGE 343 ---
Epstein, Richard, 186–87
Erectile dysfunction, and nitric oxide, 60
Erythropoietin (EPO), 96–98, 99, 109
Evolution, 52–55, 178
Exercise. See also Physical exercise
aerobic, 103–4, 180. See also High-intensity training
anaerobic, 103–4, 114, 180
breath-holding. See Breath-holding exercises
breathing. See Breathing exercises
Exercise-induced asthma (EIA), 209–20
BOLT score and, 88, 217–18
breathing volume and, 211–14, 213 
causes of, 211–14
exercise for stopping symptoms, 218, 219, 220
guidelines to avoid, 88
Julian’s case, 209–10
nasal breathing for, 88, 215–16
rate of, 210–11
swimming for, 216–17 
Exercise Physiology (McArdle), 40
Exhalation, 69, 70, 70, 72, 74, 75, 77, 108 
F 
Facial structure, 83–84, 221–27, 225, 226, 229–30 
Facing Up (Grylls), 117
Farm animals, breathing in, 55
Fatigue, 111–12
Federer, Roger, 221
Fenton, John, 61
Fight-or-flight response, 72–73, 178
Finding the zone. See Zone, the
Flow, 140–43
Focus, 142, 148–49. See also Concentration
Following the breath meditation, 156–58, 181
Food and diet. See also Weight loss
alkaline- vs. acid-forming foods, 52–53, 177–79
--- END PAGE 343 ---

--- PAGE 344 ---
appetite suppression and, 173–74, 175, 177
chronic overbreathing and, 52–53
Donna’s case, 11–13, 284–85
Eamon’s case, 174–76
Tessy’s case, 182–85
Foreman, George, 140–41
Free radicals, xiii, 34, 187–88, 318 n 
Furchgott, Robert F., 58, 194 
G 
Galen, 211
Genetics (genes), 10, 25, 31, 221–22, 229–30
Gibbs, Daniel M., 27
Giggs, Ryan, 145
“Going with the flow,” 140–43
Gordon, Don, 17–18, 137
Greene, Barbara, 224
Grylls, Bear, 117 
H 
Hamilton, Tyler, 97, 98
Hang, Bill, 83–84
Harvard University, 147
Harvold, Egil Peter, 226–27
Hatha yoga, 302 n 
Headaches
air shortages and, 110, 113
negative thinking and, 151
Head circumference, 229–30
Heart attacks, 193, 204–5, 232–33
Heart disease, 59, 200–208, 232–33
hyperventilation and, 202–4, 205–6
Heart health, 193–200
Heart rate and breathing, 197–200
Hematocrit, 100–101
Hemoglobin, 26–27, 100–101, 106
--- END PAGE 344 ---

--- PAGE 345 ---
normal results, 100
oxygen saturation percentage of, 101
Henderson, Yandell, 197–98, 200
High altitude, breath holding to prepare for ascent, 117–19
High-altitude training, xiii–xiv, 6–7
breath holds and, 105–7
“live high and train low” model, 101–3
merits of, 101–3, 105
preventing dehydration with nasal breathing, 119–20
science of simulating, 104–7
simulating. See Simulated high-altitude training
High blood pressure (hypertension), 58, 174–75, 194, 195
High-intensity training
bicarbonate of soda therapy, 114, 308–9 n 
breath holds and, 105–7
breathing and, 85–86
merits of, 103–4
science of simulating, 104–7
VO2 max and, 35, 103–4
Hiroshima University Graduate School, 196
Homeostasis, 59, 177
Hooker, Steve, 221
Horses, breathing in, 55
Human growth hormone, 96, 98
Humming, 60–61
Hydration, 116
preventing dehydration with nasal breathing, 119–20
Hyperactivity, 226
Hypercapnia, 34, 125, 296–97 n, 307 n, 330 n 
Hypertension (high blood pressure), 58, 174–75, 194, 195
Hyperventilation. See Chronic overbreathing
Hypocapnia, 26, 200, 296 n, 307 n 
Hyponatremia, 116
Hypoxemia, 189
Hypoxia, 34, 296–97 n, 330 n
--- END PAGE 345 ---

--- PAGE 346 ---
I 
Ignarro, Louis J., 58, 194, 195
Immune defense, and nitric oxide, 59
Increasing BOLT scores, 40, 41, 45–49, 85, 244
bicarbonate of soda for, 113
diet for, 178
improving tolerance of carbon dioxide, 46, 139
nasal breathing for, 51, 56, 82, 83, 85, 87
simulated high-altitude training, 46–49
stop losses of carbon dioxide, 45–46
Inhalation, 70, 70, 71, 74, 77
Injuries
maintaining fitness during, 191–92
warm-up to prevent, 86–88
Inner body, 89, 155, 161
connecting with, to enter the zone, 158–60
Internet and attention spans, 143–44
Intuitive intelligence, 145–46
Iron supplements, 125
Isaacson, Walter, 146 
J 
Jaws, 227–28
breathing and, 83, 221–24, 226–27, 229
Jefferson, Yosh, 226
Jobs, Steve, 144, 146
Jogging
nasal breathing during, 89–90, 247
simulated high-altitude training while, 129, 129–30, 251–52 
K 
Karolinska Institute, 59, 195
Keane, Robbie, 224–25
Kelly, Kevin, 143–44
Kimmage, Paul, 99
King, Don, 140
--- END PAGE 346 ---

--- PAGE 347 ---
Kinghorn Cancer Center, 186–87
“Know thyself,” 147
Kundalini yoga, 224 
L 
Lactic acid, 6, 82, 84
breath holding to reduce, 111–12
Landis, Floyd, 98
Lao Tzu, 89
L-arginine, 197
Lee, Jennifer, 67 
Legend of Bagger Vance, The (movie), 145
“Less is more” theory of breathing, 68, 191
Levine, B. D., 101–2
Light breathing, 67–69. See also Breathe Light to Breathe Right
Light-headedness, 27, 118, 167–68
“Live high and train low” model, 101–3
Living in the now to enter the zone, 160–61
Living standards, and asthma rates, 211–12
Longevity and career success, 186–87
Long track speed skating, 102–3
Los Angeles Olympics (1984), 122
Lucero, Cynthia, 116
Lum, Claude, 31, 198, 204
Lundberg, Jon, 59, 60, 195–96
Lungs, 5, 19–23, 20. See also Respiratory system
Lymphatic system, 73 
M 
Machefer, Guillaume, 188
Manchester United, 145
Marathon running (runners), 81, 84, 116, 122–23, 186–88, 210, 223
Marshall, Nick, 135–36
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), 144, 147
Mater Hospital, 213–14
Maximal oxygen uptake (VO2 max), 34–35, 99–100
--- END PAGE 347 ---

--- PAGE 348 ---
high-intensity training and, 35, 103–4
McAleese, Mary, 200
McAnallen, Cormac, 200
McArdle, William, 40
McLean Hospital, 116
Medications, 232
Meditation, 145–47, 152–55, 181–82
Brahmari, 60–61
following the breath, 156–58, 181
living in the now, 160–61
mindfulness, 146–47
observing your thoughts, 149–52
Mercola, Joseph, xiii–xiv, 114
Mew, John, 228
Mexico City Olympics (1968), 6
Mindfulness meditation, 146–47
Miyamura, Miharu, 296 n, 302 n 
Moeller, Joy, 224
Monaco Grand Prix, 143
Morris, Jeremy, 232–33, 329–30 n 
Mountain sickness, 118
Mount Everest, 117
Mouth breathing, 27, 30, 51–53, 80–82
asthma and, 215–16
causes of, 60
in children, 57, 222–24, 227, 229
dehydration from, 119–20
facial structure and, 222–27
functions of, 57
negative impact of, 52–53, 54
sleep and, 168–69
Mouth taping, 64–66, 80
Mucus, 50, 52, 61
Murad, Ferid, 58, 194
Muscle memory, 142–43, 165
Muscles, delivery of oxygen from blood to, 19–20, 24, 26–27, 108, 109
--- END PAGE 348 ---

--- PAGE 349 ---
Myocardial infarctions. See Heart attacks
Myofunctional therapists, 83, 224 
N 
Naked mole rat, 191
Nasal breathing, 51, 53–57
in animals, 53–55
asthma and, 215–16
functions of, 56–57
for improved sports performance, 82
at night, 64–66, 169
nitric oxide and, 58–61, 195–96
during physical exercise, 80–86, 92
jogging or running, 89–90, 247
preventing dehydration with, 119–20
Nasal cavity, 55–56
Nasal congestion, 3, 8, 61, 63, 222
Nasal obstruction, 61, 227
Nasal polyps, 60
National Institutes of Health, 196
Native Americans, 53, 80–81
Neurotransmission, and nitric oxide, 59 
New York Times, 122, 144, 187
Night, nasal breathing at, 64–66, 169
Nishino, T., 298 n 
Nitric oxide (NO), 58–61, 193–97, 300 n 
Nitroglycerine, 194
Nobel, Alfred, 194
Noble silence, 158
Nose, 55–61. See also Nasal breathing
nitric oxide and, 58–61
Nose Unblocking Exercise, 61–63, 62, 244–45, 245 
O 
Oatmeal, 197
Obesity, 174, 178, 180–81
--- END PAGE 349 ---

--- PAGE 350 ---
Oxygen Advantage program for, 282–85
Observing the breath, 156–58
Observing your thoughts, 149–52
O’Gara, Ronan, 162
Older persons, Oxygen Advantage program for, 268–70
Olympic athletes, 6, 13–14, 95, 102–3, 121–22, 123, 131, 146, 221
Olympic Training Center, U.S., 95
O’Riordan, Don, 112–13
Orthodontics, 52, 83, 227–29
Overbreathing. See Chronic overbreathing
Oxidative stress, 34, 187, 189–91, 319 n 
Oxygen Advantage program, 7, 234–35. See also specific topics 
Alison’s case, 29–31
Anna’s case, 198–99
benefits of, 36, 136–39, 241
BOLT scores and, 36, 40, 41, 138, 233–34
programs based on, 268–81
for children and teenagers, 286–89
David’s case, 8–9
Don Gordon’s case, 17–18, 137
Donna’s case, 11–13, 284–85
Doug’s case, 10–11
exercise summary, 242–65
guidelines before beginning, x
Nick Marshall’s case, 135–36
Penny’s case, 203–4
quick reference summary, 240, 266 
for unhealthy or older persons, 268–70
for weight loss and obesity, 282–85
Oxygenation
of the brain, 165–68
of heart, 193–208
of tissues and organs, 5, 19–20, 24, 26–27, 49, 108, 109, 285
Oxygen paradox, 17–31
delivery of oxygen from blood to muscles and organs, 26–27
dilation and constriction of airways and blood vessels, 27–28
--- END PAGE 350 ---

--- PAGE 351 ---
regulation of blood pH, 28–31
regulation of breathing, 21–25
respiratory system, 19–21
Oxygen saturation (SpO2), 20–21, 23–24, 126, 136–37
advanced simulation of high-altitude training, 132–33, 253
Oxygen uptake. See Maximal oxygen uptake
Oz, Mehmet, 59 
P 
Pagel, Mark, 114
Pali Canon, 224
Panic attacks, 23
Pantani, Marco, 98
Papworth method, 204
Paracelsus, 211
Patton, George, 111
Pearl divers, 105–6
Pei, Chris, 67–68
Phelps, Michael, 222
pH scale, 177–78
Physical exercise, 231–35
aerobic, 103–4, 180. See also High-intensity training
anaerobic, 103–4, 114, 180
cooldown, 91
determining whether you have exercised correctly, 91–92
high-altitude training. See High-altitude training
nasal breathing during, 80–86, 92, 189–90
jogging or running, 89–90, 247
reducing air intake during, 84–86
warm-up, 86–88
Physical injuries
maintaining fitness during, 191–92
warm-up to prevent, 86–88
Piszkin, Tom, 79–80
Pomegranate juice, 197
--- END PAGE 351 ---

--- PAGE 352 ---
Pool player, 161–62
Practical thoughts, 147–48
Prematch thinking, 162–65
Present moment, 160–61
Price, Weston, 52–53
Processed foods, 52–53, 173, 178, 197
Protein, 53
Pulse, 199
Pulse oximeters, 125–26 
Q 
Qigong, 67–68
Quantity of air, 1, 4
Quiet mind, 142, 144–46, 148–49, 152–55, 161, 164–65 
R 
Red blood cell count, 99–100
Red blood cells, 5, 6, 100–101, 106–7
oxygen saturation and, 20–21, 23–24, 35, 101, 136–37
Red wine, 197
Respiratory muscle strength, 36, 110–11 
Respiratory Physiology (West), 26
Respiratory system, 19–21, 20 
delivery of oxygen from blood to muscles and organs, 26–27
the diaphragm and, 71–74
nitric oxide and, 58–61, 195–96
the nose and, 55–61
regulation of breathing, 21–25
Rest, maintaining fitness during, 191–92
Rhinitis, 61
Richards-Ross, Sanya, 221
Riis, Bjarne, 98
Running. See also Marathon running
simulated high-altitude training while, 129, 129–30, 251–52
Running economy, 35–36, 297–98 n 
Rupp, Galen, 123
--- END PAGE 352 ---

--- PAGE 353 ---
S 
Salt Lake City Olympics (2002), 102
Samuel, Karen, 224
Schagatay, Erika, 305–6 n
Science of Breath, The (Rama), 56
Screen time and attention spans, 143–44 
Secret Race, The (Hamilton), 97
Sedentary lifestyle, 231, 232–33
Self-awareness, 14, 145
observing your thoughts, 149–52
Self-consciousness, 141–42
Self-doubt, 147, 150
Selker, Ted, 144
Senna, Ayrton, 143
Seoul Olympics (1988), 122
Sex life, and nitric oxide, 60 
Shut Your Mouth and Save Your Life (Catlin), 53
Siegel, Arthur, 116
Sighs (sighing), 3, 45, 72, 199, 244, 271
Simpson, Tom, 97
Simulated high-altitude training, 35, 46–49, 104–7, 249–54, 266 
advanced. See Advanced simulation of high-altitude training
benefits of, 105, 137
breath holding and, 105–7. See also Breath-holding exercises
while cycling, 130, 252
diet and, 179–80
importance of movement for, 110
increasing BOLT scores, 46–49
while jogging or running, 129, 129–30, 251–52
while swimming, 131–32, 252
while walking, 126–29, 127, 249–51, 250 
Sleep, 168–69
good breathing during, 64–66, 169
Sleep apnea, 64, 109, 168, 308 n, 312–13 n 
Social media and attention spans, 143–44
Soda water, 116
--- END PAGE 353 ---

--- PAGE 354 ---
Spleen, 99, 105–8, 305–6 n 
Sports performance, and BOLT and, 44–45
Steroid medications, 61, 213, 214
Stray-Gundersen, James, 101–2
Stress, 163–64, 174, 178, 180–81, 182–83
Stressed breathing, 72–73, 74
Strokes, 193
ST segment depression, 201–2, 323 n 
Sudden cardiac death, in young athletes, 200–204
Swart, Stephen, 98–99
Swimming (swimmers), 114, 222, 298 n, 311–12 n 
asthma and, 216–17
breath holding during, 131–32, 252
Sydney Olympics (2000), 131 
T 
Tabata, Izumi, 103
Tabata training, 103
Tai chi, 67–68, 92
Talking, increased breathing, 27–28
Taoism, 68
Taormina, Sheila, 131
Taping the mouth, 64–66, 80
Tarahumara Indians, 80–81
Tea, 197
Teenagers, Oxygen Advantage program for, 44, 286–89
Teeth, 83, 227–29
Testosterone, 96, 98
Thatcher, Margaret, 64
Thinking, 148–49, 152–55, 163–64
Timing your breathing, 76–78
Tongue posture, 55, 83, 222–24, 229
Tour de France, 96–99, 135
Traditional Chinese medicine, 68
Triggers
for asthma, 214
--- END PAGE 354 ---

--- PAGE 355 ---
for rhinitis, 61
Trinity College, Dublin, 153–54, 167–68, 221
Turbinates, 55
Turin Olympics (2006), 102–3
T-wave inversion, 201–2 
U 
Underwater hockey, 131–32
University at Albany, SUNY, 167
University of Arizona Cancer Center, 114
University of British Columbia, 147
University of California, Berkeley, 79
University of Chicago, 141
University of Exeter, 103, 197
University of Minnesota, 180
University of Patras, 202
University of Texas, 101
Upper-chest breathing, 42, 52, 69, 71, 72
Urine color, and hydration, 116
U.S. Anti-Doping Agency (USADA), 97–98 
V 
Vasoregulation, and nitric oxide, 59, 195
Viagra, 59–60
VO2 max. See Maximal oxygen uptake
Volume of breath. See Breathing volume 
W 
Walking, simulated high-altitude training while, 126–29, 127, 184, 249–51, 
250 
Walsh, David, 99
Warm-up, 86–88
breath-holding exercises, 85, 87–88
for exercise-induced asthma, 220
Water intoxication, 116
Water polo, 211, 217
--- END PAGE 355 ---

--- PAGE 356 ---
Wealth, and asthma rates, 211–12
Weddell seal, 105–6
Weight gain, 174, 178, 180–81
Weight loss, 173–74, 177, 179–80
Donna’s case, 12–13, 284–85
Oxygen Advantage program for, 282–85
Weitzberg, Eddie, 59, 60
West, John, 26
Western breathing habits, 4–5, 80–81
“What if” thoughts, 162–63
Wheezing, 28, 40, 41, 124, 212, 213, 215, 218
Wilde, Oscar, 148
Windpipe (trachea), 19, 54
Winfrey, Oprah, 98
Woods, Earl, 145
Woods, Tiger, 145 
Y 
Yawns (yawning), 45–46, 244
Yoga, 68–69, 224, 302 n 
Yogi Bhajan (Harbhajan Singh), 224
Yogi Ramacharaka (William Atkinson), 56
Yogi Science of Breath, 56 
Z 
Zátopek, Emil, 122–23
Zone, the, 140–69, 181–82
concentrated and undivided mind, 161–65
connecting with the inner body to enter, 158–60
entering at will, 143–55
following the breath to enter, 156–58
improving brain oxygenation, 165–68
living in the now to enter, 160–61
quality sleep for, 168–69
--- END PAGE 356 ---

--- PAGE 357 ---
About the Author 
PATRICK MCKEOWN was educated at Trinity College, Dublin, and later
studied under the auspices of the founder of the Buteyko Method, the late
Dr. Konstantin Buteyko. From a very young age, Patrick suffered from
asthma and relied on an array of medicines and inhalers until he discovered
the Buteyko Method at age twenty-six. By applying the principles from Dr.
Buteyko, Patrick experienced immediate relief from his asthmatic
symptoms—a feat that more than twenty years of medication had failed to
accomplish. Learning to breathe through his nose and reducing his
breathing volume positively changed his life in so many ways.
For the first time ever, Patrick’s asthma was under control.
This life-changing discovery motivated Patrick to change his career in
order to help children and adults who suffered from similar breathing
problems. Following his time in Russia in 2002, Patrick has been teaching
the Oxygen Advantage program in Australia, the United States, and
throughout Europe. He has written seven books, including in their
respective fields three Amazon.com bestsellers, and has been invited to
speak at dental and respiratory conferences around the world.
In collaboration with the University of Limerick, Patrick was the
instructor in a clinical study investigating the Buteyko Method as a
treatment for rhinitis in asthma. As published in the leading rhinitis journal 
Otolaryngology, the results showed a 70 percent reduction of nasal
symptoms in participants, including snoring, loss of smell, nasal congestion,
and difficulty breathing through the nose.
The Oxygen Advantage program is based on Patrick’s experience of
working with thousands of clients and hundreds of health care
professionals, along with his extensive research on breath-hold training
over the past thirteen years. A number of the exercises in this book were
--- END PAGE 357 ---

--- PAGE 358 ---
specifically created by Patrick to help athletes to improve their sports
performance.
Patrick has been interviewed internationally for radio and television,
including by Dr. Joseph Mercola, founder of the world’s largest health
website, Mercola.com. Patrick’s message is simple: Breathe through your
nose in a calm, gentle, and efficient manner. That’s all that matters.
Patrick’s passion for his subject enables him to continue developing and
refining his techniques to bring relief to asthma sufferers worldwide, and to
improve the fitness and well-being of athletes and nonathletes alike. 
Your profession is not what brings home your pay.
Your profession is what you were put on earth to do with
such passion and such intensity that it becomes spiritual in calling. 
—VINCENT VAN GOGH 
Discover great authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.
--- END PAGE 358 ---

--- PAGE 359 ---
Also by Patrick McKeown 
Asthma-Free Naturally
Anxiety Free: Stop Worrying and Quieten Your Mind
Sleep with Buteyko: Stop Snoring, Sleep Apnoea and Insomnia
Buteyko Meets Dr. Mew: Buteyko Method for Children and Teenagers
Close Your Mouth
--- END PAGE 359 ---

--- PAGE 360 ---
Copyright 
This book is written as a source of information only. The information contained in this book should
by no means be considered a substitute for the advice of a qualified medical professional, who should
always be consulted before beginning any new diet, exercise, or other health program.
Some names, identities, and circumstances have been changed in order to protect the anonymity of
the various individuals involved.
All efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy of the information contained in this book as of the
date published. The author and the publisher expressly disclaim responsibility for any adverse effects
arising from the use or application of the information contained herein.
THE OXYGEN ADVANTAGE. Copyright © 2015 by Patrick McKeown. All rights reserved under
International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have
been granted the nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-
screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse-
engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form
or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter invented, without the
express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
FIRST EDITION 
Illustrations by Bex Burgess 
ISBN 978-0-06-234945-3
EPub Edition August 2015 ISBN 9780062349484
15 16 17 18 19 OV/RRD 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
--- END PAGE 360 ---

--- PAGE 361 ---
About the Publisher 
Australia 
HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd.
Level 13, 201 Elizabeth Street
Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia 
www.harpercollins.com.au 
Canada 
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON M4W 1A8, Canada 
www.harpercollins.ca 
New Zealand 
HarperCollins Publishers New Zealand
Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive
Rosedale 0632
Auckland, New Zealand 
www.harpercollins.co.nz 
United Kingdom 
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
1 London Bridge Street
London SE1 9GF, UK 
www.harpercollins.co.uk 
United States 
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
195 Broadway
--- END PAGE 361 ---

--- PAGE 362 ---
New York, NY 10007 
www.harpercollins.com
--- END PAGE 362 ---

--- PAGE 363 ---
* From time to time, I do see an individual with lower blood oxygen
saturation, but this generally results from severe lung obstruction such as
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
--- END PAGE 363 ---
