



1
Praise for Transformer
‘Nick Lane’s exploration of the building blocks that underlie life’s big
fundamental questions – the origin of life itself, ageing and disease –
have shaped my thinking since I first came across his work. He is one of
my favourite science writers.’
Bill Gates
‘In this compulsively readable book, Lane takes us on a riveting journey,
ranging from the flow of energy to new ways of understanding cancer.
Lane provides a luminous understanding of how scientists, including
Lane himself, are rethinking energy and living organisms.’
Siddhartha Mukherjee, author of The Gene: An Intimate History
‘Thrilling and highly persuasive ... This hugely important book is set to
become a landmark, transforming our understanding of how life works.’
Gaia Vince, author of Nomad Century
‘I loved every page of Nick Lane’s new book. It’s one of the very best
books on the origin of life I’ve read.’
Lee Smolin, author of Einstein’s Unfinished Revolution
‘Hugely important ... a powerfully persuasive case for life being about
energy flow, flux and change. In Transformer, chemistry is quite literally
brought to life.’
Jim Al-Khalili, author of The World According to Physics
‘Amazing! Takes science writing to a new level ... with soaring prose
but uncompromising on scientific detail, Transformer made me think
about life on earth in a completely different way.’
Daniel M. Davis, author of The Secret Body
‘Hugely ambitious and tremendously exciting ... Transformer shows
how a molecular dance from the dawn of time still sculpts our lives
today. I read with rapt attention.’
Olivia Judson, author of Dr Tatiana’s Sex Advice to All Creation
‘Nobody explains the inner secrets of the living cell better than Nick
Lane ... a series of riveting detective stories.’ Richard Fortey, author of Trilobite!

[PAGE 2]

‘An exhilarating account of the biophysics of life, stretching from the
first stirrings of living matter to the psychology of consciousness. I felt
as if I was there, every step of the way.’
Mark Solms, author of The Hidden Spring
‘Nick Lane’s marvellously engaging Transformer refocused my
astronomer’s gaze on the vital chemistry of life on our own planet. Both
a scientific adventure story and an original quest to understand life on
Earth, Transformer also guides us on how to find life beyond.’
John Grunsfeld, former NASA chief scientist and astronaut
‘Fascinating ... Nick Lane brings together biology, chemistry and
physics to illuminate the role of energy in bringing matter alive.’
Sean Carroll, author of Something Deeply Hidden: Quantum Worlds and
the Emergence of Spacetime
‘Nick Lane never writes about the living world without offering entirely
new perspectives on how life itself works ... Biochemistry has never
looked more exciting.’
Philip Ball, author of Critical Mass TRANSFORMER The deep chemistry of life and death NICK LANE 4 First published in Great Britain in 2022 by

[PAGE 3] Profile Books Ltd 29 Cloth Fair London EC1A 7JQ www.




[PAGE 4]





profilebooks.com
Copyright © Nick Lane, 2022
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
The right of Nick Lane to be identified as the author of this work has been
asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored or introduced into a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written
permission of both the copyright owner and the publisher of this book.
Poetry by Richard Howard (extract on page ix and ‘Like Most Revelations’ on
page 285) reproduced by kind permission of the author.
Lines from ‘Do not go gentle into that good night’ by Dylan Thomas on page
232 reproduced by permission of David Higham Associates, © The Dylan
Thomas Trust.
All reasonable efforts have been made to obtain copyright permissions where
required. Any omissions and errors of attribution are unintentional and will, if
notified in writing to the publisher, be corrected in future printings.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978 1 78816 054 4
eISBN 978 1 78283 450 2
Typeset in Sabon by MacGuru Ltd In memory of Ian Ackland-Snow 6 Contents Introduction: Life itself

[PAGE 5] 1.



[PAGE 6]


Discovering the nanocosm
2. The path of carbon
3. From gases to life
4. Revolutions
5. To the dark side
6. The flux capacitor
Epilogue: Self
Envoi: ‘Like Most Revelations’
The forward Krebs cycle
The reverse Krebs cycle
Appendix 1: Red protein mechanics
Appendix 2: The Krebs line
List of abbreviations
Further reading
Acknowledgements
Index to this mortal process of continuing, it is the movement that creates the form.

[PAGE 7]


Richard Howard INTRODUCTION LIFE ITSELF From  space  it  looks  grey  and  crystalline, obliterating the  blue-green colours of the living Earth.

[PAGE 8]



It is criss-crossed by irregular patterns and
convergent striations. There’s a central amorphous density, where these
scratches seem lighter. This ‘growth’ does not look alive, although it has
extended out  along  some  lines,  and  there  is  something grasping and
parasitic about it. Across the globe there are thousands of them, varying
in shape and detail, but all of them grey, angular, inorganic ... spreading.
Yet at night they light up, glowing in the dark sky, suddenly beautiful.
Perhaps these cankers on the landscape are in some sense living – there
is a controlled flow of energy, there must be information and some form
of metabolism; some turnover of materials. Are they alive?
No, of course not; they are cities. We know them intimately from the
inside, even  if  most  of  us  know  little  about  the  flow  of  energy  and
materials through our own cities. We know them mainly by their visible
structures, buildings on a map. But an empty city with no power, no
energy flow, no traffic, no jostling crowds, is an eerie place, chilling and
post-apocalyptic. Dead. What brings a city to life is the people, their
movement from place to place, along with the flow of materials that
sustains our  daily  existence –  electricity,  heat,  water,  gas,  sewage. It
would not  be  misleading to  say  that  a  city  is  brought to  life  by  the
controlled flow of energy and material in this way. Set up a time-lapse
camera on a busy street downtown and we get a sense of this flow,
obeying laws of flux that we can barely guess at. In my mind’s eye, we
could rise above the conurbation and picture this combined flux, map out
the  jumbled  flow  of  people, lights  and  power,  pulsating down  some
streets, just  a  residual overflow in  others, some  districts a  hive  of
bustling activity,  others nearly dormant until  the  evening when  the
commuters return home and the lights flick on. We could map out the
flux that animates a city. Certainly, we can imagine a city this way, but
mostly all we notice are the buildings. The structure.
A cell is a city of a sort. It too has buildings, or at least physical
structures. Unlike our  own  constructions a  cell  is  not  dominated by
gravity, and is truly built in three dimensions. If  you  shrink yourself down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying.

[PAGE 9]
Membranes
sweep past  your  view:  curving,  fluid  walls, swooping overhead or
plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending
out  in  all  directions. Traffic  as  you’ve never seen  before: great
mechanical contraptions, machines the size of buildings, pistons whirring
faster than the eye can see. The great citadel of the nucleus, heart of the
metropolis, looms in the distance, miles away from you, but dominating
your field of view. All is hustle and bustle. Unlike any human city, the
vast sweeping walls themselves move and conjoin and dissociate again.
Zoom out, and the whole city of the cell can change shape and move
around, reassembling its internal structures as it does so. From out here,
through the lens of a microscope, we can watch the trafficking of goods
through the  cell,  lit  up  by  fluorescent dyes  like  a  town  at  night,  all
electric reds and blues and greens. Yet everything I have described is
buildings, the structures of the cell. We can picture this marvellous city
on a scale less than thousandths of a millimetre; we can visualise the
movement of its parts like never before. But the cell is animated on a
smaller scale  still. Even the  most  powerful microscopes can’t
discriminate the moment-by-moment flow of energy and materials that
animates all life, the unceasing changes that transform small molecules
over millionths of seconds, and distances of less than a millionth of a
millimetre. Deep within these marvellous moving structures, the flow of
energy and matter is still invisible, as hard to imagine as the restless
electrons that power our conurbations and the people within. Perhaps for
that reason, we have a tendency to discount its importance to life.
Few things are as inscrutable as a cell. In the seventeenth century,
when the Dutch microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek unveiled the
cosmos hidden in a drop of water, he marvelled at the little ‘animalcules’
that lived out their lives there, all whirring parts and purpose. For all our
deep explorations of the cityscape of the cell, the behaviour of these
protozoa is as beguiling and nearly as mysterious to us today. Do these
microscopic blobs of animated protoplasm know what they are doing as
they chase and consume each other? Surely not! But to our naive eye, it
almost looks as if they do – as if these tiny beings have hopes and fears
and pains of their own. As if they feel some joy or relief when they tear
themselves free from the mechanical rotating jaws of some minuscule
gyrating predator. Some  350  years  after  van  Leeuwenhoek, we  now
know what most of these whirring parts do, what they’re made of, how
they function. We have taken them apart, in centrifuges or with optical
tweezers, read out the code that specifies their structures, deciphered the regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts.

[PAGE 10]