
--- PAGE 0 ---

--- END PAGE 0 ---

--- PAGE 1 ---

--- END PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 2 ---

--- PAGE 3 ---

--- END PAGE 3 ---

--- PAGE 4 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 4 ---

--- PAGE 5 ---
First published in 2025 by Victory Belt Publishing Inc.
Copyright © 2025 Ben Greenfield
All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, or stored in a database or
retrieval system, without prior written permission from the publisher.
ISBN-13: 978-1-628605-39-6
The author is not a licensed practitioner, physician, or medical
professional and offers no medical diagnoses, treatments, suggestions, or
counseling. The information presented herein has not been evaluated by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and it is not intended to diagnose,
treat, cure, or prevent any disease. Full medical clearance from a licensed
physician should be obtained before beginning or modifying any diet,
exercise, or lifestyle program, and physicians should be informed of all
nutritional changes.
The author claims no responsibility to any person or entity for any
liability, loss, or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or
indirectly as a result of the use, application, or interpretation of the
information presented herein.
Cover design by Allan Santos
Interior design and illustrations by Charisse Reyes, Crizalie Olimpo, Allan
Santos, and Elita San Juan
Printed in Canada
--- END PAGE 5 ---

--- PAGE 6 ---
TC 0125 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
COFFEE, BOOZE & HORROR FLICKS01

How to Rewire Your Skull’s Supercomputer
38 DEGREES BELOW ZERO02

How to Fix a Leaky Brain
BREATHWORK AND BEYOND03

How to Banish Stress and Kiss High Cortisol Goodbye
EAT YOURSELF SMART04

How to Fuel Your Brain
LIMITLESS AND LUCY05

Nootropics, Smart Drugs, and Psychedelics
UPGRADE YOUR HEAD06

Brain Biohacking Gear, Games, and Tools
SLEEP07

How to Fix Jet Lag, Nap Like a Champ, and Track Sleep Cycles
LEAN AND MEAN08

How to Burn Fat Fast Without Destroying Your Body
SEXY FOREVER09

How to Build Functional Muscle for Life
FITNESS DECODED10

The Ultimate Blueprint for a Perfect Body
BIOHACK YOUR BODY11

Science, Gear, and Tools for Building the Perfect Human
WOLVERINE12 
A Complete Toolbox for Recovering with Lightning Speed
--- END PAGE 7 ---

--- PAGE 8 ---
CLEAN GUT13

How to Fix Your Gut, Optimize Digestion, and Maximize Nutrient Absorption
DIETS SUCK14

How to Customize Your Nutrition to You
NEVER GET SICK15

How to Build an Unstoppable Immune System
QUANTIFIED SELF16

How to Test, Track, and Interpret Blood, Saliva, Urine, and Poop
SUPERMODEL17

Maximize Your Symmetry and Beauty
SEX18

Tantra, Orgasms, Libido, Sexual Satisfaction, Hormones, and Beyond
LONGEVITY DECODED19

Ancestral Wisdom and Modern Science to Maximize Health and Lifespan
INVISIBLE20

Hidden Variables That Make or Break Your Mind, Body, and Spirit
ROUTINES AND RITUALS21

A Plan for Your Perfect Day
CONCLUSION
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 8 ---

--- PAGE 9 ---
As a token of gratitude for you taking a huge step in
your journey to life optimization, and so that you can
unleash your full potential with zero guesswork, I’m
gifting you a done-for-you road map to success,
including extra Boundless resources, training and
nutrition plans, daily routines, and much more.
You can grab all your free Boundless bonuses by
visiting boundlessbook.com/book-resources-2 or
scanning the code below:
You’ll get an exclusive toolbox of invaluable resources
for applying all the tactics in Boundless, access to the
--- END PAGE 9 ---

--- PAGE 10 ---
best biohacking and life optimization experts
(including me!) who can answer all your questions,
and the chance to join a vibrant community of other
Boundless readers and health enthusiasts prepared to
propel you forward in your journey toward living
boundlessly.
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 10 ---

--- PAGE 11 ---
INTRODUCTION
Boundless
Adjective: unlimited or immense
Synonyms: limitless, unbounded,
untold, bottomless, immeasurable,
measureless, incalculable,
inestimable, abundant, abounding,
great, inexhaustible
WELCOME TO YOUR
BLUEPRINT FOR
BECOMING BOUNDLESS.
The average person wanders through life with brain fog, bloating, gas,
indigestion, constipation, crunching joints, insomnia, lost libido, fibroids, cysts,
acne, and piles upon piles of a lifetime of accumulated excess fats releasing
inflammatory molecules and squeezing the lifeblood out of their organs. And
--- END PAGE 11 ---

--- PAGE 12 ---
amid all this physical pain and fatigue, we’re constantly searching for evasive
meaning and elusive happiness. Look around you. We’re a step away from being
the useless, soft-drink-sipping blobs who float on hovering chairs through the
hallways in the robot cartoon Wall-E.
This complete lack of realization of our full human potential begins when
we’re babies, as we can see in the host of health issues the up-and-coming
generation is experiencing, including lack of proper muscle and brain
growth, immune system weakness, low IQ, stunted growth, obesity,
depression, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, social anxiety, and
other frustrating problems that parents, teachers, and society as a whole
now accept as all too common.
But what if this didn’t have to be?
What if our kids were tiny, optimized human machines?
After all, Mozart learned to play the piano at the age of four, composed
his first piece at age five, and wrote his first symphony at age eight. Pablo
Picasso, when he was just twelve, had an astonishing grasp of the
fundamentals of art and was producing photorealistic anatomical
sketches. Gian Lorenzo Bernini was churning out intricate, lifelike stone
sculptures at only eight years old. But these folks weren’t special
childhood prodigies, savants, or some kind of unique geniuses. These were
normal human beings. Sadly, in our modern era, we’ve forgotten how to
nurture and grow an amazing human mind, body, and spirit. Instead, we’ve
settled for a generation of kids who wind up on PeopleOfWalmart.com—
attached to leashes and chewing on Ritalin.
And what if we adults—you and I—could leap out of bed each morning
and tackle the day with the extreme ferocity of an electrified tiger? What if
our performance, fat loss, recovery, digestion, brain, sleep, hormones, and
spirits were optimized and firing on all cylinders? What if we all walked
around like superheroes with a body like Batman’s, a mind like those of
the heroes of the smart-drug movies Limitless and Lucy, and a spirit like an
--- END PAGE 12 ---

--- PAGE 13 ---
enlightened yogi’s? What if you could speed-read, memorize cards,
remember the names of everyone at the cocktail party, wear any jeans you
want, step onto a beach with your chest out and abs in, age gracefully with
zero Botox and liposuction required, and have an intense feeling of inner
peace, love, joy, happiness, and spiritual satisfaction?
What if this ability to look, feel, and perform at the human body’s full
capacity wasn’t the stuff of lore but was instead the status quo? Sure, there
are UFC and NFL gladiators fighting for glory on television with
optimized bodies, random monks and meditators wandering the planet
with optimized spirits, and professional poker players, computer
programmers, and race car drivers hunched over card games, keyboards,
and steering wheels with optimized minds. But in a perfect world—a
world that is fully attainable—you would have it all: total optimization of
body, spirit, and mind.
You would be, in a word, boundless.
So what does being boundless actually look like and feel like?
Owning a boundless mind means you have balanced and complete
levels of important neurotransmitters so that your nervous system can
flawlessly communicate; your brain is free of inflammation and fog; you’ve
developed potent stress-banishing and cortisol-decreasing strategies; your
IQ is elevated, along with your working memory and executive function;
you understand how to effectively use nootropics, smart drugs, and brain-
enhancing foods, biohacks, gear, and tools; your sleep is pure,
uninterrupted, and efficient; and, ultimately, you feel as though you
actually have power and control over your thoughts, feelings, interactions,
and communication.
Owning a boundless body means you know how to rapidly get lean and
burn fat; you know how to build muscle in the safest, cleanest, and fastest
way possible; you’ve fixed your gut, eliminated digestive issues, and
maximized nutrient absorption; you know the ideal movements, exercises,
--- END PAGE 13 ---

--- PAGE 14 ---
tools, foods, supplements, and workouts for strength, power, speed,
balance, mobility, and endurance; you’ve cracked the code on maximizing
recovery and recovery speed; you possess an unstoppable immune system;
and you have a potent arsenal of tools to increase your symmetry and
beauty.
Owning a boundless spirit means that you can consciously control
your thoughts and beliefs to positively affect your health; you have a
thriving practice of gratitude, love, and joy; you understand how to use
currently fringe methods such as sound healing and vibrational
frequencies to enhance your physiology; you’ve optimized your social
connections, friendships, and relationships; you’ve maximized tantra, love,
and sexual satisfaction; you’ve optimized the hidden variables that can
make or break your mind, body, and spirit, including air, light, electricity,
and water; you’ve learned from residents of the world’s Blue Zones and
longevity hot spots how to optimize your life, happiness, and fulfillment;
and your daily habits and routines have allowed you to create your perfect
day.
This book is your blueprint to becoming boundless—to being able to
defy the modern norm of staggering through life with low energy, brain
fog, a sluggish body, and untapped potential and instead call upon every
shred of energy you want whenever you need it, so that you can achieve
the most adventurous, joyful, and fulfilling life possible.
--- END PAGE 14 ---

--- PAGE 15 ---
WHO THIS BOOK IS FOR
Allow me to give you an example of the type of person who could use a
guide for becoming boundless. Imagine a man named Kevin. Kevin is
standing in front of his bathroom mirror: frowning, concentrating, and
flexing all at the same time as he stares at and analyzes his thirty-two-
year-old body. For the past five years, he’s lived as a self-described health
seeker and has even been accused of being a “woo-woo fitness geek,” but
it’s certainly been an uphill, frustrating battle of perusing recommended
books, scrolling through fitness blogs, and experimenting with low-carb,
low-fat, low-gluten, low-dairy, low-lectin, and definitely low-taste diets.
Yet his body still doesn’t feel “right.” At his desk job as a materials
engineer, he scrunches the glasses up his nose and squints at the computer
monitor when his afternoon brain fog sets in; he’s never actually done that
triathlon he keeps saying he’ll eventually do; and his gut rumbles with
mild, distracting bloating all through the day. Despite some success at
hacking and upgrading his body and brain, he still feels empty, and he’s
considering signing up for his eighth ayahuasca retreat so that he can keep
working on finding his purpose. He’s also considering opting instead for a
ten-day Vipassana meditation, which he just heard on a health podcast is a
better way to discover how to live the adventurous, joyful, fulfilling life he
craves and hasn’t found yet.
Deep inside, Kevin wishes that he had some kind of a blueprint for the
human machine that he could use to cut through all the confusion keeping
him from getting what he wants—a blueprint he could understand
without a doctorate in human science, but one also steeped in research
and experience, with clear instructions that could finally allow him to
look, feel, and perform the way he knows he can without wasting his time
or using old-school, inefficient techniques.
--- END PAGE 15 ---

--- PAGE 16 ---
That’s the exact blueprint you’re now holding in your hands: a
complete prescription for becoming boundless. In this book, you’re going
to discover exactly how to connect with, nourish, feel, taste, and see what
it is to be boundless for the remainder of your long and fulfilled life. You
can consider this book to be your step-by-step guide to optimizing your
life force, achieving a plane of higher existence, and realizing the full
potential of the human machine—including increasing your intelligence,
decoding sleep and sleep cycles, maximizing symmetry and beauty,
building muscle, burning fat, having mind-blowing sex, defying aging,
achieving maximum longevity, and acquiring deep and lasting love and
happiness.
You will learn the fine pursuit of becoming not just a good exerciser or
a really fit person, but a completely optimized human being who is able to
“crush it” in all aspects of life, from body to mind to spirit and beyond—a
human being who, in the words of science fiction novelist Robert Heinlein,
can “change a diaper, plan an invasion, butcher a hog, conn a ship, design a
building, write a sonnet, balance accounts, build a wall, set a bone,
comfort the dying, take orders, give orders, cooperate, act alone, solve
equations, analyze a new problem, pitch manure, program a computer,
cook a tasty meal, fight efficiently, die gallantly.” In other words, all the
push-ups and pull-ups and squats in the world don’t matter unless you are
able to live an adventurous, fulfilling, joyful, and limitless life with distinct
purpose and meaning. To die having left your distinct mark on the world
and having encountered everything our grand universe has to offer. I don’t
know about you, but I think that’s a pretty cool way to experience life—
and if, like me, you have been nagged by a restless feeling that there must
be more to life than mere day-to-day existence, then this book is for you.
Upon diving into the first several chapters of this book, you will
discover that you actually can look, feel, and perform the way you’ve
always sensed that remarkable and complex human beings should be able
--- END PAGE 16 ---

--- PAGE 17 ---
to. You’ll find that your willpower, cognition, decision-making, lack of
procrastination, and focus can all be biologically enhanced without
spending thousands of dollars on biohacks or an advanced mind-training
vacation. With a new, sharpened mind, you’ll go on to see how simple it is
to look good naked while enhancing your body’s power, speed, mobility,
balance, and stamina. You’ll crack the code on optimizing hormones,
fixing digestion, determining the perfect diet for you, and never wasting a
second in the gym again. Finally, you will receive the icing on the cake: the
elusive and meaningful happiness the world’s Blue Zones and longevity
hot spots have discovered, along with exactly how to foster that same
happy life for yourself by pursuing gratitude, love, relationships, purpose,
and meaning. Upon turning the final page in this book, you will have
transformed yourself, your body, and your brain into a living being capable
of stepping out the door and into the sunshine to enjoy the ultimate joyful,
adventurous, and fulfilling life.
ABOUT ME
But you may be wondering why you should listen to me: a messy-haired,
biohacking, self-experimenting immersive journalist who lives his life off-
grid in the backwoods of Washington State on a goats-and-chickens farm
with my wife and twin boys.
Allow me to give you a bit of background.
I was raised in rural northern Idaho and homeschooled through
twelfth grade. I was president of the chess club, a thirteen-year violin
veteran, a fantasy fiction author, and a boy who spent most of his
childhood years with his nose in a book or traipsing through the
countryside with a handmade bow and spear.
I graduated high school at age fifteen and, after receiving an offer to
play varsity tennis, began college at sixteen. For four years, I studied
--- END PAGE 17 ---

--- PAGE 18 ---
anatomy, physiology, biomechanics, pharmaceuticals, microbiology,
biochemistry, and nutrition, eventually completing a rigorous series of
strength and conditioning certifications and internships at Duke
University and the NFL before graduating at age twenty as the top senior
in my class at the University of Idaho—all while working as a bartender,
personal trainer, lab assistant, nutritionist, spin instructor, athletic trainer,
and strength and conditioning coach. During this rigorous course of study,
I competed as president of the triathlon club, middle for the volleyball
team, hole set for the water polo team, and onstage as a muscle-bound
bodybuilder at 215 pounds and 3 percent body fat, drenched in glitter and
tanning cream with a hefty dose of red wine and dark chocolate to make
my veins pop.
After completing my bachelor’s degree in exercise science and getting
married to a Montana farm girl, I was accepted at six medical schools. But
I quickly became disillusioned with the failures of modern medicine and
opted instead to attain a master’s degree in exercise physiology and
biomechanics, after which I leaped hard-core into the fitness world,
partnering with physicians and opening a series of personal-training
studios, gyms, and physiology and biomechanics labs across Idaho and
Washington—eventually being voted America’s top personal trainer in
2008. In late 2008, I became the father of twin sons, sold all my studios and
gyms, and pivoted into homeschooling my boys; writing, speaking, and
consulting; launching one of the world’s first fitness podcasts; becoming a
New York Times bestselling author of thirteen books; and starting a blog
that now reaches over two million rabid fans each month. During this
time, while making a name for myself as a relentless self-experimenter and
biohacker, I became a pro obstacle course racer, completed the coveted
Spartan Delta (a collection of nine of the most brutal obstacle-course-
racing events on the planet), trained with Navy SEALs, competed across
--- END PAGE 18 ---

--- PAGE 19 ---
the globe in open-water swims, mountain runs, and adventure races, won
multiple USA bowhunting competitions, and appeared on the planet’s
toughest reality TV shows.
While building an empire in the fitness industry, I competed as one of
the top-ranked amateur triathletes in the world, completing over 120 races
spanning over 6,200 miles and 13 Ironman triathlons, winning gold medals
for the USA in long course triathlon, and leading swim, bike, and run
enthusiasts in guided adventures through Hawaii, Thailand, Japan, and
beyond. In 2013 and 2014, I was named one of the world’s one hundred
most influential people in health and fitness and began to coach the
world’s top CEOs, chefs, biohackers, poker players, tennis players,
motocross and endurance competitors, and professional athletes from the
UFC, the NHL, the NBA, the NFL, and beyond—along with advising and
investing in a multitude of companies in the health, fitness, and nutrition
industry.
Along the way, I’ve had the privilege to travel the world to hunt down
fringe superfoods and supplements, biohacks and blood tests,
centenarians and scientists, and all manner of little-known but highly
effective ways to optimize your life. Within the pages of this book, you’ll
find plenty of the wisdom and practical tips I’ve discovered from those
experts, along with what I’ve learned in the trenches as I traveled the
globe and subjected my body to the brutality of being bloodied, frozen,
dehydrated, drained, and pushed to the absolute limits of human physical
and mental performance.
Today, from my quiet home on ten acres in the forested wilderness of
the Inland Northwest, my family and I grow our own food, hunt our meat,
and forage for plants, while I continue to relentlessly experiment with all
the latest biohacks and life optimization strategies and gadgets, combining
hefty doses of ancestral wisdom with modern science in my constant
quest to optimize the human blueprint. On average, I read at least five
--- END PAGE 19 ---

--- PAGE 20 ---
books each week, spend most of my mornings immersed for hours in the
latest health and fitness research, and engage in immersive journalism
quests across the globe to discover what works and what doesn’t—what
makes you feel good and what threatens to give you insomnia and
explosive diarrhea. This book is the result: within the pages of Boundless,
you’ll discover all the best that I’ve discovered from hefty amounts of time
in the trenches combined with a voracious approach to researching and
decoding the latest studies and learnings in the fields of health, wellness,
biohacking, longevity, spirituality, and beyond.
So that’s me. But although Boundless is richly enhanced with stories
from my own immersive experiences and deep, meaningful conversations
I’ve had with the world’s leading experts, this isn’t about me. It’s about
you.
WHAT’S IN THIS UPDATED
VERSION?
I’ll admit that it can be frustrating to have a job as an author, coach,
podcaster, and speaker in the realm of human science. The field is
constantly evolving. New science emerges on high-fat versus low-fat diets,
the best type of training for fat loss or muscle gain, or what actually helps
humans live a long time. New self-optimization and biohacking tools are
constantly emerging, as are self-quantification and testing technologies.
Not a day goes by that I’m not reviewing at least a dozen new studies and
learning about a host of new protocols, tools, and tactics for helping
people look, feel, and perform better.
As a result, I realized that even a comprehensive book like Boundless, a
book that took years to research and write, finally needed to be updated
with the latest and greatest strategies for increasing health span and
--- END PAGE 20 ---

--- PAGE 21 ---
lifespan. Within Boundless 2.0, you’ll find a host of brand-new content,
including
• How to turn up the volume on mitochondrial optimization, density,
and biogenesis for maximizing your energy currency and minimizing
risk of metabolic dysfunction
• New ways to stimulate your vagus nerve for beating stress, sleeping
soundly, and increasing HRV, including the best ways to use electricity,
light, and sound for fine-tuning your nervous system
• Updated step-by-step systems for rebooting your circadian rhythm,
beating jet lag, and optimizing sleep, naps, and meditation for the
deepest relaxation and recovery
• Navigating the confusing world of fats and fatty acids while mitigating
the damage of seed oils and decoding restaurant menus and packaged
food labels
• The latest science on how EMFs and electromagnetic frequencies
impact your brain and how to modify your appliances, computers,
smartphones, and other devices to shield your body, brain, home, and
office more effectively
• How to increase libido and sexual performance, go a longer time with
more pleasure in the bedroom, decrease time between orgasms, and
develop better, deeper relationships
• The latest science on chronic, stealth co-infections, mold, mycotoxins,
detoxification, Lyme, CIRS (chronic inflammatory response
syndrome), and more—along with how to manage these issues safely
and effectively
• A fully updated list of the best doctors on the planet and the medical
teams and clinics who can help fix issues using smart precision,
diagnostic, and functional medicine protocols
--- END PAGE 21 ---

--- PAGE 22 ---
• Brand-new smart drugs, brain-boosting peptides, and nootropic stacks
I’ve never before revealed, along with precise instructions for
managing TBIs and concussions
• The latest age-reversal supplements, drugs, biohacks, and tactics based
on the results of my latest half-decade of experimenting with the new
science of longevity and age reversal
• The truth about a hidden but highly prevalent sleep assassin never
mentioned in the first edition of Boundless, and exactly what you can
do about it
• Done-for-you instructions for how to use my favorite little-known
minimalist moves to burn more fat all day long, without stepping foot
into the gym
• The latest research on fat-loss peptides like Ozempic and GLP-1
agonists, whether they really work, and safer, more natural alternatives
for quelling cravings and satiating your appetite
• The truth about what it really takes to live a long time, especially if
you’re not a wealthy tech entrepreneur or biohacking billionaire but
still want the best options for regeneration and rejuvenation
• Fully updated fitness routines, morning habits, and daily structure for
the most potent combination of physical and mental performance and
productivity
• How to build your own blue zone and biohacked home, including
brand-new strategies to optimize the air, light, water, electricity, and
health of your living and working environments
• The latest tips, tricks, and tools to recover from and fix injuries faster
while reducing nagging aches and pains that keep you from the sports
and workouts you love
--- END PAGE 22 ---

--- PAGE 23 ---
• Hidden reasons your gut isn’t working the way you want it to and
exactly how to fix it for good using the most up-to-date tests,
supplements, detoxifications, diets, fasting protocols, and healing
strategies
• My latest thoughts on the keto and carnivore diets and how to modify
them to make them healthier
• Fully updated recommendations for immune assailants like cancer and
viruses, along with a detailed list of exactly what I would do if I got
cancer
• The best of self-quantification, with the latest list of labs, reference
ranges, and tests for analyzing your body, brain, blood, and biomarkers
with the greatest accuracy and precision
• Why I’ve changed my approach to oral care and dentistry, and how to
take care of your body, heart, and health, beginning with your mouth
• How I stay healthy and maintain the ideal routine at home and when
traveling, along with my new minimalist go-to travel and “busy day”
dietary approaches
• And much, much more
Updating Boundless in this way involved countless hours of collecting,
consolidating, researching, and experimenting with a host of new health
tactics, then making the information easy to understand and actionable
for you, but the final result is an updated and fully refreshed book that is
going to save you from reading hundreds of other titles, listening to
thousands of hours of podcasts and audiobooks, and scratching your head
about what the latest science says and means.
--- END PAGE 23 ---

--- PAGE 24 ---
HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF
THIS BOOK
As you read, don’t feel pressured to digest this entire book cover to cover.
Instead, think of Boundless as a cookbook for any element of your mind,
body, or spirit that you want to target with laser-like precision. Are you
trying to heal an injury fast, recover from surgery, or simply banish your
ever-expanding morning soreness? Flip to chapter 12. Are you sick of
afternoon brain fog, curious about the emerging world of smart drugs, or
wanting an extra edge for cognition? Read chapter 5. Do you want to
combine the secrets of the ancients with modern biohacking science to
live as long as possible with stellar health? Then chapter 19 is for you.
Sure, each chapter builds on the last in terms of developing your
knowledge and understanding and allowing you to become an expert in all
things related to what makes your brain tick, your body work, and your
spirit happy, but please don’t think you need to take on this entire book at
once if that’s not your desired approach. Yes, I’ve designed it so that
professional athletes, coaches, physicians, medical researchers, physical
therapists, personal trainers, nutritionists, and other health professionals
can take their game to the next level with the information they discover.
But I have also had non-experts in mind—like Kevin, our materials
engineer yearning for something more—so that anyone can flip to any
chapter and discover research-proven, reality-tested techniques to build
muscle, burn fat, live longer, have mind-blowing sex, raise healthy and
robust children, and much, much more.
When I first finished Boundless, it was a beast—over 1,200 pages long.
Although I edited it down to the exact version you’re now reading, I have
painstakingly gone through the steps to ensure that every last piece of cut
content and every relevant study, podcast, book, and much more are
online, with a webpage devoted to each chapter. You’ll find the necessary
--- END PAGE 24 ---

--- PAGE 25 ---
URL at the end of each chapter. You can use these resource webpages to
take an extremely deep dive into any topic you discover within the pages
of Boundless. Finally, there’s even an audiobook version available wherever
audiobooks are found.
Phew. That’s it. You ready for this? It’s time to become boundless.
#beboundless
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 25 ---

--- PAGE 26 ---
01
COFFEE, BOOZE & HORROR
FLICKS
HOW TO REWIRE YOUR SKULL’ S
SUPERCOMPUTER
In 2013, on a brutally hot day at Ironman Canada, I officially bonked. The bonk
hit me hard at mile 14 of the 26.2-mile marathon run course. Up until this point,
--- END PAGE 26 ---

--- PAGE 27 ---
through the entire 2.4-mile swim, 112-mile bike ride, and previous 13 miles of
pounding the blistering pavement, things had been going quite well—as well as
things can go when both nostrils are crusted with sweat and salt, piss is dripping
down the insides of both legs and burning the spandex blisters on your skin, and
your feet feel like dead fish mashed inside stiff running shoes.
If you are unfamiliar with the term bonk, allow me to explain.
A bonk happens when your entire body runs out of carbohydrates.
Usually, the sugars stored in your muscles and liver, known as glycogen,
can fuel about one and a half to two hours of exercise. When you shove
carbohydrates down your gaping maw in the form of gels, sports drinks,
energy bars, and, at this point in the race, just about anything else you can
get your sweaty paws on, including cookies, Coke, and candy from
Ironman aid stations, this time to exhaustion can be extended by several
more torturous hours.
But eventually, the bonk occurs. When it finally strikes, your entire
body and brain shut down, fast. Your tongue sags out of the corner of your
mouth as if you were a drunken sailor. Your pelvic muscles lose their
precious grip on your bowels. You forget third-grade math. Things get
ugly. Since fat is not metabolized into ATP—your body’s primary form of
energy—as quickly as carbohydrates are, your pace slows to an
embarrassing stroll-in-the-park speed, and a midrace nap by the side of
the road becomes incredibly appealing.
But this bonk took me by surprise. See, I thought I had figured out a
way to biohack the bonk. My bonk-proof strategy wasn’t sexy back then,
and nobody was talking much about it, but it’s called ketosis. By forcing
my body to adapt to an incredibly high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet in the
months leading up to the race and then consuming primarily MCT oil,
coconut oil, electrolytes, and low amounts of a slow-release form of
carbohydrate during the race, I thought I could spare muscle glycogen and
instead begin burning the tens of thousands of calories of stored body fat
--- END PAGE 27 ---

--- PAGE 28 ---
that even the leanest of endurance athletes possess. Sounds reasonable,
right?
Not quite. Based on the fact that it took half a liter of sickeningly sweet
Coke, two energy gels, and an entire plastic bottle of neon-green Gatorade
to snap me out of my midrace stupor, the strategy was far from
reasonable. Something went wrong.
So what happened?
It turns out I had neglected one critical variable. Five days after the
race, I explained my Canadian conundrum to my friend Dr. Peter Attia, a
physician and researcher who crushes twenty-four-hour bicycle rides and
brutal CrossFit workouts in a completely fasted state.
“Oh, that’s simple,” he grunted. “You didn’t bonk. You got central
nervous system fatigue.”
Central nervous system fatigue? I faintly remembered my exercise
physiology professor describing this unique cause of burnout. It’s a bonk-
like feeling that occurs when something significant changes in the
concentration of neurotransmitters, the brain’s signaling chemicals. As the
brain and body work harder and harder, muscle tissue is broken down,
resulting in increased levels of a sleep-inducing amino acid called
tryptophan. Tryptophan crosses the blood-brain barrier and, smack-dab in
the middle of an adrenaline-pumping competition, causes you to crave a
post-Thanksgiving-dinner siesta. Tryptophan is the precursor to the
neurotransmitter serotonin, and increased levels of serotonin can cause
lethargy, depress motor neuron excitability, alter nervous system and
hormone functions, decrease the strength of muscular contractions, and
even impair judgment.
In addition, during CNS fatigue, levels of excitatory neurotransmitters
such as dopamine and acetylcholine plummet, which is why copious
amounts of caffeine and, interestingly, amphetamines can help counteract
it. I suspect this is why so many endurance athletes, beyond sucking down
--- END PAGE 28 ---

--- PAGE 29 ---
as much sugar as they can get their hands on, turn to heavily caffeinated
fuels such as Red Bull, Coke, and even NoDoz tablets during a long race.
(If you want a comprehensive resource on the central nervous system,
check out the book Endure by Alex Hutchinson. It takes a deep dive into
everything a human being can do to override mental and physical fatigue.)
But unhealthy boatloads of carbs and caffeine weren’t Dr. Attia’s
solution. Instead, he presented one simple suggestion: “Amino acids. You
just need to take a bunch of amino acids every hour during the race, and
you’ll need far fewer carbs and stimulants.”
Dr. Attia went on to explain that amino acids are the building blocks of
neurotransmitters. When your blood levels of amino acids are low—as
might be the case when afternoon brain fog strikes, or you are struck with
insomnia, or you can’t stop thinking about food, or you feel like lying
down for a nap during a workout—it is often because you are experiencing
an epic bout of amino acid deficiency and neurotransmitter imbalance. So
by mainlining amino acids during an Ironman triathlon, or a hard day at
the office, or when you are craving a Snickers bar or a venti Starbucks
coffee, you amplify your brain’s resistance to fatigue.
So what’s the solution that fixed the amino acids problem in every race
I competed in from that point forward, and the same hack you can use
when you need to balance your own neurotransmitters?
You are about to discover that solution in this chapter, as well as many
other solutions to help you improve sleep and mood and banish CNS
fatigue. You will learn how to balance your brain, how to test and fix your
neurotransmitters, how to reboot your body’s tolerance for caffeine, how
to mitigate the damage from a night of drinking, and even why you should
think twice before ever watching a horror flick again.
To begin your journey to becoming boundless, you must first reboot
the communication between your nervous system and your body. If your
brain can’t talk to your body, then you’ve got an issue that drastically
--- END PAGE 29 ---

--- PAGE 30 ---
affects your emotions, intellect, motivation, drive, cravings, focus, and,
ultimately, your ability to feel wholly human and tap into your own
boundless life force.
NEUROTRANSMITTERS 101
Neurotransmitters, those busy bees buzzing around 24-7, are key in the
communication between your body and brain. When your
neurotransmitter levels and their signaling pathways are optimized, your
nervous system can process information efficiently and communicate with
your body during a board meeting, a workout, or sex. You can fall asleep
and stay asleep, overcome anxiety, and resist the temptation of that extra
pint of chocolate coconut milk ice cream in your freezer.
You have the focus and concentration to pore over books and websites
while absorbing the precious data you seek. You are, in effect, well on your
way to becoming boundless.
But let’s face it. Your brain ain’t perfect.
Yep, that giant gooey mash-up of neuronal cells, white matter, gray
matter, blood vessels, nerves, and squishy tissue sometimes goes south,
and, as a result, most of us walk around with broken, inflamed, poorly
functioning, and poorly trained brains. When you think about it, it’s kinda
sad that you have a supercomputer in your cranium that’s currently firing
like a set of cheapo, half-broken Christmas lights from the general store.
There are multiple ways this amazing machine can wind up
functioning at subpar levels. But to understand how the brain can
malfunction, you first need to understand how nerve cells communicate
with each other.
How Neurons Work
--- END PAGE 30 ---

--- PAGE 31 ---
Your brain communicates with the rest of your body by initiating a chain
reaction that runs along a string of nerve cells, or neurons. Each neuron
has dendrites at its head, where it receives messages, and axons at its end,
from which it transmits messages. A neuron relays the message from its
dendrites to its axons through an action potential, which is an electrical
charge imbalance.
Neurons are not connected to one another physically. Between the
presynaptic cell (the neuron sending the message) and the postsynaptic
cell (the neuron receiving the message) exists a gap called a synaptic cleft.
So how does the brain’s message jump from one neuron to the next until it
reaches the target gland or muscle?
The presynaptic cell releases neurotransmitters to initiate a new
action potential down the postsynaptic cell. The pattern then restarts.
What was the postsynaptic cell is now the presynaptic cell, which releases
neurotransmitters for the next neuron, the new postsynaptic cell. This
process of synaptic transmission repeats until the brain’s message reaches
its final destination.
Let’s look at an example of synaptic transmission that involves the
neurotransmitter serotonin. The presynaptic cell makes serotonin from
the amino acid tryptophan and then packages that serotonin into vesicles
located in end terminals on the presynaptic cell. When an action potential
arrives from your brain, that signal passes down the presynaptic cell into
the end terminals.
--- END PAGE 31 ---

--- PAGE 32 ---
At this point, the serotonin-containing vesicles are released. They
cross the synaptic cleft and then release the serotonin so it can bind to
receptors on the outside of the postsynaptic cell. If enough serotonin
binds to the receptors, a threshold level is reached, the action potential is
initiated in that cell, and the message moves on to the next cell. If you
wanted to, say, contract your muscles to yank a barbell off the ground, the
action potential would eventually reach the skeletal muscle fibers and
cause that contraction.
So that the neuron doesn’t remain in a constantly switched-on state,
the remaining serotonin molecules in the synaptic cleft—the ones that
didn’t bind to a receptor—are destroyed by enzymes called monoamine
oxidase (MAO) and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT). Some
serotonin also gets returned to the presynaptic cell in a process called
reuptake. All of this enables the neuron to switch off and prepares it to
receive another signal.
--- END PAGE 32 ---

--- PAGE 33 ---
But suppose you had a serotonin deficit, which would compromise the
synaptic transmission of any signals dependent on serotonin. This could
quickly lead to
• Depression
• Food cravings
• Brain fog
• Reduced reasoning skills
• Anxiety
• Panic attacks
• Insomnia
• Eating disorders
• Migraines
• Distractibility
Of course, this sort of deficiency can also lead to your crumbling to the
pavement during an Ironman. You have probably experienced at least one
of these issues before, right? Fact is, millions of people walk around every
day with some kind of neurotransmitter deficiency, excess, or suboptimal
neuronal communication. The symptoms of a neurotransmitter problem
depend on the kind of neurotransmitter involved.
The Most Common Neurotransmitters
In addition to serotonin, the most common neurotransmitters are
dopamine, acetylcholine, and gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). We tend
to associate neurotransmitters with their effects on the brain, but they
also affect the body.
--- END PAGE 33 ---

--- PAGE 34 ---
Serotonin also regulates gut motility (the movement of food through
the GI tract) and is responsible for good bowel movements.
YOUR UNIQUE
NEUROTRANSMITTER DOMINANCE
In addition to neurotransmitter imbalances and deficits, you likely have
some neurotransmitter dominance as well. Most of us naturally tend to
have higher levels of a certain neurotransmitter, which causes us to exhibit
behaviors associated with that particular neurotransmitter.
Neurotransmitter dominance isn’t the same thing as neurotransmitter
excess. While a neurotransmitter excess is most often caused by a
dysfunction in neurotransmitter production or poor removal of a
neurotransmitter from the synapse, a dominance is simply a distinct
genetic predisposition to produce higher levels of a given
neurotransmitter.
Each kind of neurotransmitter dominance has its strengths—such as
better motivation, drive, emotional stability, or stress response—and its
weaknesses—such as a tendency toward anxiety, burnout, or fatigue. If
you’re dominant in a particular neurotransmitter, there’s no need to try to
reduce your levels of that transmitter. Instead, use your understanding of
that dominance to better determine your particular cognitive skills and
which exercise and eating protocols could work best for you.
--- END PAGE 34 ---

--- PAGE 35 ---
Here’s my overview of neurotransmitter dominances, with my
apologies if these read like astrological assessments. Trust me: they’re far
more accurate than astrology. You’ll likely recognize yourself in one of the
descriptions here, but if you’d like to confirm your dominance with a quiz,
visit Bravermantest.com.
Dopamine Dominance
If you are dopamine dominant, you are likely strong-willed, fast on your
feet, and self-confident. You tend to be highly rational and more
comfortable with hard facts and figures than with emotions and feelings.
You take pride in achievement, strategic thinking, problem-solving, and
inventing. You are overly alert, often hyperactive, and you may need less
sleep than others. You likely get bored with frequent cardio, and you love
explosive workouts and heavy weights.
When dopamine is in excess, you are tempted to engage in impulsive
actions and push yourself too far beyond your limits. As a result, you are at
constant risk of physically and mentally burning out. On the other hand, a
dopamine deficiency can lead to fatigue, sluggishness, memory loss, or
depression. You can boost your dopamine levels by using supplements
that contain dopamine neurotransmitter precursors or naturally occurring
levels of dopamine, such as amino acids, vitamin B complexes, Rhodiola
rosea (rhodiola), Ginkgo biloba (ginkgo), and Mucuna pruriens; eating foods
such as chicken, cottage cheese, eggs, pork, turkey, nuts, wheat germ, oats,
milk, and yogurt; and aiming for a moderate intake of caffeine.
Acetylcholine Dominance
If you’re acetylcholine dominant, you are tuned in to your senses, highly
creative, and open to new ideas. You make the best of any situation, no
--- END PAGE 35 ---

--- PAGE 36 ---
matter how bad it may be. You can stick to the same workout program for
a long time because you can sink your teeth into routines, but you are also
flexible, creative, and spontaneous. You enjoy activities involving words,
ideas, and communication—many artists and actors are acetylcholine
dominant. You can handle high intensity and high volume, but your body
needs more rest to recover. You are extremely social, charismatic, and
charming, and you highly value relationships. You love adventure and
travel and are constantly learning new skills and information.
In a state of acetylcholine excess, you may become paranoid, panicky,
or anxious. An acetylcholine deficiency can result in poor memory recall,
slow reactions to sensory stimuli, and a brain that generally feels slow.
Acetylcholine-supporting compounds include choline,
phosphatidylcholine, acetyl-L-carnitine, and many herbal nootropics (that
is, natural compounds that improve cognitive functioning), such as ginkgo
and ginseng.
I am quite notably inclined toward acetylcholine dominance. So what
has worked best for me? Since acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter that is
synthesized in the brain using choline, acetylcholine-dominant people
burn through their choline stores faster than normal, so it is important to
consume more choline from the diet and from supplements, such as
citicoline, which has the added benefit of lowering phospholipase A2, a key
driver of inflammation. This strategy can also be effective for serotonin or
dopamine deficiencies and excess GABA. In addition to eating a diet high
in healthy, choline-rich sources of fat, such as eggs, walnuts, clean seafood,
fish roe, and avocados, I have found it helpful to take 4 g of fish oil per day,
along with so-called “nootropics,” which are mind-directing compounds
often rich in choline precursors. You’ll learn more about those shortly.
GABA Dominance
--- END PAGE 36 ---

--- PAGE 37 ---
GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter, so if you’re GABA dominant, you
often function quite well and stay calm in stressful or chaotic situations,
operating in a state of level-headed confidence. You love organization and
rigid schedules that eliminate uncertainty, and you’re drawn to
institutions and tradition. You tend to be emotionally stable and slow to
anger. You thrive on creating peace, nurturing and caring for others, and
creating stability in the relationships around you. You may have difficulty
motivating yourself to exercise hard because you are too relaxed to crave
the excitement that training and competing can provide. Instead, you
likely enjoy laid-back outdoor activities and sports.
Excess GABA may amplify your tendency to nurture to the point that
you ignore your own health and needs. A GABA deficiency can make you
feel nervous, irritable, and anxious. Herbs and supplements that support
GABA include melatonin, phenibut (at night), valerian root, and
passionflower. Supplements like Kion Sleep, under-tongue troches like
Troscriptions, and creams such as Somnium can provide extra GABA and
are especially effective at helping you get back to sleep if you wake at
night. Alcohol, on the other hand, causes a short-term spike in GABA that
wears off later at night, resulting in light sleep or nighttime awakenings.
Serotonin Dominance
Serotonin reboots the brain while you sleep so that you can start fresh
each morning. Delta brain waves, which are produced in abundance when
you sleep, are amplified by serotonin and increase your ability to rest and
regenerate. If you’re serotonin dominant, you’re highly responsive to
sensory input and slightly impulsive, and you thrive on change and novelty
—you like to try new foods, explore new hobbies, and travel to new places.
You tend to be drawn to excitement, whether in movies, parties, or video
--- END PAGE 37 ---

--- PAGE 38 ---
games, and you prefer high-energy activities like gambling, mountain
climbing, hunting, skydiving, and other extreme sports.
Excess serotonin can make you nervous and distracted and prone to
emotional extremes. It can also induce desperation for interpersonal
interactions. Strategies such as carbon dioxide therapy, altitude or altitude
simulation, thyroid care, progesterone, caffeine, low-dose daily aspirin,
and decreased tryptophan consumption can protect against excessive
serotonin release. A serotonin deficiency—often brought on by too much
excitement or insufficient sleep—can make you feel overtired and out of
control. Serotonin-supporting compounds include fish oil, 5-HTP,
magnesium, St. John’s wort, and tryptophan. One word of caution: Both
excess tryptophan and 5-HTP can lead to degenerative changes that occur
in aging, including excess estrogen and serotonin. Ray Peat, who was an
icon in the longevity and health arena, wrote extensively on this topic, and
I will include a helpful article that dives into more details on the online
resources page for this chapter. In summary, Peat suggested that total
tryptophan intake from food and supplements shouldn’t comprise more
than about 0.17 percent of your diet, which comes out to 300 to 400 mg
per day. Dr. Joe Mercola suggests even less: no more than about 50 mg
total per day! Food-tracking apps like Cronometer can help you calculate
how much tryptophan you’re consuming. I personally shoot for no more
than 1,200 mg per day, mostly from my nighttime sleep supplement (Kion
Sleep). For reference, many people supplementing with tryptophan are
consuming over 5,000 mg per day! While increasing glycine and gelatin
intake from sources like bone broth and organ meats can help combat
these issues, it is still prudent to be aware of your total daily intake of
tryptophan.
--- END PAGE 38 ---

--- PAGE 39 ---
TESTING YOUR
NEUROTRANSMITTERS
A physician can determine your neurotransmitter levels by testing your
blood, cerebrospinal fluid, or urine (the most common method). Typically,
a testing panel will encompass some or all of the major neurotransmitters
—in addition to serotonin, dopamine, acetylcholine, and GABA, these
include glutamate, norepinephrine, and epinephrine (the last two are used
to synthesize dopamine). Ostensibly, this information helps doctors treat
a host of brain-related disorders, such as anxiety, depression, ADHD,
memory loss, brain fog, mood swings, autism, and Alzheimer’s.
Problem is, neurotransmitter tests don’t actually measure
neurotransmitter levels that are being released by vesicles within the
nervous system and traveling between neurons in your brain. In fact, there
is no established relationship between neurotransmitter levels in the brain
and the levels in any other part of the body, including blood, cerebrospinal
fluid, and urine—which are the usual suspects for testing
neurotransmitter levels. The brain has a selective filter called the blood-
brain barrier (BBB) that keeps out neurotransmitters, along with many
other substances. And a significant amount of the neurotransmitters
circulating in your body are produced outside of the brain—95 percent of
your serotonin, for example, is produced in your gut. Some
neurotransmitters are not even produced by you but rather by the bacteria
that live inside you. Indeed, the bacteria that reside in your gut synthesize
over thirty neurotransmitters!
Commercial lab neurotransmitter testing has also not held up under
scrutiny. The physicians who use it often receive a referral commission,
and in 2016, a company called NeuroScience, Inc. was fined over $6
million for violating testing requirements and was found to have
intentionally manipulated test results. Not only that, but NeuroScience
--- END PAGE 39 ---

--- PAGE 40 ---
also recommended supplements based on the illegitimate results and then
proceeded to sell those supplements! Plus, one study on the accuracy of
neurotransmitter testing found plenty of evidence refuting its validity,
demonstrating that these tests have no scientific foundation.
The circulating amount of any given neurotransmitter is also in
constant flux. Each neurotransmitter has a different half-life, the time it
takes for the total amount to fall by 50 percent. These half-lives can be as
long as several minutes or as short as a fraction of a second. Everything
you do, including thinking, impacts your neurotransmitter levels on a
second-to-second basis, so neurotransmitter test results show only your
levels at a particular moment in time. Perhaps this is why there are
currently no scientifically established norms for ideal neurotransmitter
levels.
However, there is one relatively new and more accurate method of
assessing neurotransmitters: the DUTCH Complete panel. While in the
past I’ve only relied on a panel like this for a urinary analysis of hormones,
DUTCH is now able to provide valuable insight into specific markers
associated with neurotransmitter breakdown, most notably homovanillate
(HVA), a metabolite of dopamine metabolism, and vanilmandelate (VMA),
a metabolite of norepinephrine and epinephrine metabolism. Low levels of
HVA can be due to low levels of dopamine or poor conversion of
dopamine to HVA, often caused by insufficient levels of methyl groups,
magnesium, and NAD, which are needed to metabolize dopamine. This
can be accompanied by addictions, cravings, and pleasure seeking (to
boost levels) in addition to sleepiness, impulsivity, tremors, low
motivation, fatigue, and low mood. Low levels of VMA in the urine may
indicate low adrenal hormone output and often signal a copper or vitamin
C insufficiency. This can be accompanied by addictions, cravings, fatigue,
low blood pressure, low muscle tone, exercise intolerance, depression, and
loss of alertness.
--- END PAGE 40 ---

--- PAGE 41 ---
Aside from the DUTCH test, there are effective, symptom-based
questionnaires that have been used for years to determine
neurotransmitter imbalances. Dr. Datis Kharrazian, author of the book
Why Isn’t My Brain Working?, states, “There is no scientifically validated
way to test neurotransmitter levels through lab testing. The best way is to
assess your symptoms.”
There are several neurotransmitter quizzes and questionnaires online,
including the following:
• Dr. Eric Braverman’s Personality Type Assessment
(bravermantest.com), which will help you find deficiencies in
acetylcholine, dopamine, GABA, and serotonin levels. Dr. Braverman is
the founder and president of the PATH Foundation, a nonprofit
organization that researches brain health and healthy aging. The quiz
is taken from the information in his bestselling book The Edge Effect.
• Dr. Mark Hyman’s UltraMind Solution Companion Guide
(drhyman.com/download-the-ultramind-solution-companion-guide),
which is a set of quizzes to help you determine your levels of
neurotransmitters, vitamin D, magnesium, fatty acids, zinc,
inflammation, thyroid function, and more. It is adapted from his book
The UltraMind Solution.
• Julia Ross’s Mood Type Questionnaire
(www.juliarosscures.com/mood-type-questionnaire), which helps you
determine your serotonin, endorphin, norepinephrine, and GABA
status. It can also help you determine how stable your blood sugar
levels are.
• The Neurotype System (neurotype.pro), an approach used to identify
your neurological profile via a comprehensive questionnaire that
covers many neurological and psychological factors. It was developed
by Christian Thibaudeau, a world-renowned strength and conditioning
--- END PAGE 41 ---

--- PAGE 42 ---
coach who has worked with athletes in a total of twenty-eight sports.
Neurotyping refers to utilizing your personality traits to evaluate your
neurotransmitter dominance and select the best type of training and
diet to maximize your training results.
• Nootopia (nootopia.com) is a brain-enhancing “system” that begins
with an online quiz to determine your needs, including memory, focus,
sleep, word recall, and creativity. A custom supplements package is
chosen for you and shipped out from Nootopia, and then you can
select from a variety of nootropics (“mind-directing” supplements) to
balance your unique neurotransmitter type.
Neurotransmitters and Your Gut
Neurotransmitters produced outside of your brain, such as those produced
by the bacteria in your gut, cannot cross the BBB, though amino acid
neurotransmitter precursors like tryptophan and B vitamins can. This may be
a feature, not a bug: 95 percent of the body’s serotonin is produced in the
gut, and if all that serotonin were able to cross the BBB and accumulate in
the brain, it could potentially cause similar effects to LSD. Basically, you’d be
trippin’ all the time.
But neurotransmitters in the rest of the body, such as those in the gut, can
still affect the health and function of the brain. It appears this is most likely
due to the fact that the vagus nerve serves as the primary communication
nerve between the gut and the brain and can be both stimulated and
inhibited by neurotransmitters, even if those neurotransmitters aren’t
crossing the BBB in any significant quantity. Some evidence suggests that
supplemental forms of the neurotransmitter GABA might be able to cross
the BBB and exert a calming effect. GABA can also exert its effects on the
brain in a bit more indirect way, specifically via an effect on the enteric
nervous system in the gut. GABA, as an inhibitory neurotransmitter, inhibits
the generation of the action potential of a neuron, which makes that neuron
less likely to excite a nearby neuron.
--- END PAGE 42 ---

--- PAGE 43 ---
When neurotransmitter activity in the gut or brain is disrupted, the
neurotransmitters in the other area are also affected. For example, serotonin
regulates healthy bowel movements by improving gut motility. IBS-D, a type
of irritable bowel syndrome characterized by excessive gut motility and
diarrhea, is modulated by serotonin levels in the gut. Research has shown
that 46 percent of IBS patients exhibit depression, 34 percent exhibit
generalized anxiety disorder, 31 percent exhibit panic disorder, and 26
percent exhibit somatization (medical symptoms not connected to any
cause). So, while neurotransmitter populations in the gut and brain are often
separate and distinct, they can still dramatically affect each other.
9 WAYS TO FIX YOUR
NEUROTRANSMITTERS
Once you’ve identified any deficiencies or excesses, the tips here can help
you implement supplemental, dietary, and lifestyle habits that will help
bring your neurotransmitters back into balance—and if you’re not
experiencing any problems at the moment, they are generally supportive
of neurotransmitter health.
1. Avoid Antidepressants
Prozac, Sarafem, Paxil, Zoloft, Celexa, Lexapro, Effexor, Cymbalta, Pristiq
—the list of antidepressant drugs goes on, with hundreds of millions of
prescriptions handed out and billions of dollars in sales each year.
Most antidepressants affect serotonin levels in one of two ways: by
directly increasing the brain’s level of serotonin or, more commonly, by
blocking the reuptake of serotonin by nerve cells. Antidepressants that
work this way are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs.
--- END PAGE 43 ---

--- PAGE 44 ---
By preventing serotonin from being returned to neurons, SSRIs increase
the brain’s amount of available serotonin.
However, it’s far from certain that SSRIs are safe or effective,
especially with long-term use. Eventually, not only do you require
increasing doses of SSRIs to have the same effect, but you also eliminate
up to 60 percent of the serotonin receptors in your brain as they become
downregulated due to long-term exposure to flooded levels of serotonin.
The enzymes in the synaptic cleft that break down neurotransmitters also
adapt to the higher levels of available serotonin by becoming more
efficient and operating at higher activity levels, so serotonin is more
rapidly broken down. Antidepressant use can also damage the serotonin
receptors in your liver, kidneys, and colon and thus affect your delicate
brain-gut connection (a crucial connection I’ll explore in greater detail in
chapter 13) and appetite regulation by lowering the sensitivity of these
organs to signals from your nervous system.
A great deal of evidence suggests that antidepressants don’t work well
anyway. Meta-analyses of research have revealed that SSRIs have no
clinically meaningful advantage over a placebo, and those studies that do
show any clinically meaningful advantage over a placebo do not take into
account that people taking the drugs also engage in supportive weekly
visits with the physician overseeing the medication, which is a significant
treatment in and of itself. There is also little evidence that antidepressants
work better for more severe depressive conditions. The few studies that
have shown antidepressants to have a small degree of superiority over
placebos were poorly designed and, as a result, unreliable. Ultimately,
antidepressants have not been shown to affect the long-term
improvement of depression or suicide rates, and chronic exposure to
SSRIs can make you feel apathetic and less engaged in your life.
Are there alternatives? You bet. Natural supplements such as acetyl-L-
carnitine, probiotics, St. John’s wort, methylene blue, curcumin, peptides
--- END PAGE 44 ---

--- PAGE 45 ---
such as Selnak, Semax, and Cerebrolysin, and even low-dose psilocybin
can all be highly effective antidepressant strategies with far lower risk than
a pharmaceutical antidepressant. Caring for your microbiome is also
important, because an average course of antibiotics can kill off the gut
bacteria that serve as “in-house” factories to produce your body’s own
slow-drip of natural benzodiazepines, which is why so many people who
have gut issues also have significant sleep and anxiety issues. The fix? Eat a
wide variety of fermented foods, take a good probiotic, and avoid nuking
your gut bacteria whenever possible. Even supplement and medication-
free strategies such as red-light therapy, sauna, cold exposure, and
exercise can be incredibly powerful antidepressants (consider this: based
on inherent genetic deficits of brain-derived neurotrophic factor, Finland
should be the most depressed country in the world, yet they rank as the
happiest, likely due to their robust sauna habits). Finally, an important
note: If you’re currently taking an antidepressant, don’t stop taking it
without talking to your doctor. Abruptly stopping an antidepressant can
cause unpleasant withdrawal symptoms and other side effects, so make
sure you work out a tapering schedule with your doctor.
2. Limit Your Intake of Stimulants
My father was a gourmet coffee roaster. When I was as young as thirteen, I
was sucking down espresso shots and gulping black coffee every day. By
the time I was thirty, I was a bona fide addict. I was so tolerant of caffeine
that I could never settle for anything less than a 20-ounce mug o’ joe. At
that point, I knew I had to do something to fix my excessive caffeine
intake.
Sure, low doses of caffeine can improve mental performance and
protect against Alzheimer’s, so you don’t need to avoid it entirely. But, like
antidepressants, high doses of caffeine, ephedrine, ephedra, guarana,
--- END PAGE 45 ---

--- PAGE 46 ---
Ritalin, and other central nervous system stimulants can overwhelm the
brain with excitatory neurotransmitters such as dopamine, creating
resistance to neurotransmitters and long-term receptor damage. The more
stimulants you take, the more you need to take to feel any benefit. As you
increase your intake, you exacerbate this effect, and the cycle continues.
This is the premise of the book Dopamine Nation and the reason many
people now take occasional fasts from highly rewarding activities such as
stimulants, hedonistic foods, phone apps, or entertainment, with the goal
of “resetting” the dopamine receptors and breaking addictions or
dependencies. Caffeine is another example of something to consider
taking a break from every once in a while. Caffeine is both water- and fat-
soluble, which means it can easily cross your blood-brain barrier (even
more significantly if blended with fats such as ghee, MCT oil, or butter).
When you frequently consume coffee, tea, soda, and other caffeine-
containing drinks, you cause a gradual change in your brain’s chemistry
and physical characteristics, especially in the number of receptors for
adenosine, a chemical that induces a state of tiredness and supports
natural sleep rhythms.
The molecular structure of caffeine closely resembles that of
adenosine, which means that caffeine can easily fit into your brain’s
adenosine receptors. With its receptors constantly plugged up by caffeine,
adenosine can no longer bind to those receptors and make you tired. Your
body’s response is to create more and more adenosine receptors, so you
need more and more caffeine to bind to those receptors and block the
effects of adenosine. You need ever-increasing doses of caffeine just to
function normally.
To kick a serious caffeine habit and reset your adenosine receptors,
you have three options: First, you can avoid caffeine for seven to ten days,
every four to eight weeks. Consider keeping a bag of decaf coffee or decaf
tea in your freezer or pantry for this period so you can enjoy the
--- END PAGE 46 ---

--- PAGE 47 ---
wonderful aroma, taste, concentrated antioxidants, social benefits, bowel-
moving glory, and many other health benefits of a hot morning beverage
without exhausting your neurotransmitters. Second, you can drink one or
two cups of coffee per day of a medium roast, which is slightly lower in
caffeine but contains a high amount of antioxidants. Third, you can
consume 100 to 200 mg of L-theanine with every cup of coffee, which will
“elongate” the caffeine high and result in you probably needing fewer cups
to feel consistently energized.
3. Avoid Toxins
--- END PAGE 47 ---

--- PAGE 48 ---
Ten years ago, while passing through a mall or department store, I would
think nothing of taking a big whiff of men’s colognes and fragrances. Same
thing for those nasty “toxin-tree” air fresheners I used to hang on the
rearview mirror of my car. But these days, I literally hold my breath while
rushing through the personal care aisles at Macy’s or, say, a casino, and the
only air freshener you’ll find in my cars are essential oils. I also open the
window of a hotel room to pull in fresh air and even call the front desk for
a HEPA air filter if they have one, avoid running near polluted roads, and
travel with my own soap, shampoo, and conditioner.
See, colognes, perfumes, brake dust, smog, airborne heavy metals, and
even Christmas tree–shaped car air fresheners contain toxins that can
drastically affect neurotransmitter production as well as your sensitivity
to those neurotransmitters. The results can include brain damage and
brain fog. To avoid these effects, you can take the following measures.
Finding the Sweet Spot with Medium-Roast
Coffee
The solution I’ve implemented in the past to not being overcaffeinated?
Simple. For seven to ten days out of every month, I grab a bag of
decaffeinated coffee and make myself a piping-hot cup of decaf as a
substitute for regular.
--- END PAGE 48 ---

--- PAGE 49 ---
But if you prefer to pass on decaf, another option is to pay attention to the
roasting process of your coffee. Roasting involves some pretty complicated
science: it requires converting a substance that has three hundred volatile
aromatic compounds into a substance with over one thousand volatile
aromatic compounds. As you can imagine, this encompasses a lot more than
simply tossing a metal bucket of coffee beans into a giant oven.
Why is the roasting process so important when it comes to your health and
the purity of the coffee you drink? Even the highest-quality coffee beans
contain a substance called acrylamide, which has been known to cause
cancer in animals. Most roasters roast the hell out of the coffee bean to
eradicate this substance, but this dark-roast process often introduces other
cancer-causing chemicals. For example, at high temperatures, roasting
produces polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and results in the
burned flavor that so many coffees are known for.
But if a smokeless roasting process is used (this is pretty rare, but a few
folks still do it), it obliterates acrylamide without sacrificing the numerous
antioxidants found in coffee or creating PAHs. In addition, and most
important for the caffeine issue, it creates a coveted sweet spot of a dense
amount of antioxidants and only a low-to-moderate amount of caffeine.
Compare your coffee to a nice cut of beef: you wouldn’t blast a filet mignon
to well-done; you’d gently cook it to a tasty and tender medium-rare for the
ultimate combination of taste and health.
In other words, with a medium roast and a smokeless roasting process, you
can get all the benefits of coffee without as many potential issues with
overexcitation and the jitters. You can have your cup and sip it too, baby.
Once you begin to make these changes, you will find that when you do
encounter an attack against your neurotransmitters, such as the wafting
aromas in a department-store cologne section, you will be extremely
sensitive and notice it almost immediately. This may seem inconvenient,
but think of it this way: once your olfactory receptors are no longer
bombarded with chemicals 24-7, they become much better “canaries in the
coal mine,” so to speak. So if you can’t eat a compound without getting
--- END PAGE 49 ---

--- PAGE 50 ---
sick, think twice about smearing it on your teeth, hair, skin, or nails. (I’ll
talk in much more depth about avoiding toxins in chapter 20.)
4. Avoid Sensory Overload
Eighteen years ago, I walked out of the horror flick Saw, hands trembling
with adrenaline, and swore under my breath that I would never watch
another scary movie at night. Since making that oath, my sleep has
drastically improved, as have my daily focus and energy.
In the twenty-first century, most of us are bombarded with sensory
information every day. We’re exposed to all of the following:
All this sensory exposure overloads your central nervous system and
can lead to severe neurotransmitter imbalances. Your brain has to calm
itself down from these stimuli with higher levels of calming
neurotransmitters like serotonin and GABA than it would normally
require. You may be overloaded if you
--- END PAGE 50 ---

--- PAGE 51 ---
To rebalance your neurotransmitter levels, you have to step back from
the barrage of sensory input in your life and enjoy some silence and
stillness. Turn down the midworkout heavy metal and pop music. Back
away from the 3-D Blu-ray box set. Go for a leisurely walk through a
nearby park, sit on the porch with a cup of chamomile tea or a glass of
organic, biodynamic red wine, or engage in twenty minutes of quiet,
mindful deep breathing and meditation. (See chapter 3 for effective
breathing and meditation techniques.) If you do use technology at night,
dim the screen, wear blue light blocking glasses and keep the sound lower
than you might otherwise. Your senses aren’t invincible, so don’t
overabuse them, especially before sleep.
If you find yourself accompanying a group of friends to the latest
Halloween blockbuster, consider following it up with a dose of GABA-
supporting compounds, such as passionflower extract, lemon extract,
cannabidiol (CBD), or a phenibut supplement. Passionflower extract is
known to promote healthy GABA activity and reduce anxiety; lemon
extract and CBD have GABA-mediated antistress effects; and phenibut is
the form of GABA that is capable of entering your brain through the
blood-brain barrier. Finally a dose of melatonin can help with the
melatonin suppression that bright light at night can cause. While it may
seem like a cheeky approach, when in a brightly lit city like Las Vegas
where I’m exposed to a hefty amount of sensory stimuli at night, I can
--- END PAGE 51 ---

--- PAGE 52 ---
sleep like a baby if I use a 100 to 300 mg melatonin suppository before
bed.
5. Fix Your Gut
You have a second brain, and that second brain is not in your head. Think
lower. Okay, fellas, not that low. Up a bit higher. Yes, the second brain is in
your gut. The enteric nervous system (ENS) is a net of neurons that
controls your gut and operates semi-independently from your brain. It
uses more than thirty neurotransmitters, just like the brain, and up to 95
percent of your body’s serotonin is actually produced in your gut. This
makes sense when you consider that in the nine meters from your
esophagus to your anus, there are more than 100 million neurons, more
than in your spinal cord or your entire peripheral nervous system!
Irritable bowel syndrome, which afflicts nearly every active individual now
and then, arises partly from a serotonin imbalance in your gut. This is also
why SSRI antidepressants, which alter the balance of serotonin in your
body as well as your brain, can lead to serious gut issues.
Neurotransmitters are produced in your gut lining and by the billions
of bacteria in your gut. So if your gut lining is damaged or your gut flora is
out of balance, then you are at serious risk for neurotransmitter
deficiencies and imbalances. This may also be why probiotics, fiber that
increases small-chain fatty acids that heal the gut lining and suppress
inflammation, and the consumption of a wide variety of fermented foods
can be highly effective natural remedies for depression.
I’ll explore the brain-gut connection in more detail in chapter 13, but,
as you can likely imagine based on your newfound knowledge of the brain-
gut axis, a good first step in addressing neurotransmitter imbalances is a
gut reboot, which involves four to eight weeks of a squeaky-clean nutrition
protocol (two of my favorites are the Autoimmune Paleo [AIP] diet and
--- END PAGE 52 ---

--- PAGE 53 ---
the low-FODMAP diet) combined with generous amounts of glutamine,
colostrum, bone broth or collagen, a wide variety of fermented foods, a
well-formulated probiotic, and the inclusion of polyphenol-rich
compounds such as blueberries, plums, cherries, black currants, black
olives, dark chocolate, black tea, coffee, black walnuts, and even done-for-
you “red powder” supplements. Akkermansia, a unique probiotic that also
assists with blood sugar control, can be useful as well.
6. Replace Your Building Blocks
Think back to my Ironman bonk and Dr. Attia’s advice to use amino acids.
Amino acids work so well to stave off central nervous system fatigue
because they are the primary building blocks—along with vitamin B and
minerals—of neurotransmitters.
First, examine your diet to ensure you are consuming adequate
protein. I recommend a minimum of 0.55 g per pound of body weight per
day or, for muscle maintenance or gain and joint or gut repair, ideally
closer to 0.8 g per pound, especially if you’re above the age of forty. Some
of the best-quality amino acid sources are grass-fed beef, wild salmon,
eggs from pastured chickens, protein powder, fermented dairy, fermented
soy, spirulina or chlorella, and collagen- or gelatin-rich compounds such as
bone broth. Many people who struggle with sleep or motivation issues tied
to neurotransmitter problems can also benefit from 10 to 20 g each day of
essential amino acids, which combine nine essential amino acids to supply
all the necessary neurotransmitter precursors.
VITAMIN B6 VITAMIN B12 FOLATE VITAMIN B SUPPLEMENTS  
Bell peppers
Calf’s liver
Broccoli
Full-spectrum blend with 5-
Turnip
Snapper
Beets
methyltetrahydrofolate (5-
greens
Lentils
MTHF)Spinach
Calf’s liver
--- END PAGE 53 ---

--- PAGE 54 ---
Asparagus
Spinach
For the nervous system to synthesize and circulate the
neurotransmitters formed by amino acids, you also need to have an
adequate intake of B-complex vitamins. Vitamins B , B , and folate
6 12(vitamin B ) are especially important. Food sources of vitamin B6 include
9bell peppers, turnip greens, and spinach. Folate is found in broccoli, beets,
turnip and mustard greens, romaine lettuce, lentils, calf’s liver, asparagus,
parsley, and spinach. B sources include calf’s liver and snapper. For
12 vitamin B supplementation, look into full-spectrum vitamin B blends that
use only the highly bioavailable form of vitamin B called 5-
methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF) while avoiding that all-too-common,
inflammatory synthetic folic acid as much as you can (you’ll find this is
not as easy as it seems, since a ton of cereals, grains, energy drinks, and
other processed foods are now “fortified” with synthetic folic acid).
EAAs and BCAAs
Not all amino acids are created equal. Branched-chain amino acid
supplements (BCAAs) contain only three of the nine essential amino acids
(EAAs) that the body can’t make itself: leucine, isoleucine, and valine.
People take BCAAs hoping to stimulate muscle protein synthesis, fight
fatigue, and increase focus during workouts. Unfortunately, these claims
about the benefits of BCAAs are primarily based on old studies done on
rats. But newer studies have shown that BCAAs have no significant effect on
muscle growth and may instead cause a spike in blood glucose or insulin,
along with an imbalance of the more important EAAs. The latest, extremely
comprehensive paper on EAAs, by the International Society of Sports
Nutrition (ISSN), demonstrably shows that EAAs stimulate muscle protein
synthesis more than any other protein source and can assist with muscle
maintenance and growth even in the absence of weight training!
--- END PAGE 54 ---

--- PAGE 55 ---
In contrast, supplements that contain the correct balance of all nine EAAs—
which are more expensive than BCAAs but far more efficacious—have been
shown to improve the retention of lean muscle, increase metabolic rate, and
optimize brain and liver function, with no deleterious side effects and a very
low calorie load. Sure, you could simply eat a steak or suck down a whey
protein shake to get all your EAAs, but the protein from food must first be
digested and then broken down into amino acids, so food-derived amino
acids not only come with far more calories than EAA capsules or powders
but also take longer to be absorbed. It’s also difficult to consume and digest
an appreciable amount of protein from real food immediately before or
during exercise—say, a workout or race.
A recent paper by the International Society of Sports Nutrition on the
effects of EAA supplementation on performance highlighted the important
role of EAAs in stimulating muscle protein synthesis (MPS) and turnover.
MPS stimulation by EAAs occurs with as little as 1.5 g per day and becomes
especially significant at around 20 g per day. Even when fasting, in a calorie
deficit, or in a scenario when food-derived protein sources aren’t available,
EAAs allow for easy muscle maintenance and muscle building. My preferred
brand of EAA supplements is Kion (GetKion.com), which is the closest to the
actual amino acid composition of human muscle, without any nasty fillers or
sweeteners.
7. Lube Your Nerves
Ever since I sat slack-jawed in the audience at a health conference and
listened to author Nora Gedgaudas present evidence that cholesterol
levels lower than 200 are associated with lower IQ, I have gone out of my
way to shun a phobia of dietary fats. After all, cholesterol plays a role in
forming and maintaining cell membranes and structures; increasing
membrane fluidity; helping cells adjust to changes in temperature; making
a number of critical hormones, including cortisol, testosterone,
progesterone, and estrogen; forming bile, a fluid that plays a vital role in
the processing and digestion of fats; making vitamin D; and importantly,
--- END PAGE 55 ---

--- PAGE 56 ---
insulating or “lubing” nerve cells. On the flip side, cholesterol can be a
contributory factor to heart disease if certain risks are present, such as
high ApoB (a protein that helps carry cholesterol throughout the body,
ideally below 100 mg/dL), familial hypercholesterolemia (genetically
elevated cholesterol), high levels of proinflammatory cytokines, a
triglyceride-to-HDL ratio above 2 (also referred to as your “atherogenic
index”), a high calcium scan score, or elevated unstable plaque as shown
on a CT angiography score such as a CLEERLY scan. But in general, I do
not recommend you make a mad, blind dash to reduce cholesterol without
taking into account these other factors.
Because a diet rich in healthy animal foods like meat, dairy, and eggs is
associated with higher cholesterol levels, vegans and vegetarians are more
likely to have lower cholesterol—and the side effects that come with it. So
I warn vegans and vegetarians to be cautious with a strictly plant-based
diet, especially one that is low in fats and cholesterols. In a wide body of
research, vegetarians have been shown to have elevated rates of depressive
disorders, anxiety disorders, and other cognitive malfunctions. Though
plant-based eaters are often unaware of the potential dark side of this diet,
significant evidence suggests a link between going meatless or low-fat (a
prevailing characteristic of a plant-based diet) and an elevated risk of
mental disorders. Many vegetarians and vegans feel stellar on a plant-
based diet for months or even years. But eventually, they tend to
experience nagging aches and pains due to amino acid deficiencies and
cognitive decline due to fat and vitamin B deficiencies, which can cause
12 dementia, depression, and other mental disorders. Sure, if you’re
hypercautious and very thorough in addressing dietary deficiencies, you’ll
be at lower risk of these issues, but that will require plenty of food
combining, slow-prep cooking methods, fermentation, soaking, sprouting,
supplementation, and taking great care to consume adequate amino acids
and fatty acids.
--- END PAGE 56 ---

--- PAGE 57 ---
Creatine and Memory
Creatine is an important compound that’s found mostly in meat, so it’s
largely missing from plant-based diets. David Benton, a psychology
professor who specializes in diet and behavior, studied the memory of
omnivores and vegetarians both before and after they consumed a placebo
or creatine supplement. Before taking the pills, the omnivores and
vegetarians had similar performance on a memory test. Then each group
was divided into two smaller groups, one taking a placebo, the other taking
creatine.
A week later, all four groups took another memory test. The omnivores’
results didn’t change from the previous week, whether they took a placebo
or creatine. The vegetarians who took the placebo also performed the same
as the week before. But the vegetarians who took creatine not only
improved from the week before but also outstripped all the other groups in
terms of cognitive performance.
Interestingly, this suggests that vegetarians could potentially have better
memories than omnivores—most likely due to their high intake of
antioxidant-rich plants and relatively low intake of overcooked or processed
meat—but the same diet that gives them these advantages also gives them
the disadvantage of a creatine deficit. It also suggests that creatine intake,
either via supplementation, adequate meat (particularly beef) intake, or
both, can address some of those deficits. While 5 g per day is the
recommended creatine intake for muscle strength and power, 10 g and up to
20 g per day is recommended for cognitive performance, memory, sleep
deprivation, and other nervous system–related goals.
When it comes to fats, another very good way to enhance the speed
with which your brain communicates with the rest of your body is to care
for the health of your nerves themselves. Your nerves are wrapped in
insulating myelin sheaths, sleeves of fatty tissue that protect your nerve
cells and assist with the transmission of messages between your brain and
the rest of your body. A diet for a healthy nervous system should be rich in
--- END PAGE 57 ---

--- PAGE 58 ---
nutrients that support the formation of these sheaths. After all, it doesn’t
matter how many neurotransmitters you make if the action potentials
they propagate can’t be adequately transmitted because you have broken-
down, degraded myelin sheaths. Omega-3 fatty acids, particularly
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), are important for the formation of myelin
sheaths, so a neurotransmitter-supporting diet should include a high
intake of omega-3s.
Flax seeds, walnuts, kale, collard greens, and winter squash contain
high levels of omega-3 fatty acids, but the amount absorbed from them can
be relatively low because they convert poorly from the omega-3 fatty acid
ALA to more beneficial EPA and DHA. Sources of more readily available
omega-3 fatty acids include salmon, sardines, cloves, grass-fed beef,
halibut, shrimp, cod, tuna, and algae or algal oil. In addition,
anthropological evidence shows that, long before humans discovered
cashew cheese and tofu, animal flesh and organ meats could provide not
only many of the omega-3s necessary to support myelin sheath health but
also the calorie-dense foods necessary to fuel the energy-hungry human
cerebellum. Many anthropologists believe that without the ability to use
cooking to make raw meat more digestible, we would never have matured
beyond the mental capacity of herbivores like gorillas. Today, stronger
brains are still powered by many of the nutrients commonly found in
animal proteins, including B vitamins, zinc, iron, and tryptophan, which is
found almost exclusively in poultry.
That’s not to say that a plant-based diet can’t be neurotransmitter-
friendly. Vegans and vegetarians can obtain myelin sheath–promoting
nutrients and oils by consuming soaked, sprouted, and fermented seeds,
nuts, legumes, and grains; vegan-friendly algae-based DHA supplements
like chlorella, spirulina, and marine phytoplankton; and foods containing
the monounsaturated fat oleic acid (which can comprise up to 30 percent
--- END PAGE 58 ---

--- PAGE 59 ---
of the myelin sheath!), such as olive oil, almonds, pecans, macadamia nuts,
and avocados.
With each meal, include at least one source of oleic acid, such as
olives, olive oil, or avocados, and at least one source of DHA, such as cold-
water fish, fish oil, algae, or DHA-enriched eggs. My personal strategy is to
keep a bottle of extremely high-quality extra-virgin olive oil on hand in the
kitchen at all times and to travel with a fish oil high in DHA.
Plasmalogens are also protective of the myelin, which is highly
susceptible to oxidative stress. Much like glutathione and catalase,
plasmalogens help neutralize the reactive oxygen species that are
produced during ATP production. Myelin is rich in plasmalogens, which
are made in the peroxisomes inside our cells, but our levels decline rapidly
as we age, leading to a breakdown in the myelin and increasing the
chances of acquiring a degenerative condition. While you can’t
supplement plasmalogens directly, as they are destroyed by the stomach
acid, you can supplement with plasmalogen precursors.
8. Know Your Genes
When I interviewed Dr. Ben Lynch on my podcast about his book Dirty
Genes and his genetic testing service, StrateGene, he explained to me that
there’s an important list of so-called dirty genes—gene variants that
directly affect not only neurotransmitters, but also several other
important metabolic functions. The most notable of these gene variants
are•

MTHFR, which supports methylation, a crucial process involved in
more than two hundred of your body’s vital functions•

GST/GPX, two gene variants responsible for regulating your body’s
energy levels as well as your glutathione levels, thus impacting your
--- END PAGE 59 ---

--- PAGE 60 ---
natural antioxidant responses•

COMT, which affects the metabolism of dopamine, norepinephrine,
and epinephrine, thus regulating your mood, energy levels, and ability
to calm down, sleep, and focus•

DAO, which affects your body’s response to histamines from food and
bacteria, thus affecting your vulnerability to food allergies and
intolerances•

MAOA, which affects your relationship to dopamine, norepinephrine,
and serotonin, thus governing your mood, energy, sugar cravings, and
ability to sleep•

NOS3, which affects your circulation and nitric oxide levels and helps
determine your cardiovascular health and vulnerability to heart
attacks, circulatory issues, and stroke•

PEMT, which affects your cell walls, brain, and liver, impacting a range
of health issues, such as gallstones, fatty liver disease, gut problems,
and attention and focus deficits
You can test for these genes by taking an inexpensive salivary DNA test
through a company such as StrateGene, SelfDecode, or TheDNACompany.
Once you are armed with the knowledge of which dirty genes you possess,
you can go about fixing them. For example, if you discover you possess the
MTHFR gene pattern that directly affects methylation, you can
supplement with 5-methyltetrahydrofolate while avoiding folate or folic
acid. If you discover you have impaired DAO genes, you can use a natural
antihistamine prior to drinking wine or eating fermented foods or canned
fish. Or, if you discover that you have impaired nitric oxide pathways, you
can prioritize lifestyle strategies such as infrared sauna, breathwork, and
citrus fruit and dark chocolate intake.
--- END PAGE 60 ---

--- PAGE 61 ---
9. Focus on Antioxidants
Antioxidants can play a critical role in stabilizing cognition and reducing
overall brain inflammation. For example, multiple studies show the
importance of one particular antioxidant, N-acetylcysteine (NAC), for
reducing the neuronal damage and degeneration associated with excess
levels of excitatory neurotransmitters like glutamate (such as from the
MSG megadose in that box of Chinese takeout food you polished off last
night). NAC is also recognized as a crucial nutrient for treating
neurological disorders such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. As an
antioxidant, NAC neutralizes many free radicals before they cause damage
in neural cells, and by inhibiting excess excitatory activity of glutamate
receptors in the brain, it can also be very effective at treating addiction to
everything from nicotine to cocaine to meth to gambling. It also works
quite well for addiction because it affects dopamine reward pathways in
the brain. Any addictive substance or behavior activates these pathways,
which eventually creates a dopamine imbalance. Along with decreasing
glutamate, NAC balances these reward pathways, which can reduce or
eliminate cravings. Other important antioxidants for the brain are alpha-
lipoic acid (ALA), which protects the memory-friendly neurotransmitter
acetylcholine and dampens brain oxidation and inflammation; glutathione,
which protects the brain and improves methylation while preventing
dementia; and vitamins A, C, and E, which are all associated with reducing
Alzheimer’s risk.
You can also use certain plant extracts to increase your body’s natural
production of antioxidants, which include glutathione, catalase, and
superoxide dismutase, all of which decline as we age. When taken in
higher doses in a supplement, these extracts put stress on our cells, which
respond by upregulating the Nrf2 transcription pathway (the master
regulator of the antioxidant response) and increasing antioxidant
production. While there are literally thousands of plant extracts that can
--- END PAGE 61 ---

--- PAGE 62 ---
be utilized, the two I like best are curcumin and milk thistle, as they have
many other health benefits, including anti-cancer, anti-inflammation, and
improving gut and liver health.
Two other antioxidants called luteolin and diosmin have been shown
to reduce levels of beta-amyloid, which is strongly associated with
Alzheimer’s disease. Lemons are rich in diosmin, and luteolin is abundant
in green peppers and tomatoes. Studies have also shown that flavonoids
called anthocyanins—particularly those found in red berries—also play a
key role in brain health and Alzheimer’s prevention.
Mitigating the Effects of Alcohol
My StrateGene analysis revealed that because of my genetic makeup,
alcohol has a deleterious effect on my neurotransmitters. Turns out, this is
primarily related to my histamine intolerance. Alcohol and its metabolic
breakdown product acetaldehyde can liberate histamine from its storage
location in mast cells and depress histamine elimination by inhibiting DAO,
resulting in elevated histamine levels throughout body tissues. So I asked Dr.
Ben Lynch about his strategies for mitigating histamine intolerance and
thereby reducing alcohol’s negative effects.
He explained to me that histamines are bioactive, nitrogen-based
compounds that play a part in immune responses and gut function.
Histamine intolerance is associated with a combination of slower DAO,
MTHFR, MAOA, MAOB, and NAT2 genes—a condition that Dr. Lynch refers to
as “dirty.” So my histamine levels are naturally elevated, and while this
contributes positively to focus and attention, it also produces a potential risk
for narcolepsy and adverse reactions to alcohol. If you drink alcohol, you
may experience one or more of the following (typically a few occur
simultaneously):
• A red face
• Flushing
• Irritability
• A runny nose
--- END PAGE 62 ---

--- PAGE 63 ---
• A bloody nose
• Exacerbation of existing eczema
• Exacerbation of existing psoriasis
• Insomnia
• Sweaty feet
• Increased heart rate
• Headaches or migraines
You can implement the following dietary tactics to reduce these effects:•

Limit intake of high-histamine foods when drinking alcohol. Cheese and
aged meats are particularly high in histamines and, ironically, are often
paired with wine.•

Consume specific probiotics. The DAO gene is partly responsible for
breaking down histamines derived from food and bacteria. In the gut,
DAO can be overwhelmed in the presence of too many histamines and
too much tyramine (an amino acid), both of which can be increased
when drinking alcohol. One way to minimize this effect is to take
probiotic supplements that contain bacterial strains involved in breaking
down histamines.•

Take SAMe. Like the DAO gene, the HNMT gene’s job is to break down
histamines in the blood. When your DAO gene is overwhelmed by the
consumption of alcohol, your HNMT gene has to work harder to
compensate. For HNMT to work, it needs a compound called S-
adenosine-L-methionine, or SAMe, so taking a SAMe supplement can
help. If SAMe makes you feel worse, you can consume nutrients that
indirectly promote the breakdown of histamine, such as nettle leaves,
quercetin, bitter orange fruit, and bromelain, or take enzymes such as
DAO that break down histamine quite effectively.•

Take PQQ. If your genes are dirty, alcohol can lead to oxidative stress,
which reduces your ability to process histamine. The molecule PQQ helps
reduce oxidative stress far more effectively than vitamin E, vitamin C, or
other common antioxidants. To get the benefits of PQQ, take one PQQ
lozenge before drinking.•

Take molybdenum and thiamine. Sulfites are common in wines and
contribute to irritability, insomnia, and headaches. They also bind to and
prevent the absorption of vitamin B1, which is necessary for energy and
--- END PAGE 63 ---

--- PAGE 64 ---
focus. Taking about 500 mcg of molybdenum helps reduce the effects of
sulfites on mental performance and vitamin uptake. You should also
consume about 50 mg of thiamine before drinking, as thiamine can
prevent sulfites from binding to vitamin B1.•

Consume products that will break down acetaldehyde, the toxic by-
product of alcohol consumption. Two of the best are dihydromyricetin
(DHM) and a genetically engineered probiotic strain called ZBiotics.
In summary, my ideal booze stack—supplements I’d use anytime I’m
planning to consume more than two drinks—would include the following:
• Probiota HistaminX, a probiotic, to optimize the DAO gene. Consume two
capsules before drinking.
• HomocysteX Plus to optimize the HNMT, MAOA, MAOB, and MTHFR
genes. Take one capsule before drinking.
• Molybdenum to optimize the SUOX gene. Consume one capsule before
drinking.
• PQQ to optimize the MTR gene. Take one lozenge before drinking.
• Thiamine to optimize the PDH gene. Consume one capsule before
drinking.
• SAMe to optimize the HNMT gene. One of my favorite such supplements
is Histablock by Seeking Health. This is optional if you are already taking
HomocysteX Plus.
• A serving of ZBiotics or DHM
Your genetic makeup may be different from mine, but it’s worth testing and
addressing, because being able to drink alcohol and feel amazingly clean the
next day is a handy life hack for any social butterfly.
How to Fuel for Endurance
For any workout that lasts more than ninety minutes and any competition
for which glycogen depletion and central nervous system fatigue are
potential concerns, I recommend a blend of four ingredients to keep your
--- END PAGE 64 ---

--- PAGE 65 ---
energy high for hours on end, with very few blood sugar fluctuations or gut
issues:1.

Easy-to-digest carbohydrate. Look for one that contains potato dextrin,
dextrose, fractionated amylopectin starch, or highly branched cyclic
dextrin. This will allow you to maintain liver and muscle glycogen stores
without getting the blood sugar roller coaster or gut rot and
fermentation caused by many common sports nutrition carbohydrates,
such as fructose, isomaltulose, and maltodextrin. Good options include
GlycoFuse by Gaspari Nutrition, Carb1 by FirstPhorm, and Transparent
Labs Carb Powder. Because you’ll be including the other substances
listed below, I recommend far less of this carbohydrate than is normally
recommended: 100–150 calories per hour.2.

Easy-to-digest protein. Although many sports drinks now feature whey
protein, I prefer a protein that is more easily digested and broken down
for immediate assimilation. For this, you cannot beat essential amino
acids, at an intake of 5–10 g per hour. I recommend a powdered version,
such as Kion Aminos.3.

Ketone or MCT source. I recommend, if you can afford the relative
expense, one serving of liquid ketones per hour, such as HVMN or
KetoneAid. Do not use ketone salts, which require so much salt for the
ketone binding that they cause gastric distress. In addition, or as a more
budget-friendly alternative to ketones, you can consume 1 teaspoon to 1
tablespoon of MCT oil per hour, although there is also an increased risk of
digestive distress with this strategy, especially if you “eyeball” the dosage
and happen to overdose.4.

Electrolyte source. If you are mixing all of the above into one water
bottle that you nurse for each hour you are competing, you should also
include one serving (typically a single scoop) of electrolytes each hour,
such as Thorne’s Catalytes, LMNT, Protekt, or Quinton—or a few pinches
of a good salt, such as Celtic salt.
Simply mix all of the above in a blender or shaker bottle, then divide the
drink among sports flasks or water bottles based on the number of hours.
For instance, if you’ll be competing for three hours, mix together the three-
hour amounts of carbs, protein, ketones, and electrolytes and then divide it
among three water bottles.
--- END PAGE 65 ---

--- PAGE 66 ---
THE LAST WORD
So what happened after I struggled to the finish line of Ironman Canada,
surviving on the fumes of Coke and sugar?
For the next race, I took Dr. Attia’s advice and pulled out the big guns:
amino acids. And voilà—that year at the Ironman World Championships
in Kona, Hawaii, I crossed the finish line in a very respectable nine hours
and fifty-nine minutes, with no central nervous system stimulants and
one-quarter of the carbohydrates that white-lab-coat-wearing nutrition
scientists normally recommend for endurance athletes. Since then, I have
refined my fueling strategy and the nutrition tactics I recommend for
endurance athletes to include other potent compounds such as dextrin
and liquid ketones (discussed in the sidebar above and in chapter 14). I
also added 10 to 40 g of essential amino acids to my daily supplement
protocol for neurotransmitter, gut, joint, and muscle support, especially
on days when I’m on the go and have less time to stop for large protein
feedings from real food sources.
Of course, you don’t need to swim 2.4 miles, bicycle 112 miles, or run
26.2 miles in half a day or be some kind of crazy biohacker or athlete to
use these strategies. When you care for your neurotransmitters and brain,
you will certainly improve your stamina and endurance, power
production, and physical performance, but perhaps more important for
the average person just wanting to feel good, these strategies can also help
you increase focus, fall asleep faster, and banish brain fog.
In the next chapter, you are going to learn about another aspect of
your brain that can break—the blood-brain barrier. But in the meantime,
try implementing the neurotransmitter-supporting strategies from this
chapter:
1. Address depression naturally.
2. Take a break from caffeine.
--- END PAGE 66 ---

--- PAGE 67 ---
3. Remove toxins from your home.
4. Avoid sensory overload.
5. Reboot your gut with a squeaky-clean eating protocol.
6. Get adequate amino acids.
7. Eat fat.
8. Determine your neurotransmitter dominance.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Today, take at least one step toward boosting the state of your
neurotransmitters. For example, try to get good sources of omega-3 fatty
acids, amino acids, and polyphenols with each meal by including foods like
salmon, eggs, walnuts, bone broth, kimchi, sauerkraut, and blueberries.
Switch to natural cleaning supplies for your home and office, and for
Pete’s sake, get the TV out of your bedroom already. Instead of drinking
that afternoon cup of coffee or second energy drink, opt for a cup of decaf
or herbal tea or some sparkling water with monk fruit or stevia, paired
with a quick round of breathwork or a cold-water face and head dunk, for
which you’re about to discover the intriguing science.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/1.
--- END PAGE 67 ---

--- PAGE 68 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 68 ---

--- PAGE 69 ---
02
38 DEGREES BELOW ZERO
HOW TO FIX A LEAKY BRAIN
Silhouetted against the glow of the halogen floodlights in Spartan CEO Joe De
Sena’s big red barn in Pittsfield, Vermont, bundled up in a giant double-layered
snowsuit, the emergency medical technician sighed and bent down for a closer
look at my cold, hard, blue feet.
“Were you wearing double socks?”
--- END PAGE 69 ---

--- PAGE 70 ---
I watched as he tugged at my ice-encrusted big toe. “Yeah,
polypropylene liner with Smartwool.”
“Wiggling your toes a lot out there?”
I nodded.
“Can you feel this?”
He dug his fingernail into the underside of my toe. The pressure felt
like a distant pinprick. “Barely.”
He sat up. “Let’s get your feet in a hot water basin for a few minutes
and get you back out there.”
I grimaced. He was referring to the 38-degrees-below-zero, snow-and-
ice-covered fields that lay just outside the barn and served as the
playground and official location of the brutal Spartan Agoge. Formerly
known as the Death Race, the Agoge is a punishing mash-up of obstacle
course racing, brutal mental and physical challenges, and wilderness
survival, an ultimate battle against the elements and the twisted, cruel
minds of the race organizers. It is designed to build the perfect blend of
grit, resilience, and perseverance to make you just as badass as Leonardo
DiCaprio’s character in the hard-core movie The Revenant. The Agoge was
just one step in my quest to complete the coveted Spartan Delta, a
calendar year of nine of the toughest obstacle course races on the planet.
As the EMT placed my near-frostbitten feet into a hot water basin to
thaw them out, I began to practice my four-count breathing. One year
earlier, former Navy SEAL commander Mark Divine had taught me this
invaluable box-breathing technique as I was getting bashed by the frigid
Pacific Ocean for eight consecutive hours at the SEALFIT Kokoro Camp—
an equally hellish crucible designed to simulate Navy SEAL Hell Week for
those citizens who want to see what it feels like to be subjected to the
extreme rigors used to sculpt a battle-worthy warrior and to be on the
brink of hypothermia for seventy-two consecutive hours.
Four count in, four count hold, four count out, four count hold.
--- END PAGE 70 ---

--- PAGE 71 ---
As pins and needles engulfed my feet, I continued to focus on my
breathing, the same breathing I use when strolling through a chaotic
airport, managing the lions jumping out from my email inbox, or sitting in
a stressful traffic jam. My mind soon entered a state of pleasant and
painless nirvana. Ten minutes later, I was trudging out into a tundra so
cold that any exposed skin would be frostbitten within two minutes.
So what am I, some kind of cold-obsessed masochist? Hardly. As a
skinny-ass, relatively hairless author, extreme forays into icy landscapes
and arctic plunges are not a regular or deeply desired habit of mine. But I
highly value the power of cold exposure to heal and optimize the nervous
system, particularly a critical part of the brain, the blood-brain barrier. In
this chapter, you’ll discover why I wander out for chilly winter morning
walks in a T-shirt and shorts, why I begin and end each day with a
refreshing cold shower, why I go out of my way to hop into a cold lake,
--- END PAGE 71 ---

--- PAGE 72 ---
river, ocean, or ice bath once a week, and why cryotherapy chambers are
not just gimmicky ways to spend valuable cash on goose bumps.
BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER 101
I became interested in cold therapy when I learned about its benefits for
one part of the human nervous system that is vital but often neglected: the
blood-brain barrier (BBB). When it comes to your mental function,
supporting the BBB is one of the most important steps you can take, and
maintaining it properly requires far more than mere cold therapy. To
understand why the BBB is so critical, let’s look first at what can happen
when something goes wrong.
Chances are, you have heard of the gastrointestinal condition known
as leaky gut. If you are a wellness enthusiast or you lurk on health forums,
you may have heard leaky gut described as “intestinal permeability.” But
the truth is that your gut is naturally and selectively permeable, allowing
nutrients to pass into your bloodstream while keeping harmful toxins,
large allergenic proteins, and pathogens out. When this process fails
because your gut lining has been damaged by compounds such as
herbicides, pesticides, excessive alcohol, sugar, and other assailants, your
gut lining becomes more permeable than it should be, and you end up with
a leaky gut. This can lead to indigestion, poor nutrient absorption, the
development of food sensitivities, and systemic inflammation.
Similarly, when your BBB is punctured or damaged, you can end up
with a leaky brain. No, a leaky brain has nothing to do with the zombie
apocalypse or gray matter oozing out your ears. The reality is much easier
to digest and is based on the fact that your brain is similar to your gut in at
least one respect: it’s protected by a membrane, the BBB, that’s selectively
permeable.
--- END PAGE 72 ---

--- PAGE 73 ---
Your brain requires compounds such as glucose, amino acids, fat-
soluble nutrients, and ketones to function properly, so the BBB needs to
allow them to pass through. For example, caffeine crosses the barrier
easily and can be beneficial for brain health. At the same time, your brain
relies on the BBB to keep out harmful toxins, infectious pathogens, and
rogue immune cells.
The BBB is formed by brain capillary endothelial cells, which are
simple squamous (flat) cells that line the walls of blood and lymphatic
vessels. The entire barrier includes three mechanisms that control the
exchange of materials between your blood, brain, and cerebrospinal fluid
and maintain the extracellular environment of the central nervous system:
• The cells that form the physical barrier between your blood and your
brain
• Transporter molecules that mediate the flow of compounds between
your brain and blood
• Enzymes in the endothelial cells of the brain and epithelial cells of the
blood that metabolize neurotransmitters and toxins
Most of the research on the BBB in the past one hundred years has
focused on formulating drugs to effectively reach the central nervous
system by enabling them to cross the BBB. To understand the delicacy of
this barrier, you have to understand that the endothelial lining of your
blood vessels is only one cell thick—that’s about one-tenth the thickness
of a single strand of hair. Some of the largest vessels, such as arteries and
veins, are also surrounded by thick walls of connective tissue and smooth
muscle cells, but the vessel walls themselves are lined only by this thin
sheet of cells.
Like every other cell in your body, endothelial cells can divide. The
division of endothelial cells can help quickly repair blood vessel walls. If
left to themselves, they can live from a couple months (liver endothelium)
--- END PAGE 73 ---

--- PAGE 74 ---
to several years (brain endothelium). But when they are exposed to
harmful compounds or stressors such as excessive inflammation, these
cells can die prematurely and are forced to divide quickly in order to
replicate in adequate quantity to repair the vessel wall. But when the
vessel wall is exposed to a stressed state 24-7 without any breaks, the
vessels that make up the BBB gradually weaken.
When the BBB is compromised, the brain is exposed to invaders such
as toxins and bacteria. This can cause inflammation in the brain, and long-
term, chronic inflammation in the brain can result in dementia,
Alzheimer’s, and other neurodegenerative diseases, as well as less serious
problems like brain fog, lack of focus, poor sleep, and food cravings.
DO YOU HAVE A LEAKY BRAIN?
Getting tested for a leaky brain can be difficult. It often involves
complicated and expensive protocols like electroencephalograms,
spectrophotometry to track blue dyes that are injected into the brain, or
tests of enzymes called matrix metalloproteinases. There is one decent
blood panel from Cyrex Laboratories, called the blood-brain barrier
--- END PAGE 74 ---

--- PAGE 75 ---
permeability test, that looks for antibodies often associated with BBB
issues brought on by traumatic brain injury or concussion, but you’ll need
a doctor to order that panel for you.
You don’t actually need to invest in these tests to determine if you’re
at risk for leaky brain. In fact, it is pretty simple to identify variables in
your life that may be weakening your BBB. The following are the most
common factors that can lead to a leaky brain.
Poor Sleep
To properly regulate BBB function and integrity, it is crucial to get enough
sleep. One group of researchers studied the effects of chronic sleep
restriction on mice. Not only did it significantly diminish endothelial and
inducible nitric oxide synthase, endothelin 1, and glucose transporter
expression in brain microvessels of the BBB, but it also decreased the
brain’s uptake of 2-deoxyglucose, a sugar needed to maintain proper
signaling between neurons. In other words, the mice’s BBBs were less able
to shuttle nutrients into their brains, and their brains were less able to
properly send messages. This all coincided with increased permeability of
the BBB. If you really want to optimize overnight clearance of waste
products from your brain via a mechanism called glymphatic clearance,
which replenishes and cleanses the brain during a night of sleep, research
--- END PAGE 75 ---

--- PAGE 76 ---
has demonstrated that sleeping on your right side is the best position for
that!
Excessive Alcohol Intake
Research suggests that long-term alcohol abuse can lead to neuron
degeneration, ranging from poor message signaling to full-on cell death,
and can cause damage that renders the BBB more permeable. Alcohol is
primarily composed of ethanol, which enhances the activity of molecules
called reactive oxygen species (ROS) that can damage brain cells. Chronic
exposure to alcohol also increases the expression of CYPE1, an enzyme
that converts ethanol to acetaldehyde, resulting in the formation of excess
ROS in the process. Acetaldehyde is a close chemical cousin of
formaldehyde (did someone say embalming fluid?) that’s used in the
manufacturing of adhesives and plastics. It’s also a potent neurotoxin
(thirty times more toxic than alcohol itself!) that can cross the BBB. When
the BBB is punctured, ruptured, or loosened, heavy metals, toxins, molds,
undigested proteins, and—you guessed it—excess acetaldehyde can cross
the barrier and damage the brain.
Both ethanol and acetaldehyde can increase the permeability of the
BBB. While a small glass of wine a day may not be a serious issue for your
--- END PAGE 76 ---

--- PAGE 77 ---
BBB, chronic, excessive alcohol intake will push ethanol and acetaldehyde
concentrations to dangerous levels.
High Blood Pressure
Research suggests that in rats, BBB dysfunction is related to the combined
effects of elevated blood pressure and cerebral vasodilation, the widening
of blood vessels in the brain. High blood pressure can be caused by
anything from chronic stress and shallow chest breathing to poor diet and
lack of sleep. Considering that one in three adults in the US has high blood
pressure, this factor should be taken very seriously.
Other Factors
While sleep deprivation, alcohol intake, and high blood pressure are
common causes of a leaky BBB, there are other well-researched factors,
including the following:
• Systemic inflammation
• Stress, whether acute or chronic
• Bacterial infections
--- END PAGE 77 ---

--- PAGE 78 ---
• Toxins like lipopolysaccharides (LPS), which are usually generated
from high-fat, high-carbohydrate meals or alcohol (burger and fries
washed down with a beer, anyone?)
• Mold exposure
• Leaky gut
• Liver damage
• Frequent blood glucose fluctuations
• Frequent sleep disturbances
• Anything that triggers oxidative stress in glial cells of the brain, such as
high sugar intake
• Hypoxia (oxygen deficiency in the cells), especially from shallow, rapid
mouth breathing rather than deep, slow nasal breathing
• In some people, high intake of glutamate and MSG. The glutamate that
naturally occurs in many foods, such as milk, wheat, and vegetables,
and the glutamate added to foods as MSG are the same, which means
that your body metabolizes them the same way. But a problem arises if
you have any of the following conditions, which can lead to excess
inflammation that renders the BBB more permeable: histamine
intolerance, glutamate sensitivity, gluten intolerance or celiac disease,
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, or autoimmune diseases
linked to glutamate autoimmunity. In addition, if you’re consuming
very high amounts of glutamate (more than 20 g per day, which can
happen with high intake of processed foods and plenty of Chinese
takeout), it could be a problem, since excess glutamate in the brain can
cause cell damage and cell death.
Many common health issues are associated with increased
susceptibility to these factors, including depression, head trauma, Lyme
disease, obesity, and diabetes. These conditions lead to inflammation and
--- END PAGE 78 ---

--- PAGE 79 ---
oxidative stress and increase levels of MMP-9, a class of enzymes that are
involved in the body’s natural process of tissue repair and replacement.
When inflammation is present, MMP-9 can break down various
components of the BBB.
So, with all these threats to your brain and vascular system, how can
you prevent leakage and seepage in your BBB?
How to Recover from a TBI/Concussion Fast
Several life events influenced my deep interest in “stacks” that could help a
person recover from a traumatic brain injury (TBI) or concussion. The first
was really a series of events as head injuries piled up through my physically
active teenage years, namely during the usual pursuits of a young man, such
as riding without my bike helmet and playing football with no protective
gear. Next, I discovered I possess a high genetic risk of dementia, and it
turns out that many of the same brain-blood flow and neural anti-
inflammatory strategies recommended in books such as The End of
Alzheimer’s by Dale Bredesen can help with head injuries, too. Finally, one of
my friends slipped and hit his head (during Wim Hof breathing while
standing on a concrete pad—not recommended) but recovered far faster
than I expected by incorporating a wide range of strategies, including many
of those you will find here:
• Get a lot of sleep and spend time meditating, breathing, or doing
generally nothing in a dark room, stimulant-free (no TV, no reading, no
typing—just eyes closed).
• Constantly use orange-tinted or red-tinted blue-light-blocking glasses
paired with full bedroom darkness via blackout curtains and a
wraparound sleep mask.
• Wear earplugs or noise-blocking headphones when around loud noises
or machines.
• Limit access to email and similar technology, particularly on bright,
backlit screens. Install Iris light-blocking software on all screens possible.
• Use a vagus nerve stimulation device or red-light therapy on the vagus
nerve daily.
--- END PAGE 79 ---

--- PAGE 80 ---
• Use a wearable head photobiomodulation device such as Vielight or
Neuronic helmet daily.
• Use HBOT for 30–90 minutes per day, preferably with red-light therapy
and methylene blue prior.
• Use the peptides P21/Adamax combo, Semax/Selank combo, Dihexa,
and/or BPC-157 daily.
• Regularly use a sensory deprivation chamber such as Zen Float or Blue
Light Floatation.
• Use a BioCharger (on the concussion or clear head setting) and/or
PulseCenters PEMF cranial stimulation protocol and/or FlexPulse for 15–
20 minutes per day near the occipital lobe on the back of the head.
• Daily exercise with oxygen therapy (EWOT) using a machine like the
CellGym or LiveO2.
• Full ketosis diet, including MCT oil, ketone esters, minerals, green tea,
fatty fish, and lots of hydration, along with high intake of polyphenols
and flavonols from red and green powder supplements.
• Optional: Short (1-to-2-week) course of HGH or daily frequent use of
colostrum and deer antler velvet to accelerate healing.
• Optional: Intranasal stem cells and/or intranasal or nebulized exosomes.
• Optional: Gonstead Chiropractic (a trustworthy, research-driven form of
chiropractic adjustments).
• Acupressure and/or acupuncture.
• Optional: Visit Peak Brain Institute, Revive Centers, or Cognitive FX for a
comprehensive, medically managed approach.
Daily Supplements Stack:•

Methylene blue (10–30 mg daily) 60–90 minutes prior to Vielight and any
other red-light treatment (BioBlue, Troscriptions, and 10X are good
brands)
• KetoneIQ (3 servings per day)
• 4–6 g fish oil (Kion Omega is a good brand)
• 1–2 servings curcumin or turmeric (Kion Flex is a good brand)
• 600 mg alpha-lipoic acid (Thorne is a good brand)
--- END PAGE 80 ---

--- PAGE 81 ---
• 1–3 mg folic acid in a natural form as methylfolate (Thorne is a good
brand)
• Higher-dose vitamin C: 1,500–2,000 mg in the morning and again in the
evening (Jigsaw Health and American Nutraceuticals are good brands)
• 4,000 IU vitamin D (d.velop is a good brand)
• Magnesium: 400 mg before bed (Magnesium Breakthrough is good
brand)
• NAD, NMN, or NR supplements or IVs/patches/suppositories: 400–1,000
mg per day
• Glutathione (topical with Aura spray or oral, liposomal version such as
Quicksilver)
• 50–100 mg lion’s mane extract with 100–200 mg niacin and (optional)
0.1–0.3 g psilocybin
• Creatine monohydrate: 10 g per day split into two 5 g portions
• Full-spectrum organic CBD (100–300 mg) before bed
• High-dose melatonin (300–1,000 mg from Mitozen oral or suppositories)
before bed
13 WAYS TO FIX A LEAKY BRAIN
“Hi, I’m Ben Greenfield, and I’m naked.”
Thus begins one of my most popular videos on YouTube. Over five
million voyeuristic viewers have watched me strip off my clothes, take a
deep breath, and step into an icy shower (and yes, it still surprises me how
many people need a tutorial on taking a cold shower). I have religiously
maintained this practice for the past eight years, along with cold baths,
cold river and lake swims, keeping my home temperature at goose-bump
level, and even swimming in the nineteen-foot endless pool in the forest
behind my house, which I filled with the chilliest water I could find.
I became intrigued by cold exposure when, in 2013, I interviewed
NASA materials engineer Ray Cronise on my podcast. Ray, who had just
--- END PAGE 81 ---

--- PAGE 82 ---
penned a fascinating article in Wired magazine, described to me how he
had just created what he called the Shiver System, a protocol to help
people lose over 20 pounds of fat per month by taking a cold shower at the
beginning and end of each day. Later, I discovered more about the effects
of cold exposure when neurosurgeon Dr. Jack Kruse explained to me how
he uses cold-water exposure with his patients to heal nerves and brain
damage. Then journalist James Nestor, author of the fascinating books
Deep and Breath, informed me of the beneficial brain changes that occur in
freedivers and humans in general when they immerse themselves in cold
water.
I was convinced. Not only did I journey to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, to
spend a full week learning to freedive and spearfish in deep, cold water,
but I also began to experiment with chanting, meditation, deep breathing,
and even fancy electronic vagus nerve stimulators, all to increase the
integrity of the BBB. It turns out that many of these strategies help train
and tone your vagus nerve, which snakes throughout your body, innervates
many organs, and helps maintain BBB integrity. Because of this, I go out of
my way each day to care for my vagus nerve, including red-light therapy on
my neck and upper jaw, cold-water soaks, gargling water, breathwork,
pulsed electromagnetic field therapy (PEMF), sleeping on my right side,
and eating a diet rich in DHA. It is likely these strategies that have led to
consistently good values of my heart rate variability (HRV), a key
measurement of nervous system repair and recovery.
There are plenty of measures you can take to prevent BBB
permeability, repair holes that may already be there, and maintain the
integrity of your endothelium. The following are thirteen ways to fix a
leaky brain.
1. Get More Sleep
--- END PAGE 82 ---

--- PAGE 83 ---
Sleep loss is known to impair the immune system and increase levels of
pro-inflammatory mediators. Sleep loss also increases sympathetic, “fight-
or-flight” nervous system activity and causes endothelial dysfunction—
which limits the ability of the cells that make up the BBB to divide and
repair. The sleep study on mice mentioned earlier found that at the end of
six days of sleep deprivation, the permeability of the BBB was restored to
baseline after just twenty-four hours of recovery sleep. So, to maintain the
health of your BBB, you need to get a good amount of sleep each day,
between seven and nine hours per twenty-four-hour period. A small dose
of the sleep hormone melatonin—0.2 to 0.3 mg—half an hour before bed
can help restore optimal BBB permeability and maintain its integrity, likely
due to melatonin’s impressive anti-inflammatory and sleep-promoting
properties. After discovering this strategy from Dr. John Lieurance, my
friend whom I call the “Dr. Strange” of alternative medicine, I often use
extremely high-dose melatonin suppositories and patches while traveling,
at up to 600 mg for the first few nights after arriving at a new destination.
In addition, NAD and creatine supplementation can assist with healing the
blood-brain barrier damage induced by a poor night of sleep. (Chapter 7
will take a much deeper dive into sleep and sleep hacking.)
2. Limit Your Alcohol Intake
As you learned earlier, alcohol consumption is a major contributor to a
leaky brain because of the formation of ROS, which can damage the BBB,
and the passing of compounds such as acetaldehyde across the BBB and
into the brain. Sure, the low dose of ethanol from a glass of wine a day can
migrate across the BBB and trigger the release of good endorphins and
stimulate relaxing neurotransmitter receptors. But higher amounts of
alcohol can result in damage from ethanol and acetaldehyde. So, as much
as possible, limit yourself to no more than one serving of alcohol per day
--- END PAGE 83 ---

--- PAGE 84 ---
—preferably not of the giant fishbowl-size wineglass variety. If you opt to
drink, check chapter 1 for tips on how to mitigate damage, and consider
alcohol-free or low-alcohol nighttime cocktail alternatives such as ketone
esters, herbal liquors, or bitters and digestifs mixed with soda water,
electrolytes, and splashes of fresh fruit juice. A few of my favorite options
include KetoneAid ketone cocktails, Ebo Lebo (Italian), Pelinkovac
(Croatian), apple cider vinegar, and vinegar-based shrubs, which are
featured in my books Boundless Cookbook and Boundless Kitchen.
3. Control Blood Pressure
Both acute and chronic hypertension increase BBB permeability. Dark
chocolate, magnesium, potassium, handgrip strength training, and even
high-dose garlic can help reduce blood pressure. If you’re worried about
your breath after consuming garlic, rest assured that you don’t have to
mow through an entire bowl of elephant garlic to reap its benefits. Taking
a supplement of allicin, the main bioactive component of garlic, is a far
more efficient way to get the brain-boosting benefits of garlic without
acquiring vampire-killing breath. As far as handgrip devices go, you can
take a Captains of Crush grip strengthener with you in the car or on an
airplane or train. There is also a handgrip smart device called Zona that
has been clinically approved for treating blood pressure and guides you
through a squeeze-and-relax regimen. Finally, do not restrict salt as a
blood pressure–lowering strategy. A good mineral-rich salt is crucial for
maintaining normal blood volume, blood pressure, and oxygen delivery to
tissues. (For more on the myths behind salt consumption, I cannot
recommend highly enough that you read Dr. James DiNicolantonio’s book
The Salt Fix.)
--- END PAGE 84 ---

--- PAGE 85 ---
4. Be Cautious with High-Fat Diets
In one study, rodents given a diet that was 40 percent saturated fat
experienced elevated BBB permeability. The deleterious effects of
saturated fats on brain health can be even more serious if you happen to
be a carrier of the APOE4 genotype, which can significantly increase your
risk of Alzheimer’s and impair brain transport of DHA due to a breakdown
in the tight junctions of the BBB. But if you happen to be a high-fat, low-
carb or keto diet enthusiast, there are ways to mitigate this damage. For
example, limiting alcohol consumption and adding aged garlic extract,
alpha-lipoic acid (particularly R-ALA, its more biologically active form),
niacin, NAD, bitter melon, or vitamin D can be effective. Phytonutrient-
rich plants and spices such as turmeric, astragalus, and cruciferous veggies
like broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and cabbage produce a similar protective
effect. Fiber-rich foods such as sweet potatoes, purple potatoes, yams, and
beans are also helpful, as is fish consumption. What’s most important to
know is that you should avoid a low-carb or “dirty keto” diet chock-full of
butter, coconut oil, lard, and fat-streaked slabs of red meat and limited in
fiber and greens and instead—if you choose to limit carbs—adopt a more
Mediterranean approach rich in omega-3 fatty acids such as fish, avocados,
and olives; a wide variety of bitters; herbs and spices; fermented
vegetables; tannin- and polyphenol-rich beverages; and low-sugar,
nutrient-dense fruits such as berries and pomegranates.
5. Drink Coffee and Tea
Caffeine is a known protector of BBB integrity, and a cup of coffee a day, or
around 100 to 200 mg of caffeine, may even help inhibit BBB disruption,
which could be one way that coffee helps prevent Alzheimer’s disease.
Caffeine induces the production of cAMP, a molecule that facilitates
--- END PAGE 85 ---

--- PAGE 86 ---
intercellular communication and fortifies the tight junctions of the BBB.
In addition, cAMP reduces inflammation in the brain. You can get a
healthy dose of caffeine from an 8-ounce cup of coffee or green tea. Just be
sure to choose low-mold and organic varieties since many mycotoxins and
metabolites secreted by molds can translocate through the BBB and cause
neuroinflammation.
6. Take Specific Supplements
Alpha-GPC, a type of choline that readily crosses the BBB, is known to
improve endothelial dysfunction. Inositol from egg yolks or supplements
also enhances BBB integrity. Berberine reduces BBB permeability and
increases resistance to brain damage following head trauma. Vitamins B ,
12B , and B restore a damaged BBB to equilibrium. Research has shown that
6 9 individuals who have had a stroke may have some success repairing their
BBBs by using herbs and supplements such as astragalus, chlorogenic acid,
ginseng, olive leaf extract, and rosmarinic acid. In addition, individuals
who have had head injuries and suffer from a leaky brain have been shown
to benefit from apigenin, butyrate, citicoline, and shilajit.
You can also use nutrients and supplements to help inhibit MMP-9,
those enzymes that, in the presence of inflammation, can break down
parts of the BBB—inhibitors of MMP-9 have been shown to restore BBB
integrity. These inhibitors include curcumin, resveratrol, berberine, fish
oil, ginger, broccoli, watercress, pomegranate extract, and many other
natural anti-inflammatories found in fruits, vegetables, herbs, and spices.
Peptides, which are short chains of amino acids available as oral,
injectable, or, most notably in this case, nasal spray delivery mechanisms
can also assist with BBB integrity. A few of the more relevant peptides in
this respect, which can also act like relatively potent nootropics or smart
--- END PAGE 86 ---

--- PAGE 87 ---
drugs, are Semax, Selank, P21, Adamax, BPC-157, VIP, GHK-CU, DIHEXA,
and Cerebrolysin.
7. Get More Magnesium
Adequate magnesium intake, between 300 and 600 mg a day, can
attenuate BBB permeability—in a study, even people who were injected
with an agent to induce leaky BBBs benefited from magnesium. You can
take magnesium orally, soak in magnesium salts baths, or apply
magnesium topically, as either a lotion or spray, on the back of your neck
and head. Make sure to track how much magnesium you take in total,
including all these applications, because in amounts over 1,500 mg per day,
magnesium can cause annoying loose stools. Magnesium L-threonate is
the best form—it has the ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and most
effectively increases magnesium levels in the brain.
8. Stimulate Your Vagus Nerve
The vagus nerve is the largest nerve in the body and runs from your brain
to your ears, tongue, lungs, and gut. It is the backbone of your
parasympathetic system, and its health goes hand in hand with both
emotional and gastric health. Multiple studies have shown that
stimulating the vagus nerve strengthens the BBB. You can stimulate it
naturally with practices like massages, singing, chanting, meditation, deep
breathing, and cold showers. A good stimulator device that delivers
electrical impulses to the vagus nerve, such as the Fisher Wallace
Stimulator, Truvaga, or Pulsetto, can also work quite well, along with red-
light therapy devices that can treat the neck and jaw area, particularly the
Vielight or Kineon device.
--- END PAGE 87 ---

--- PAGE 88 ---
9. Avoid Frequent Snacking
Ghrelin, a hunger-stimulating hormone, can improve BBB integrity.
Research has shown that ghrelin can reduce BBB breakdown after
traumatic head injury. By maintaining a moderate weight without yo-yo
dieting, avoiding long fasting periods, eating adequate protein (0.7 to 0.8 g
per pound of body weight per day), and getting enough sleep, you can
normalize your ghrelin levels.
10. Nourish Your Gut Bacteria
One study observed the effects of a transplant of gut bacteria from healthy
mice with perfect BBB integrity to unhealthy mice with leaky brains. The
researchers found that the transplant restored the integrity of the
damaged barriers because of specific inflammation-modulating
compounds released by bacteria that increase BBB integrity. Fortunately,
you don’t have to hunt down a willing donor to give you a healthy poop
transplant (although so-called “fecal microbiota transplants” are
increasingly available and affordable). You can achieve similar repair
results by avoiding stress, limiting antibiotic use, eating enough fiber,
taking quality probiotics (look for synbiotics, which have both bacteria
and bacteria food), and eating a wide variety of fermented foods on a
regular basis.
11. Decrease Inflammation
According to Dr. Datis Kharrazian, a medical researcher specializing in
chronic disease and nutrition, inflammatory cytokines—molecules that
promote inflammation—that start in an inflamed gut can enter the
bloodstream, make their way to the brain, and pass through even a healthy
--- END PAGE 88 ---

--- PAGE 89 ---
blood-brain barrier. Once in the brain, these cytokines can affect sensitive
tissues, most notably the vagus nerve and autonomic nervous system, to
the point that they cannot function properly. Both the vagus nerve and the
autonomic nervous system play a major role in regulating the movement
of food through the gut, so when they’re not working properly, intestinal
motility slows down. Once intestinal motility slows down, the
inflammatory cytokines in the intestines have even more time to make
their way into the bloodstream and from there pass through the blood-
brain barrier, creating a sort of vicious cycle of continuing inflammation
and worsening intestinal function. Because poor vagal nerve tone can
increase both cortisol and inflammatory cytokines, Dr. Kharrazian
recommends stimulating the vagus nerve in order to reboot it through
singing, gargling, and gagging exercises, along with coffee enemas.
In addition, one of the best ways to manage inflammation is to support
your mitochondria, which operate a bit like cellular engines. But in the
process of creating ATP energy, these engines give off exhaust known as
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Your body creates compounds to
neutralize that exhaust, such as glutathione, catalase, and superoxide
dismutase, but produces far fewer of these compounds with age, triggering
an issue known as inflammaging, which is a root cause of most chronic
diseases of aging, such as cancer, Alzheimer’s, and heart disease. So, in
addition to supporting your vagus nerve, you should support your
mitochondria with nutritional strategies such as NAD, CoQ , alpha-lipoic
10acid (ALA), L-carnitine (especially the injectable kind), and creatine, along
with biohacks such as high-intensity interval training, cold therapy,
hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) or exercise with oxygen therapy
(EWOT), sauna, methylene blue combined with red-light therapy,
peptides like MOTS-C and epitalon, and—a personal favorite of mine—
the powerful intranasal peptide VIP (vasoactive intestinal polypeptide),
--- END PAGE 89 ---

--- PAGE 90 ---
which can be effectively used to treat the chronic inflammatory response
syndrome discussed in chapter 4 but also used to treat the BBB.
12. Don’t Heat Your Head
The influence of electromagnetic radiation on the function of the BBB has
been researched since the 1970s on animals, cell cultures, and recently
humans. Electromagnetic fields (EMFs), such as those produced by
microwaves, Wi-Fi routers, and other elements of the electrical soup,
don’t seem to produce significant thermic heating of brain tissue that can
make the BBB more permeable, but unfortunately, the practice of holding
your phone up to your head or sleeping with your device on non-airplane-
mode close to your head does. A multitude of studies now show that
harmful biological changes in brain tissue can occur at much lower
radiation levels of specific absorption rate (SAR) than the FCC and FDA
claim are safe, and that radiofrequency waves from a phone within 12
inches of the head can increase brain tissue temperature to unsafe levels.
Even though there’s no hard evidence (yet!) that Bluetooth earbuds are
also a problem, I engage in smart risk reduction: I always use my phone in
speaker mode or with old-school wired headphones, I seldom wear
Bluetooth earbuds or headphones, and for long calls, I opt for airtube
headphone technology, which allows sound to travel through non-wired
hollow tubes.
13. Cold Thermogenesis
With ten pale-blue fingers, I white-knuckled the steering wheel of my
Toyota RAV4 and strained to remember how to turn on the engine. After
staring blankly through the windshield at the parking lot for several
minutes—teeth chattering and brain slowly coming back to life—I leaned
--- END PAGE 90 ---

--- PAGE 91 ---
to the right, fumbled for the keys that lay on the passenger seat, and then
cursed as my large intestine contracted and filled my soggy Speedo with a
liquid bowel evacuation.
Ten minutes earlier, I had dragged my sorry ass out of the frigid
Spokane River and stumbled like a drunk, waterlogged sea otter up across
the pavement back to my Toyota. See, after studying the benefits of cold
thermogenesis (which is the use of any type of cooling strategy to induce a
metabolic effect) and practicing cold showers and ice baths for several
weeks, I figured I would level up and try a real outdoor cold-water swim in
the middle of March, when chunks of ice still floated down the river near
my home. But rather than simply dipping in and out of the safe edges of
the water, like a true hard-charging overachiever, I attempted to swim
upstream for a good twenty minutes without a wet suit. Now, in the car, as
my body fought to restore its normal temperature after my foolhardy
attempt at a health hack, I was paying the price. The thing is, a long, frigid,
lose-control-of-your-bowels ice-water swim is an unnecessary (and ill-
advised) method of engaging in cold thermogenesis. You can take full
advantage of the many benefits of cold thermogenesis with far simpler
techniques. By engaging in regular cold exposure such as cold soaks, cold
showers, splashing cold water on your face, cold walks in minimal
clothing, wearing body-cooling gear like the Cool Fat Burner vest, standing
in cryotherapy chambers, and even keeping your home a bit chillier than is
comfortable, you can
• Restore BBB health by increasing blood flow and nitric oxide delivery
to your brain, which increases BBB integrity and suppresses BBB
degeneration
• Increase cell longevity
• Support a robust immune system
• Induce rapid fat loss in the absence of exercise
--- END PAGE 91 ---

--- PAGE 92 ---
• Lower your appetite and strengthen the appetite-regulating vagus
nerve connection between the gut and brain
• Cause internal temperature fluctuations that will send blood and nitric
oxide to your brain (you will learn more about nitric oxide in chapter
3) One simple option is to use Ray Cronise’s “Shiver System,” a five-
minute cold shower at the beginning and end of the day. It involves
alternating between twenty seconds of cold water and ten seconds of
warm water ten times through. If this sounds boring or monotonous to
you, get a waterproof mp3 player or learn some rollicking shower songs.
Another option is a prebuilt ice bath such as the Morozko Forge, which
uses chlorine-free ozone treatment combined with an advanced water
cooling system to maintain water temperatures as low as 32 degrees
Fahrenheit—even in hot summer conditions of up to 110 degrees
Fahrenheit. Other high-quality cold plunge options, for which I’ll include
details and a personal ranking system I’ve put together on the resources
page for this chapter, include the Renu, the Monk, and the Brass Monkey.
Interestingly, these types of strategies are all the more crucial for
children. After all, babies aren’t born with a BBB! If a leaky BBB makes an
adult highly susceptible to toxins, chemicals, and other environmental and
food-based pollutants, it really makes you rethink how you should
optimally care for a newborn, eh? Finally, I’m often asked if cold water
post-exercise can somehow “blunt” responses such as mitochondrial
biogenesis or satellite cell proliferation and muscle growth, kind of like
high-dose antioxidants such as vitamin C and E can do. The proposed
mechanism of action for this effect is that cold water can shut down the
body’s own inflammatory processes so effectively that an exercise
response just doesn’t occur. Fact is, you have to get very cold for this to
happen—typically experiencing a drop in core temperature that takes ten
or more minutes at less than 45 degrees Fahrenheit, which most people
--- END PAGE 92 ---

--- PAGE 93 ---
just aren’t doing after a workout. If you do want to take a long cold soak,
just save it for at least two hours pre- or postworkout.
THE LAST WORD
You don’t want to associate the word leaky with any part of your body.
After reading this chapter, you may be worried that you have somehow
done irreparable damage to a delicate structure in your brain. But the good
news is that your endothelial cells are designed to quickly regenerate and
patch holes in your BBB. All you need to do is follow the tips in this
chapter to give your body the environment that allows this repair to occur.
In the same way that a sound intestinal lining is necessary for
optimized digestion and nutrient absorption, an intact and correctly
functioning BBB is critical for precise cognitive performance. By
combining all the strategies above with what you already discovered in
chapter 1 about neurotransmitters and what you are about to learn in
chapter 3 about breathing, you will be fully equipped to upgrade your brain
health and cognition.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
The health of the vagus nerve, a raging appetite, and normalized blood
pressure are critical to a healthy BBB. Guess what addresses all three?
Cold showers, cold head dunks, or cold water splashed on the face. Each
morning for the next week, try to take a two-to-five-minute cold shower,
get your head under cold water, or splash cold water on your face ten to
twenty times.
--- END PAGE 93 ---

--- PAGE 94 ---
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/2. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 94 ---

--- PAGE 95 ---
03
BREATHWORK AND BEYOND
HOW TO BANISH STRESS AND KISS
HIGH CORTISOL GOODBYE
--- END PAGE 95 ---

--- PAGE 96 ---
Ron Penna, the founder of Quest Nutrition and a brilliant lifelong student of
human physiology, flexed his python-like biceps and spoke a little faster. “But it
turns out most of these so-called breathing experts are wrong and that carbon
dioxide is a good thing.”
I leaned forward at the dinner table in Los Angeles, ignoring my sous vide
rib-eye steak. I had always been taught, even in my master’s-level nutrition
and exercise science courses, that carbon dioxide (CO₂) was a metabolic
waste product associated with lactic acid accumulation and poor breathing
patterns, and that too much CO₂ in your blood resulted in nasty issues like
metabolic acidosis and cell damage. Ultimately, I had been taught that the
less CO₂ you have floating around in your bloodstream, the better.
Ron continued: “High levels of CO₂ in the body, if you can figure out
how to get high oxygen levels at the same time, is actually one of the best
ways to completely saturate your tissues with oxygen. As a matter of fact,
the naked mole rat, an animal that lives an inordinately long amount of
time, has rock-bottom levels of inflammation, and has never been known
to develop cancer, lives in underground holes that allow it to maintain
remarkably high levels of CO₂.”
I was skeptical, but Ron went on to explain something called the Bohr
effect: high levels of CO₂ cause the hemoglobin in red blood cells to dump
their precious oxygen. Because this increases oxygen levels in the brain
and muscles, it results in huge surges of energy and enhanced physical
performance. He also described the fascinating practice of Buteyko
breathing, a little-known form of breathwork that optimizes oxygenation,
maximizes O₂ and CO₂ levels, and causes stress levels to plummet.
I had one more question for Ron. “So what’s the best way to teach the
body how to do this the right way?”
Ron’s eyebrows shot up in surprise. “You mean you don’t know? I
would have thought you were doing this every night, Ben. It’s mouth
taping.”
--- END PAGE 96 ---

--- PAGE 97 ---
I nodded and gulped. It could be tough to convince my wife that I
needed to tape my mouth at night during our normal snuggle-and-chat
time, but I was willing to experiment with Ron’s anticancer, cortisol-
lowering, life-extending suggestions. Head spinning, I left dinner and
immediately ordered the book Normal Breathing: The Key to Vital Health by
Artour Rakhimov, which changed my entire approach to breathwork—
specifically by altering my belief that you need to breathe deeply from the
belly and exhale as much harmful CO₂ as possible and convincing me that,
instead, shallow, infrequent nasal breathing could be a hidden key to
longevity, decreased levels of the stress hormone cortisol, and reduced
risk of cancer. Incidentally, since that initial dinner with Ron, I’ve made
repeat visits to LA to discover other notable passions of his, including a
ketogenic diet for dog health (look into a version called the B.A.R.F. diet,
also made popular by Forever Dog author Karen Becker), better-for-you
high-protein Pop Tart–like pastries (head nod to Legendary Foods), jaw-
strengthening, bone-building chewing gum (a bit like the popular mastic
gum, on steroids), and liquid cancer biopsies (discovering cancer months
or years before it would show up as a tumor on a scan).
The power of breath to change emotions, chemicals,
neurotransmitters, and hormones was not a new concept to me. Years
before speaking with Ron, I realized the importance of breath when I
interviewed running coach and author Budd Coates, who taught me the
rhythmic exercise breathing techniques I’ll cover later in this chapter.
When training with former Navy SEAL commander Mark Divine at his
famous SEALFIT Kokoro crucible camp in California, I learned box
breathing and holotropic breathwork, the latter of which got me the
highest I have ever been sans psychedelics. Freediving instructor Ted
Harty introduced me to static apnea tables for hypoxia (low oxygen) and
CO₂ tolerance. World-famous holistic health coach Paul Chek taught me
the best tricks for proper deep belly breathing. The Iceman, Wim Hof,
--- END PAGE 97 ---

--- PAGE 98 ---
taught me his body-charging breathwork tactics, and big-wave surfer Laird
Hamilton showed me how to use my breathing to instantly enter the
parasympathetic rest-and-digest state.
Quick Tips to Breathe Better
An easier-to-digest alternative to Normal Breathing is The Power of Your
Breath by Anders Olsson. In Olsson’s book, I found a host of breathing tips
and science based on Buteyko breathing concepts, including these:
• Breathe in through whichever nostril correlates to the part of the brain
you want to activate (keeping in mind that the left side of the brain is
associated with the right side of the body, and vice versa). For example, if
you have a more left-brain, analytical, logical task to accomplish, precede
it with one to two minutes of inhaling only through your right nostril. If
you need to accomplish a more right-brain, creative task, then inhale only
through the left nostril. Breathing only through your left nostril is also an
effective way to activate the parasympathetic nervous system before bed
or a nap.
• CO₂ is typically thought of as nothing more than a harmful waste product
of respiration, but it’s actually a driver of mitochondrial energy
production, and it improves the delivery of oxygen to your cells. To
increase your CO₂ levels, you can mix 2 teaspoons of baking soda with a
glass of water and drink it before, during, or after training. Alternatively,
throughout the day, you can sip on a form of bottled water that is
naturally high in sodium bicarbonate, such as San Pellegrino water.
• Use a device called the Relaxator to improve your breathing. I have been
hanging this tiny breath-training device around my neck when I go on
walks to gently nudge me to retain oxygen and CO₂ simultaneously.
• Add one to two cups of baking soda to a bath and soak in it for twenty to
thirty minutes to increase circulating CO₂ levels.
• Take three deep abdominal breaths prior to a meal to center your body
and improve nutrient uptake.
• Not in Anders’s book but made popular by health icons such as Dr.
Joseph Mercola and Georgi Dinkov, consider devices or techniques that
--- END PAGE 98 ---

--- PAGE 99 ---
saturate the body with CO2, such as the BodyStream suit, a Carbogen
breathing device, or (gulp!) a CO₂ enema!
In this chapter, you will learn everything I have been taught by these
experts, the best-of-the-best breathing protocols. But first, you must
understand something called the HPA axis, along with the reason your
breath (which you can consider to be your life force, your invisible energy,
your prana, and a primary source of boundless energy) is vitally important
to your cortisol and CO levels. Then you’ll understand why breath is one
2 of the most potent tools you can use to decrease stress, fix your nervous
system, and even upgrade your genetics.
STRESS AND THE HPA AXIS
For months, there was a thin beige kite string lying on the surface of my
desk. Each day, when I arrived at my desk to write, I would take that string
and tie it around my waist. No, I was not obsessed with narcissistic waist
measurements, nor do I have a kite fetish. Rather, the kite string trick was
a method taught to me by Paul Chek, who discovered that everything from
constipation and back pain to poor stress control is caused by squeezing
one’s abs in, a habit I developed to perfection during two years of
competitive “abs in, chest out” bodybuilding. Paul teaches that one of the
best fixes for this habit—which he refers to as an inverted breathing
pattern that locks up the abdominal wall, pulls the rib cage down, and puts
extra tension on the chest and neck muscles, restricting the amount of
oxygen your body receives—is to tie a string around your waist and focus
on consciously expanding that string with each belly breath. This is also a
potent way to decrease stress because the pressure receptors in your chest
can stimulate cortisol release during shallow chest breathing. Nifty trick,
--- END PAGE 99 ---

--- PAGE 100 ---
eh? When paired with a free, downloadable “Clock & Bell” track by
Coherence from the album Respire (inspired by a breathing book of the
same name), it transformed my workday psyche into that of a Zenned-out
monk, and I kissed the concept of “email apnea” goodbye.
Don’t get me wrong: Stress can be good for you. Stress is why ripping
muscle fibers apart with a barbell makes you stronger, why sucking wind
and tasting lactic acid in your mouth during a run makes your heart
healthier, why skipping a meal or fasting enhances longevity and blood
sugar control, why eating bitter wild plants and tannic coffees and teas
strengthens your immune system, why getting bombarded with sunlight
radiation causes vitamin D synthesis, and why blasting through a hundred
emails causes the growth of new neurons.
A heavy weight, a fast-moving treadmill, a morning without food, a
mouth-puckering bite of raw kale, a bit of afternoon UVA and UVB rays,
and even stress from a lion jumping out of your email inbox are all mild
hormetic stressors. Hormesis is a biological reaction in which low doses of
an agent that could be toxic or lethal at higher doses have a beneficial
effect, such as improved health, stress tolerance, muscle growth, or
longevity. Sure, exercise could kill you if you went to extremes, but in
controlled doses, exercise can give you hormetic benefits, such as an
increased ability to fight free radicals, manage heavy loads, or be more
resilient to environmental stressors. Other examples of hormetic stressors
include fasting, caloric restriction, exposure to heat or cold, low-level
radiation, and even exposure to some bacteria and germs.
This concept of hormesis is why I do something mildly uncomfortable
every day (such as a cold-water soak, a deep sauna sweat, a rigorous
breathwork session, or a hard workout) and something that scares the
living hell out of me about once a quarter (like an obstacle course or
fitness race, a new certification in something like kettlebell training or
freediving, an off-road triathlon, or an open-mic-night performance). But
--- END PAGE 100 ---

--- PAGE 101 ---
you run into problems when you expose yourself to too much of this type
of stress. In many people, excessive exposure to hormetic stress from all
those workouts, cold baths, sauna sessions, and more is often combined
with
• Physical stress from sleep deprivation
• Chemical stress from drugs, alcohol, caffeine, nicotine, cleaning
chemicals, or pesticides
• Mental stress from anxiety or worry
• Emotional stress from anger, guilt, loneliness, sadness, or fear
• Nutritional stress from food allergies or nutritional deficiencies
• Spiritual stress from troubled relationships or financial or career
pressures
• Exercise stress from inadequate recovery days
When any of this stress—both good and bad—gets too high and too
hard for too long, you can break your brain via a third system, which is the
focus of this chapter. That system is the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis, and when it breaks, you end up with HPA axis dysfunction.
The HPA axis includes the hypothalamus (the part of your forebrain
toward the front of your skull), the pituitary gland ( just below the
hypothalamus), and the adrenal glands (at the top of the kidneys). By
producing a host of chemicals, such as corticotropin-releasing hormone
(CRH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), glucocorticoids, and
cortisol, these three organs regulate functions such as stress response,
mood, digestion, immune system function, libido, metabolism, and energy
levels.
This entire axis operates on what are called feedback loops. A feedback
loop occurs when the output of any system loops back to that system as an
--- END PAGE 101 ---

--- PAGE 102 ---
input. A positive feedback loop would increase a system’s output, while a
negative feedback loop would decrease a system’s output.
Let’s take a look at how a feedback loop would take place in the HPA
axis—in this case, with regard to cortisol. You lift a heavy barbell at the
gym, your body realizes it is stepping into a fight against that barbell, and
cortisol is released to activate your sympathetic nervous system. At the
same time, some of that cortisol sends one signal back to your
hypothalamus to inhibit CRH production and another signal to your
pituitary gland to inhibit ACTH production, which can decrease
production of epinephrine and norepinephrine by the adrenal glands. The
result of this negative feedback loop is that cortisol taps the brakes on
your body’s built-in stimulants, ensuring that you don’t exhaust your
energy stores by lifting barbells all day.
In healthy, low-stress individuals who are not, say, crushing a daily
half-marathon or destroying themselves at the gym each day, this HPA axis
feedback loop works in harmony. But when cortisol and norepinephrine
are overproduced, the HPA axis eventually becomes desensitized to the
negative feedback telling it to calm down. This leads to chronic stress on
the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and adrenal glands. Eventually, adrenal
--- END PAGE 102 ---

--- PAGE 103 ---
imbalances arise that cause hard-charging high achievers to wake up each
morning tired, groggy, and unmotivated until they can get their paws on a
piping-hot cup of liquid cortisol in the form of coffee, nootropics, smart
drugs, or an energy drink.
Interestingly, HPA axis dysfunction is associated with the
neurotransmitter imbalances you learned about in chapter 1. For example,
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants are very effective at
treating panic issues. These drugs keep serotonin high, causing
norepinephrine levels to fall, so you feel less of the effects of chronic
stress. But this is a less-than-ideal way to treat stress since you simply
need more and more antidepressants as time goes on and your body
becomes desensitized to serotonin.
The Adrenal Fatigue Myth
I have made mistakes in the past. For example, I used to tell all my
personal-training clients to eat six to ten small meals per day to keep the
metabolism boosted, a myth I’ll bust in chapter 8. I used to preach that
having as much muscle as possible was a key to longevity, which is also not
true, as I’ll explain in chapter 9. And in my book Beyond Training, I devote
an entire section to identifying and fixing “adrenal fatigue,” which recent
research has shown to be a bit more complicated than I first thought.
The term adrenal fatigue (AF) has been used by some medical experts
to describe a condition supposedly caused by chronic stress, particularly
exposure to stressful situations. It was coined in 1998 by Dr. James Wilson
to describe a group of symptoms that include body aches, fatigue,
nervousness, sleep disturbances, and digestive issues, all of which were
hypothesized to be the result of subpar adrenal gland function and are
typically the reason a catch-all term such as AF is used as a diagnosis.
When you experience stress, your immune system slows down and your
--- END PAGE 103 ---

--- PAGE 104 ---
adrenal glands release hormones like cortisol to regulate blood pressure
and heart function. According to the AF theory, if you experience long-
term chronic stress, your adrenal glands become incapable of
continuously producing the amount of cortisol necessary to make you
“feel good” or give you energy. At that point, supposedly, adrenal fatigue
hits.
But the fact is that no endocrinology society has recognized AF. In fact,
most endocrinologists say there is no compelling evidence that the
condition exists. There is an inherent fault with the theory of AF because
the underlying biology is false: the adrenal glands are indeed capable of
pumping out plenty of hormones like cortisol. To cope with increasing
amounts of stress, the adrenal glands may also adapt and become larger.
And even if cortisol levels are low, it doesn’t necessarily mean that the
adrenal glands aren’t working. The hormone DHEA is also produced by
the adrenal glands, and sometimes when cortisol levels are reduced,
DHEA can be relatively high—so low cortisol levels do not necessarily
point to subpar adrenal gland function.
There are a myriad of valid causes of symptoms attributed to AF, none
of which arise from adrenal dysfunction. Sure, it is true that recommended
treatments for alleged cases of AF have proved helpful. But the drugs
prescribed for AF—typically corticosteroids—seem to promote a sense of
well-being whether or not someone has been diagnosed with AF.
Another issue with AF is that diagnosing it usually requires examining
a patient’s cortisol levels. But any number of factors could influence
cortisol levels. In fact, you could probably name one common factor given
everything you have learned thus far in the book: inflammation. Cortisol
modulates inflammation, and there are many environmental factors aside
from AF that could result in an acute or chronic inflammatory state.
How does inflammation lead to symptoms that could be misconstrued
as AF? First, tiredness, a chief symptom of AF, is actually modulated by the
--- END PAGE 104 ---

--- PAGE 105 ---
hypothalamus. The hypothalamus is regulated in part by orexin neurons,
and inflammation leads to the suppression of orexin neurons, resulting in
an overall feeling of fatigue. One example of this effect is narcolepsy,
which is thought to result from the loss of orexin: people with narcolepsy
have a high level of general fatigue in addition to the excessive daytime
sleepiness that characterizes this disorder.
Inflammation also modulates tiredness through pro-inflammatory
cytokines, small proteins that signal interactions and communications
between cells. Pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain have been
observed to correlate with fatigue in many studies. One of the
mechanisms by which this is thought to occur is the suppression of what is
called the “circadian pacemaker output.” Circadian rhythms, which govern
sleep cycles, are controlled by a pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
in the hypothalamus. Research suggests that inflammatory damage to the
circadian pacemaker leaves a person feeling tired.
All this is not to say that everyone who thinks they have AF is suffering
from hypothalamic problems. Symptoms of alleged cases of AF could be
the result of sleep apnea, mitochondrial dysfunction, long COVID, mold
exposure, poor methylation, or thyroid dysfunction. But let’s say you are
indeed dealing with many of the symptoms of AF—whether due to
inflammation, overtraining, environmental toxins, nutrient imbalances, or
a combination of factors. What’s the best fix?
First, many of the tactics covered in this chapter, from curcumin to
cryotherapy, revolve around quelling inflammation to put you in a state
that is more receptive to recovery. These tactics can help you minimize or
resolve any symptoms stemming from inflammation.
There are also lifestyle changes you can make to reduce fatigue and
other symptoms often associated with AF. One of the first things to do is
reduce sources of stress in your life. Stress can lead to the release of pro-
inflammatory compounds like cytokines, blood cells, and platelets, which,
--- END PAGE 105 ---

--- PAGE 106 ---
in turn, lead to chronic low-level inflammation. Meditation is a simple
method for reducing anxiety and stress, as are several of the breathing
techniques in this chapter, especially box breathing. Getting adequate
sleep is also critical for reducing fatigue. After all, your body can only fully
repair itself if you get enough sleep. Visit chapter 7 for guidelines for
hacking your sleep schedule and circadian rhythms, even when you are on
the road, and for properly timing your sleep.
Sun exposure helps reduce fatigue-related symptoms as well. The
infrared rays that the sun releases, particularly between 8 and 11 a.m. and 4
and 7 p.m., modulate several physiological processes related to stress and
fatigue—and can of course be replicated with near- and far-infrared and
red-light therapy devices. Low-frequency PEMF therapy has also been
shown to modulate and improve fatigue, which makes sense considering
that the PEMFs given off by the earth are involved in regulating circadian
rhythms. Blue-light-blocking glasses and blue-light-generating glasses can
also help regulate your circadian rhythms.
As you can see, it’s not as simple as getting a diagnosis of AF and
taking the giant plastic bag full of adrenal-support supplements that your
old-school naturopathic doctor might hand you or the corticosteroids an
allopathic physician might prescribe. Instead, you must change your
lifestyle and your environment dramatically.
Finally, one other underlying cause of fatigue is mitochondrial
dysfunction. When your mitochondria fail, ATP production drops,
resulting in reduced energy levels, which affects everything from muscle
contraction to hormone production. Your mitochondria often fail when
the system responsible for producing ATP becomes excessively stressed.
Here is how this might occur: In normal metabolism, ATP is converted to
a compound called ADP and phosphate energy is released. ADP passes into
the mitochondria, where ATP is then remade by a process called oxidative
phosphorylation. You become fatigued when you require energy faster
--- END PAGE 106 ---

--- PAGE 107 ---
than ATP can be produced. In this scenario, ATP is converted into ADP
faster than it can be recycled, resulting in a buildup of ADP. Some of the
ADP is converted to AMP-1 phosphate, but it cannot be recycled fast
enough to keep up with ATP losses. The result is too much ADP and AMP-
1 phosphate and not enough ATP. So any attempt to reduce fatigue and
other related symptoms ought to include strategies for boosting your
mitochondrial count and efficiency. Chapter 20 has more about how to
reduce and fix mitochondrial dysfunction by addressing a host of invisible
variables in your environment that can affect mitochondria. I also highly
recommend the works of Dr. Sarah Myhill (drmyhill.co.uk) on
mitochondria dysfunction, especially Diagnosis and Treatment of Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome and Myalgic Encephalitis.
In addition, one important consideration for mitochondrial
dysfunction is the concept of a cell danger response (CDR), which is
elucidated in a fascinating paper by researcher Dr. Robert Naviaux. In
simple terms, your mitochondria can sense danger, such as a pathogen,
toxin, or excessive sympathetic nervous system activity initiated by stress,
and in response release ATP into the extracellular matrix. The ATP can
bind to receptors on the outside of the cells and trigger an immune
response, leading to cytokine cascades and massive inflammation. When
mitochondria get stuck in this process because the pathogens are still
there or danger is still perceived, chronic fatigue syndrome and
mitochondrial dysfunction can result because you have very little ATP left
for energy production (since it’s all being dumped into the extracellular
matrix, a network of molecules outside cells that give them structure and
support). For people with chronic fatigue, some good functional medicine
doctors are using a medication called suramin (originally developed to
treat African sleeping sickness) to block the extracellular ATP and calm
the immune reaction. This is important because Dr. Naviaux believes that
no amount of mitochondrial support will reverse the process of releasing
--- END PAGE 107 ---

--- PAGE 108 ---
ATP once it’s begun, so you need to either eliminate the source of danger
or switch off the “danger response” that has gotten caught in this loop.
Ironically, some people who feel the stress from CDR turn to marijuana
for relaxation, resulting in even more free radical damage and
inflammation in the brain’s mitochondria. In other words, don’t smoke a
joint to combat stress if long-term brain health is your goal.
HOW TO FIX YOUR HPA AXIS
So what can you do about HPA axis dysfunction? There are fancy biohacks
that can help, such as cryotherapy, sleeping in a low-electricity
environment, or even a Biocharger device set on an HPA recipe that
combines infrared light, PEMF, and negative ion therapy. But you can
probably guess what is perhaps the single most important tactic for
dealing with the stress that causes HPA axis issues: breathing.
Research has demonstrated a link between stress and breath. In fact,
scientists have figured out that you can relax your brain via deep,
controlled breathing techniques and that you can speed up stress
reactions and cortisol release via hyperventilation. This all has to do with
your brain’s respiratory pacemaker, which consists of a cluster of neurons
in the brain stem that affect breathing, emotional states, and alertness.
Harvard researcher Herbert Benson coined the term “the relaxation
response” in his 1975 book of the same name. He wrote that by using your
breath, you can alter the basic activity of your cells and the expression of
your genes. But more fast-acting than your breath’s gene-altering effects is
its ability to improve the body’s reaction to stressful situations, reduce
excessive stress hormones, and alter oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in
the way Ron explained to me at dinner. Short, rapid breathing stimulates
the fight-or-flight sympathetic nervous system, while slow, deep breathing
stimulates the rest-and-digest parasympathetic nervous system.
--- END PAGE 108 ---

--- PAGE 109 ---
As a hard-charging high achiever, I am increasingly infatuated with the
power of breathwork. In my quest to become a better breather, I have
identified the best-of-the-best of the myriad of breathwork tactics, all of
which you are about to discover.
THE BEST-OF-THE-BEST
BREATHING TECHNIQUES
While there are a host of breathwork practices and tactics, I’ve discovered
that those listed in this section are the most effective for me at managing
stress, maintaining tissue oxygenation, enhancing sleep, increasing energy,
and much more.
1. Buteyko Breathing
Years before I spoke with Ron Penna, Patrick McKeown, the author of the
excellent book The Oxygen Advantage, introduced me during a podcast
interview to Buteyko breathing, a technique primarily used to reverse the
host of health problems associated with improper breathing habits. The
most common of these habits are overbreathing (excess oxygen
consumption combined with excess carbon dioxide exhalation) and
mouth breathing, which contribute to poor sleep and sleep apnea. Buteyko
breathing—named after the Russian physician who developed the
technique—is based on the fact that when you stop mouth breathing and
learn to engage in slow, whisper-like nasal breathing, you can oxygenate
your tissues and organs far more effectively.
As Ron described to me, the common belief among experts is that you
must breathe deeply to remove excess CO₂. But you must maintain ideal
CO₂ levels in your lungs because a lack of CO₂ constricts your blood
--- END PAGE 109 ---

--- PAGE 110 ---
vessels and may detrimentally affect your heart function, tissue
oxygenation, and blood pH. Buteyko breathing keeps you from both
excessive oxygen consumption and excessive CO₂ blow-off. In addition,
Buteyko nasal breathing transports the gas nitric oxide (NO) more readily
into your lungs because your nasal cavities produce and contain high
levels of NO. Think of NO as Viagra for your entire body—it significantly
dilates blood vessels and bronchial tubes, along with neutralizing germs
and bacteria.
How can you learn to Buteyko breathe and reverse a mouth-breathing
habit? The two best methods are the control-pause technique and
nighttime mouth taping.
THE CONTROL-PAUSE TECHNIQUE (CP)
CP is a breath-hold after a normal exhalation until you experience the
tiniest desire to breathe in. CP provides excellent feedback about your
ability to efficiently raise your carbon dioxide levels and engage in nasal
breathing.
To obtain an accurate measurement, rest for ten minutes before the
exercise. Next, begin to breathe through your nose. After exhaling
normally through your nose (not a full, deep exhalation), squeeze the tip
of your nose with your fingers and look at a stopwatch. If you experience
even the slightest inclination to breathe in or gasp air at six seconds,
immediately let go. In this case, your CP is six seconds. If you have to take
a big breath at the end of the breath-hold, then you held your breath for
too long.
A good CP is thirty seconds, a very good CP is forty-five seconds, and
Buteyko claimed that if someone had a CP of sixty seconds, then “he or
she is insured against illness.” A CP lower than thirty seconds indicates
room for improvement, while a CP lower than fifteen seconds is indicative
of symptoms such as respiratory issues, disordered sleep breathing,
--- END PAGE 110 ---

--- PAGE 111 ---
anxiety, and stress. My first CP was seventeen seconds, but via nasal
breathing, mouth-taping, and many of the other tactics in this chapter, I
am now up to forty-one seconds and still improving.
MOUTH TAPING
The concept of mouth taping is simple: you force your body to learn nasal
breathing by taping your mouth prior to sleep. Curious if mouth taping
could be a solution for you? Try it while using a wearable that measures
your resting heart rate and, if available, your respiration rate and blood
oxygenation levels. Those first two values should decrease, while the latter
should increase, and that’s a pretty good clue right there. You can use 3M
Micropore tape or a precut mouth-shaped tape such as Somnifix (which
contains a hypoallergenic adhesive with fewer chemicals than 3M tape) or
even Hostage Tape (great name, eh?), which is a good solution for men
with facial hair.
To mouth tape, simply apply a small amount of an oil such as olive or
coconut oil to your lips and the edges of your mouth, which will make it
easier to roll back the tape during the night if you need to speak or cough.
Then purse your lips with your mouth just slightly open and apply the tape
to your lips. The next step is easy: fall asleep while having no choice but to
--- END PAGE 111 ---

--- PAGE 112 ---
breathe through your nose (applying a nasal strip to your nose can assist
with any initial nasal congestion). I quickly adjusted to sleeping with the
tape on, even when I was first learning the technique. I’m amazed by the
number of individuals with sleep issues who report to me that mouth
taping seemed to fix all their nighttime wakefulness woes.
The only comparable, albeit more expensive, solution I’ve found is a
custom-made mouthguard that properly aligns the nasal cavity, jaw, and
cervical spine during sleep. To learn more about that strategy and the
concept of biological or holistic dentistry that underlies it, I recommend
you listen to my podcast with or look into the work of Dr. Eniko Loud,
who has worked extensively with me and my wife to fix our teeth and jaws.
2. Box Breathing
Former Navy SEAL commander Mark Divine taught me this simple tactic
for quieting the mind during periods of extreme stress, such as struggling
to stay warm during an entire night of standing in the bone-chilling waves
of the Pacific Ocean or sitting in a giant tub of ice for over fifteen minutes.
I also use this tactic to resist the urge to flinch from syringes during
procedures such as stem cell injections or blood draws. The deep,
intentional breathing helps regulate the autonomic nervous system and
calm you down.
The technique is simple: close your mouth and slowly inhale through
your nose for four seconds, hold your breath for four seconds, exhale
through your mouth for four seconds, and then hold the exhalation for
another four seconds. Doing this a few times through will help you enter
into a relaxed state, and it works wonders for getting through a brutal
sauna session, an ice bath, or cryotherapy.
Box breathing is similar to another popular style of breathing called 4-
7-8 breathing. For 4-7-8 breathing, begin by placing the tip of your tongue
--- END PAGE 112 ---

--- PAGE 113 ---
against the ridge of tissue behind your upper front teeth. Quietly inhale
through the nose for four seconds, hold your breath for seven seconds,
and then exhale audibly through your mouth, making a whooshing sound,
for eight seconds. Repeat this cycle at least three more times.
3. Kundalini Breathing
Of all the forms of yoga I have learned, Kundalini yoga is the most
invigorating and effective at circulating oxygen and energy throughout the
body. In the Kundalini yoga tradition, you use a combination of movement
and breathing techniques to ignite your Kundalini energy, which is coiled
at the base of your spine. Although I’m no devotee of the Hindu religious
philosophies underlying Kundalini, I am a fan of the biological benefits.
The first time I performed a Kundalini session on the beaches of Kauai, I
found myself in a blissful state with elevated energy for hours afterward.
In the years since, I have adopted a morning stretching routine that
incorporates the 5 Tibetan Longevity Exercises, a series of moves that
elicits a similar response (see sidebar).
Kundalini yoga weaves several core breathing concepts into a single
routine.
The 5 Tibetan Rites
Here’s a simple fifteen-minute morning energy routine that works like
gangbusters as a morning stretching routine.
--- END PAGE 113 ---

--- PAGE 114 ---

--- END PAGE 114 ---

--- PAGE 115 ---
BREATH OF FIRE
If you have ever watched a dog pant, you get the gist of Breath of Fire. This
is one of the few forms of breathing I perform to invigorate my body. To
do it, inhale and exhale as quickly as you can—preferably through your
nose—while pressing your belly out on the inhalation and in on the
exhalation. (This technique is considered to be activating for the
sympathetic nervous system, so you may want to avoid it if you are in a
stressed-out state.)
SITALI BREATH
Also known as the “cooling breath,” Sitali brings you into a centered,
focused state of calmness. Close your eyes, curl your tongue, and inhale
through your open mouth. Then close your mouth and exhale through
your nose. I have found that simply performing six Sitali breaths when I
am stuck in traffic or overwhelmed by a stressful workday can be
incredibly centering.
ALTERNATE-NOSTRIL BREATHING
This form of breathing, traditionally known as Nadi Shodhana Pranayama,
is a potent stress-reducing tactic. Begin by pressing your thumb on your
right nostril and gently breathe out through your left nostril. Next, gently
breathe in through the left nostril, and then press the left nostril closed
with a different finger. Remove your thumb from the right nostril and
breathe out through the right nostril. Next, breathe in through the right
nostril, close it with your thumb, lift your finger from your left nostril, and
then exhale from the left nostril. Interestingly, breathing in and out of
only the right nostril can activate the sympathetic branch of the nervous
system, resulting in excitation, while the left nostril correlates to
parasympathetic activation and relaxation, meaning you can use just one
nostril, depending on your energy needs.
--- END PAGE 115 ---

--- PAGE 116 ---
4. Rhythmic Breathing
After reading the book Running on Air by Budd Coates, I began to use
rhythmic breathing to get through long endurance-training sessions. Then
I realized that it could be used in just about every exercise situation.
Whether you are lifting weights, running, or cycling, you can use rhythmic
breathing to keep your body in a relaxed state no matter how hard you are
moving. Learning to breathe rhythmically is difficult initially, but it
becomes second nature within a few days of practice.
When you are running or cycling, you want to inhale more than you
exhale. When you are lifting weights, you want the lengths of your inhales
and exhales to be equal. No matter what you’re doing, you never lose
control of your breath or allow it to become nonrhythmic.
For example, if you are running or cycling, take one active, deep nasal
breath in for every three foot strikes or pedal strokes and one relaxed,
more passive nasal breath out on the next two foot strikes/pedal strokes.
As you increase your intensity and go faster, you can continue this
breathing pattern while speeding up the frequency by taking one deep
breath in for two foot strikes or pedal strokes and one deep breath out on
the next foot strike/pedal stroke.
If you are lifting weights, take in a deep nasal breath, exhale as you lift
the weight, and then take in another deep nasal breath as you return the
weight to its starting position. Alternatively, you can inhale through the
nose and exhale through the mouth. More advanced versions of breath
practice performed during weight training are taught in Russian Systema
breathing, which is useful for making bodyweight workouts such as push-
ups and air squats more intense.
--- END PAGE 116 ---

--- PAGE 117 ---
5. Decompression Breathing
Hunching at a keyboard, tilting your head over your phone, commuting
long hours, and slouching on the couch all promote poor posture and
aggravate poor breathing patterns. This, in turn, causes unnecessary stress
and strain on the joints, restricts organ function, and weakens force
output. So, if you can wake up in the morning and do something that fights
the effects of gravity and restores your body to a decompressed state so
that you can enhance circulation, breathe better, and stand taller all day
long and have better digestion and no lower-back pain, why not try it?
Enter Dr. Eric Goodman. After watching Eric’s TEDx Talk, “The
Unexpected Physical Consequences of Technology,” I interviewed him on
my podcast about the decompressive breathing he teaches in his
Foundation Training program, which trains your body to shift the burden
of its weight to where it belongs: the large posterior chain muscle groups,
--- END PAGE 117 ---

--- PAGE 118 ---
specifically your shoulders, back, butt, and legs. Foundation Training was
birthed by necessity when Dr. Goodman began suffering repetitive back
problems in his mid-twenties. He had blown out his L4 through his S1
vertebrae in his lower back and was told, at age twenty-five, that he
needed back surgery.
Instead, Dr. Goodman, who was in chiropractic school at the time,
became a man obsessed. He used his knowledge of anatomy and his deep
understanding of exercise to learn how to use breath and simple exercises
to decompress the spine and restore nerve and lower-back function. Each
movement incorporates the same basic decompressive breathing pattern,
in which you inhale and expand your rib cage up and out to the sides of
your chest. You then focus on keeping the rib cage expanded while you
exhale, using your stomach muscles to expel the air from your lungs. I use
this form of breathwork every day, typically during a quick break from
computer work or while on a long road trip or flight. In his latest book,
Foundations of Health, Dr. Goodman advocates combining Foundation
Training with sauna and/or cannabis.
6. Static Apnea Tables
Static apnea tables, which freediving instructor Ted Harty introduced to
me, are sequences of timed breath-holds designed to accustom the body to
an extreme lack of oxygen or excess CO . These can be useful for training
2inspiratory and expiratory muscles, increasing breath-hold time, and even
as a mini-workout on an easy recovery day. The tables can be performed in
water or on dry land (for instance, when you are driving or at home on the
couch).
A CO tolerance table is designed to accustom the body to high levels
2 of carbon dioxide by reducing the duration of resting time between
breath-holds. The following table, which takes about twenty-five minutes
--- END PAGE 118 ---

--- PAGE 119 ---
to complete, consists of eight cycles and is based on breath-holds of one
and a half minutes:
1 Hold breath 1:30 min
2 Rest 2:15 min Hold 1:30 min
3 Rest 2:00 min Hold 1:30 min
4 Rest 1:45 min Hold 1:30 min
5 Rest 1:30 min Hold 1:30 min
6 Rest 1:15 min Hold 1:30 min
7 Rest 1:00 min Hold 1:30 min
8 Rest 1:00 min Hold 1:30 min
In contrast, an O tolerance table is designed to accustom the body to
2 extremely low levels of oxygen by prolonging the duration of breath-holds
between resting periods. The following table, which requires about thirty
minutes to complete, consists of eight cycles:
1 Hold breath 1:00 min
2 Rest 2:00 min Hold 1:15 min
3 Rest 2:00 min Hold 1:30 min
4 Rest 2:00 min Hold 1:45 min
5 Rest 2:00 min Hold 2:00 min
6 Rest 2:00 min Hold 2:15 min
7 Rest 2:00 min Hold 2:30 min
8 Rest 2:00 min Hold 2:30 min
--- END PAGE 119 ---

--- PAGE 120 ---
Obviously, the math can get distracting when you are trying to focus
on your breath, so I recommend using any of the numerous free static
apnea apps, which will walk you through tables for a variety of breath-hold
times with helpful audio cues or vibrations.
7. Breath-Hold Walks
Several afternoons each week, I duck out from writing and working in my
home office and scramble up a steep hill through the forest to an old farm
road that travels a mile out and a mile back. The road is dotted with
telephone poles approximately one hundred yards apart. Every time I pass
a telephone pole, I take one deep belly breath and hold it for as long as
possible. Once I run out of oxygen, rather than gasping for air—which
every muscle in my body desperately wants to do—I inhale only through
my nose. After a twenty-to-thirty-minute walk like this, I feel as if I have
been in deep meditation for hours. These breath-hold walks are similar to
apnea walks for freediving training and can be performed in a park or
airport, on a treadmill, or anywhere you want to combine movement and
breathwork. The breathwork app Othership has several guided walking
sessions, and the Relaxator, which is a resisted breathing device shaped
like a whistle and worn around the neck, can train you to breathe in
through your nose and then out against resistance through pursed lips,
providing an added workout for the diaphragm and inspiratory and
expiratory muscles.
Although it isn’t based on breath per se, another interesting device I’ve
discovered for these walks is a Counterpace. This combination heart rate
strap and app plays a quiet metronome or timed music in sync with your
heart rate so that as you walk in time to the music, you match your step
rate to your heart rate—for instance, 120 beats per minute and 120 steps
per minute. Keeping your heart rate and step rate identical trains your leg
--- END PAGE 120 ---

--- PAGE 121 ---
muscles to squeeze blood toward the heart exactly when it’s relaxing and
most able to receive it. Conversely, the heart contracts while the legs are
relaxed, which delivers oxygen to the muscles while they are most
receptive to blood flow. This favorable timing has been shown in research
to lower central blood pressure and increase the speed at which blood
flows to the brain. The concept is based on external counterpulsation
therapy, in which a device squeezes the legs of patients with
cardiovascular disease in time with their heartbeat.
8. Holotropic Breathwork
While Dr. Stanislav Grof was researching the effects of LSD, he became
interested in altered states of consciousness and how they could help
empower people to deal with trauma. He developed a method for
achieving a psychedelic experience via breathwork alone and called it
holotropic breathing, derived from the Greek holos, which means “whole,”
and trepein, which means “to move forward.”
Dr. Grof explains that holotropic breathing works because your breath
can help you “transcend the narrow boundaries of the body ego” and
achieve a relaxed, spiritual high. The holotropic breathwork session I
performed in San Diego got me higher than I have ever been without the
use of psychedelic drugs, providing me with an intense out-of-body
experience unlike anything I have ever encountered.
While apps like Othership and The Breath Source contain holotropic-
esque guided sessions, I recommend you start with a class led by a
certified facilitator, which is often performed during a two-to-three-hour
group session. There is usually evocative, intense music that is rhythmic
throughout the intense breathing portions and meditation toward the end
as you enter a trancelike state. (You’ll find guidelines and
--- END PAGE 121 ---

--- PAGE 122 ---
recommendations for finding a certified holotropic facilitator at
www.holotropic.com/holotropic-breathwork/facilitator-listing.)
9. Pranayama Breathing
Wim Hof is a somewhat crazy and controversial but highly entertaining
Dutch yogi known for completing intense feats of physical endurance in
extreme temperature conditions, often clad in little more than pasty white
underwear. His Wim Hof Method, which he explained to me on two
separate podcast episodes, is a series of breathing exercises based on the
yogic breathing technique pranayama, typically combined with cold-water
or cold-air exposure. If you care to try it, you can begin with his basic
breathwork technique. It consists of thirty cycles of continuous
breathwork, with no pause between each inhalation and exhalation. Each
exhalation should be relaxed—meaning you should not fully exhale but
should instead leave some air in the lungs so that you breathe in more
oxygen than you breathe out.
At the end of the thirty cycles, exhale and hold your breath for as long
as possible with no air in your lungs. You will eventually feel the urge to
breathe. At that point, inhale and hold your breath for a final fifteen to
thirty seconds, or as long as you can. You can squeeze your forehead a
little to get more blood flow to the brain. Repeat this process of thirty
breath cycles for two or three rounds. To complete the routine, take one
more deep recovery breath to restore normal oxygen levels. Wim also
encourages doing bodyweight exercises such as squats or push-ups while
holding your breath on an exhalation, and he has created occasional
controversy by performing this routine while immersed in cold water,
which I do not recommend due to the risk of fainting (although if you do
it before getting into the water, it can certainly make a cold soak feel less
harsh).
--- END PAGE 122 ---

--- PAGE 123 ---
This breathwork also stimulates hypoxia and can mimic training at
high altitude. The effects of hypoxia are generated mostly through an
ancestral mechanism to help the human body survive in low-oxygen
environments. By holding your breath, you induce a positive stress
response by turning on your “survival mode,” just as when you expose
yourself to sauna therapy or cold thermogenesis. The results include
• An increase in red blood cells
• The production of growth factors that lead to the development of new
blood vessels, even in people with heart disease
• The induction of nitric oxide synthase, which has a variety of positive
effects on cell tissues and can even assist with vasodilation problems
like erectile dysfunction
• The induction of tumor protein p53, the “guardian of the genome,”
which protects your cells’ DNA and prevents cells from becoming
cancerous
Finally, stem cells, which are incredibly important to your tissue
survival and repair, as well as to your overall longevity, can only survive in
a state of hypoxia. Stem cells are abundant in fetal circulation, where
oxygen levels are low. The mother’s womb is very hypoxic, with oxygen
concentrations matching those at the top of Mount Everest! After birth,
the stem cells survive in various locations called niches in the body, such
as bone marrow.
Here is what’s most interesting: research has shown that in rats, the
number of active mesenchymal stem cells (MSC)—one of the most
versatile and beneficial forms of stem cells—in the blood increases by as
much as fifteen-fold during hypoxia! And when cultured in hypoxic
environments of just 2 percent oxygen, instead of 20 percent oxygen, like
normal air, stem cells keep their self-renewing abilities. This is likely
because bone marrow stem cells and mesenchymal stem cells have low
--- END PAGE 123 ---

--- PAGE 124 ---
numbers of mitochondria and are more adapted to anaerobic
environments than to oxygen-rich environments.
Just a few minutes of hypoxia per day may stimulate your stem cells to
migrate from bone marrow to the rest of your body, where they can
stimulate the repair and growth of new cells. This could benefit many
degenerative disorders, including Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s, and has
been shown in rat models to stimulate neurogenesis in the brain by
proliferating neural stem cells. Hypoxia can also help memory and
cognitive function and even exert antidepressant effects.
A big thanks to my friend and breathwork expert Niraj Naik for turning
me on to this little-known fact about stem cells. Niraj, a former DJ, has
taken certain elements of Wim’s protocols, along with holotropic
breathwork, pranayama, yoga, and brainwave music, and expertly
combined it all into a program called SOMA Breath, including several free
YouTube videos and paid multi-day to multi-week online breathwork
courses that my sons and I have completed with incredible results for
quelling anxiety, increasing sleep, improving breath-hold time, increasing
endurance, and much more.
Finally, if you really want to elevate the potential of a breathwork
experience to shift you into a new mood, you can use nasal sprays and
mouth oils developed by Dr. John Lieurance of Mitozen during your
practice.
Ten Resistance Breath-Training Tools and
Gadgets
More and more breath-training tools and gadgets have hit the market
recently. Research shows that these devices are effective ergogenic aids for
sports performance. Breath-training tools help increase airflow resistance,
making breathing harder, strengthening the diaphragm and respiratory
--- END PAGE 124 ---

--- PAGE 125 ---
muscles, and reducing breathlessness and exertion. Breath trainers can also
hold you accountable for breathing and make it more challenging, leading to
noticeable gains over time—whether you’re looking to run a marathon or go
up a flight of stairs without panting.
I’ve been actively seeking various tools and gadgets to help me enhance my
breathing and maintain a consistent breathing practice. Incorporating
breath-training tools into my daily routine has significantly impacted my
stress level, performance, recovery, sleep, and overall wellness. The following
are ten breath-training tools and gadgets that can improve various aspects
of your life.
Usage tip: go as hard as possible on the treadmill, bike, rowing
machine, etc. for 1 minute, then pull the mask down around your neck,
recover with full breath for 1 minute, and repeat for five to ten rounds.
TrainingMask
TrainingMask is a performance breathing trainer designed to improve
respiratory conditioning, fitness, and recovery during workouts. Conditioning
your lungs and creating pulmonary resistance strengthens your diaphragm,
making your lungs work more efficiently. When your lungs work harder, the
surface area and elasticity in your lungs’ alveoli are increased, which
increases your ability to utilize oxygen, your stamina, and your ability to go
harder at your sport—or simply have increased energy for daily living.
TrainingMask helps you break through cardio plateaus by increasing your
respiratory compensation threshold (RCT). When RCT is reached during
high-intensity activity, lactate levels cause heavy respiration and signify the
transition point where fatigue starts to overcome the body’s ability to
sustain exercise intensity. By increasing RCT, TrainingMask allows the body
to generate more effort before the point of exhaustion is reached, which
means better performance. As a result, you’ll feel as though you’ve grown a
third lung and will have a distinct advantage in your workouts, races, and
competition. You also look pretty badass wearing one.
--- END PAGE 125 ---

--- PAGE 126 ---
Usage tip: go for a walk and keep it in your mouth the whole time.
Relaxator
If you have a certain type of mouth and airway anatomy, you may find it
hard to get enough air with each breath. Following an airway analysis to
identify any issues that may be affecting breathing, select dental practices
offer a product called the Relaxator to improve your breathing (if you
qualify). The Relaxator is designed to improve the function of the respiratory
muscles and train the diaphragm.
The device works by creating resistance to airflow during inhalation and
exhalation. When you breathe through it, the resistance forces the
respiratory muscles to work harder. Over time, this increased resistance
helps strengthen the respiratory muscles, making them more efficient and
giving you the ability to take deeper breaths. By training the respiratory
muscles to work more efficiently, the Relaxator helps improve oxygen
uptake in the body. This, in turn, can lead to better heart function, reduced
stress and anxiety, and improved overall energy and endurance.
Usage tip: keep it in your bag or glove box and practice when you’re
sitting around and have a few minutes for breath training, such as
waiting for a flight or sitting in traffic. Just don’t pass out if you’re
driving, please.
PowerLung
PowerLung is a handheld device that offers a form of resistance training for
your breath. Independent studies have shown that using PowerLung can
increase lung capacity and improve breathing, allowing you to perform
better in activities such as racing, diving, and exercising. When you breathe
in and out through PowerLung, you’re working against the same resistance
for every breath. You are not breathing through a restricted orifice where
the load can be reduced by changing how you breathe.
--- END PAGE 126 ---

--- PAGE 127 ---
Just like any other muscle, the best way to make the muscles that support
your breathing stronger and more efficient is to strength-train them. Imagine
training with weights. You must work against and overcome the force
created by the weight being lifted and lowered. The more you repeat the
exercise pattern against this force, the stronger your muscles become. As it
becomes easier to do the exercise, you can increase the force, intensity, or
threshold to help make the muscles stronger. So, using PowerLung is much
different than breathing through a straw that allows you to control the
amount of resistance.
Usage tip: keep it by your bedside and start or end the day with some
resisted breathwork, guided by the handy Airofit app.
Airofit
Airofit provides personalized training programs based on measurements of
lung performance. As a result, the programs it provides are customized to
your specific needs, goals, and lung condition. It also helps track your
progress over time. The mobile app records data on each breathing session,
including the volume of air inhaled and exhaled and the length and strength
of the breaths. Monitoring these metrics over time allows you to see your
progress and adjust your training regimen as needed. The versatility and
ability of Airofit to be used across various sports and industries make it a
valuable tool for a wide range of people looking to improve their respiratory
function and overall health.
In addition to improving respiratory strength and endurance, Airofit can be
used to improve sleep quality. The device includes a sleep mode feature
designed to train the respiratory muscles to work more efficiently during
sleep. Using the device before bedtime can improve your breathing patterns
and reduce the likelihood of snoring or other breathing-related sleep issues.
Usage tip: pair with BFR bands and crank out a bodyweight workout of
push-ups, squats, lunges, pull-ups, etc. to transform bodyweight
--- END PAGE 127 ---

--- PAGE 128 ---
training into a whole different beast.
TrainMaximus
TrainMaximus is a resistance-breathing trainer device designed to enhance
physical performance by deep resistive breathing during exercise. It is a
force multiplier that places a greater load on the cardiorespiratory system,
heart, lungs, and vasculature. After eight weeks, prototype users who added
TrainMaximus to their routine saw increases in endurance and strength. Dual
Airflow Resistance Technology in the TrainMaximus allows you to adjust
airflow resistance equally during inhaling and exhaling to rapidly and
optimally increase fitness and boost performance.
TrainMaximus is ergonomically designed to be worn comfortably under a
face mask while exercising or practicing sports, allowing for a sport-specific
cardiorespiratory workout. While highly competitive athletes may not see
the same level of gains as prototype users, TrainMaximus has the potential
to enhance physical performance regardless of your fitness level.
Usage tip: keep it on your desk and do passive resistance breath
training while working on e-mails, etc. on your computer—effective
multitasking indeed!
BasRuttenO2
The BasRuttenO2 trainer provides an effective mixed martial arts workout.
The system features a head pad and torso pad that allow users to perform
uppercuts, hooks, punches, elbows, and knees with proper form. The Deluxe
and X2 models include additional focus pads and T-bars for side-to-side
striking and advanced core training. The highly customizable device can be
adjusted to accommodate your size, providing a real sparring partner
experience and an all-in-one device for an optimal workout.
The BasRuttenO2 trainer comes equipped with the XLINK Wearable 4
Tracker Systems that monitor upper and lower body movements
simultaneously, analyzing and scoring training sessions for individual
feedback. The XLINK on-demand training experience challenges you with
--- END PAGE 128 ---

--- PAGE 129 ---
advanced combinations of martial arts techniques to improve power, cardio,
and confidence. The system also has a free app that offers video coaching,
ongoing feedback, and a diverse range of martial arts genres. With the 4
Tracker technology, you can track and measure your progress with speed,
rate, endurance, and power. No membership is required to use the
BasRuttenO2 trainer, making it an accessible and convenient option.
Usage tip: take on your next long bike ride or hike for added oxygen
training benefits with a minimalist device.
AIRWAAV Performance Mouthpiece
By optimizing breathing and reducing stress on the body during exercise,
the AIRWAAV Performance Mouthpiece can improve athletic performance
and recovery. The mouthpiece is built to support both strength and
conditioning work, making it a versatile tool for athletes looking to improve
their overall performance.
The tongue plays a critical role in the functioning of the respiratory system,
as it helps create and maintain an open airway. The design of the AIRWAAV
Performance Mouthpiece takes advantage of this fact by directing the
tongue down and forward, creating an optimal airway opening that can
reduce your respiratory rate by up to 20 percent. Reducing respiratory rate
can help improve muscular endurance, as less energy is expended on
breathing, allowing you to perform at a higher level for longer.
In addition, the mouthpiece is designed to support recovery by reducing
cortisol levels and other stressors. It triggers a reflex that opens the airway
by up to 25 percent, which can aid in recovery by reducing strain on the
body and improving relaxation.
Usage tip: just try it, for at least a week. Mouth-taping seems like a
pain in the butt at first, but most people notice profound sleep benefits
once they get used to it.
--- END PAGE 129 ---

--- PAGE 130 ---
Hostage Mouth Tape
Mouth breathing during sleep is a leading cause of snoring, bad breath,
chronic fatigue, brain fog, chronic stress and anxiety, increased blood
pressure, and even increased risk of divorce. When you breathe through
your mouth, you bypass the natural filtration that occurs in the nose and
inhale harmful particles in the air directly, which can lead to inflammation of
the airways, congestion, and other respiratory issues. Mouth breathing can
also lead to a dry mouth, which can cause bad breath and increase the risk
of tooth decay and gum disease.
Mouth breathing during sleep can disrupt the balance of oxygen and carbon
dioxide in the body, leading to decreased oxygen levels and increased
carbon dioxide levels. Breathing through the nose allows your body to
regulate these gases more effectively, maintaining a healthy balance. As
mentioned earlier in this chapter, Hostage Mouth Tape is designed to keep
the mouth closed during sleep and promote nasal breathing, potentially
preventing snoring and improving overall sleep quality. The tape is strong
and comfortable enough to stay put all night, even if you have facial hair or
a strong jaw.
Usage tip: combine with mouth taping for better nasal flow, or try it
while biking or running to experience a big increase in airflow,
especially if you tend toward congestion.
Rhinomed Nasal Dilator
The Rhinomed Nasal Dilator is designed to help you breathe more easily
through your nose. Nasal dilation has many health benefits, including
increased airflow, improved breathing patterns, enhanced sleep quality, and
better overall health. It can be particularly beneficial if you have respiratory
conditions such as asthma or allergies, as it can help reduce congestion and
make breathing easier.
There are two Rhinomed Nasal Dilator devices: Mute and Turbine. Mute is
designed for use during sleep and can help with congestion, blockages, a
deviated septum, or narrow airways that can contribute to snoring or sleep
disruption. It sits inside the nose, gently opening the airways to increase
--- END PAGE 130 ---

--- PAGE 131 ---
airflow and improve breathing. Turbine is designed for use during physical
activity, such as sports, yoga, or meditation. The device fits inside the
nostrils and gently opens them to allow more airflow, resulting in greater
breathing efficiency. The Turbine is comfortable to wear and can help
improve athletic performance or breathing techniques during focused
activities. Both devices are easy to use, noninvasive, and effective.
Usage tip: find the resistance level where your exhale finishes at the
same time you get the impulse to inhale. Then repeat this breath
sequence several times, resting in between. Once you get the hang of
it, try it while riding an exercise bike, running on the treadmill, rowing,
etc.
Nemstar
The Nemstar breathing trainer is made with adjustable resistance levels to
increase lung capacity and improve overall physical stamina. It uses a
resistance dial to reduce the amount of airflow to the lungs, forcing you to
take more focused and deeper breaths during inhalation and exhalation. In
essence, you inhale more oxygen and exhale more carbon dioxide. The result
is a substantial improvement in shortness of breath and endurance through
better breathing.
A final note: Consistency and accountability are important in breath training.
These techniques and tools require regular practice to see noticeable
improvements, so you will want to incorporate them into a daily routine to
make breath training a habit. Many tools and gadgets available for breath
training come with mobile apps or other features to track progress, which
can help you stay accountable and motivated.
Breathing Practices Summary
Buteyko

To use the control-pause technique,
Slow, whisper-like
Breathing exhale normally through your nose,
nasal breathing that
then pinch the tip of your nose.
effectively
--- END PAGE 131 ---

--- PAGE 132 ---
Hold your breath until you
oxygenates tissues
experience the tiniest desire to
and organs, achieved
breathe in; the number of seconds it
with either the
takes is your CP. A good goal is 30
control-pause
seconds or more.
technique or mouth
taping
Box Breathing Close your mouth and slowly inhale
Deep, intentional
through your nose for 4 seconds,
breathing that helps
hold your breath for 4 seconds,
regulate the
exhale through your mouth for 4
autonomic nervous
seconds, and then hold the
system and calm you
exhalation for another 4 seconds.
down
Kundalini

Breath of Fire: inhale and exhale as
A combination of
Breathing quickly as you can—preferably
movement and
through your nose—while pressing
breathing techniques
your belly out on the inhalation and
used to ignite the
in on the exhalation.
Kundalini energy
Sitali Breath: Close your eyes, curl
coiled at the base of
your tongue, and inhale through
the spineyour open mouth, then close your
mouth and exhale through your
nose.
Alternate-Nostril Breathing: Press
your thumb on your right nostril and
gently breathe out through your left
nostril. Next, gently breathe in
through the left nostril, then press
the left nostril closed with a
different finger. Remove your thumb
from the right nostril and breathe
out through the right nostril. Next,
breathe in through the right nostril,
close it with your thumb, lift your
finger from your left nostril, then
exhale from the left nostril.

Rhythmic

When running or cycling, inhale
Keeps your body in a
Breathing more than you exhale; when lifting
relaxed state no
--- END PAGE 132 ---

--- PAGE 133 ---
weights, make the lengths of your
matter how hard you
inhales and exhales equal.
are moving
Decompression

Inhale and expand your rib cage up
Fights the effects of
Breathing and out to the sides of your chest,
gravity and restores
then focus on keeping the rib cage
your body to a
expanded while you exhale, using
decompressed state
your stomach muscles to expel the
to enhance
air from your lungs.
circulation, breathe
better, and stand
taller
Static Apnea

For CO₂ tolerance, complete 8
Sequences of timed
Tables cycles of 1½-minute breath-holds
breath-holds
with a decreasing amount of rest
designed to
time after each hold, starting at 2
accustom the body
minutes 15 seconds and decreasing
to an extreme lack of
by 15 seconds each time. For O₂ oxygen or excess

tolerance, complete 8 cycles of
CO₂increasing breath-holds, starting at 1
minute and increasing by 15 seconds
each time, with 2 minutes of rest
after each hold.

Breath-Hold

At regular intervals over a 20-to-30-
A way to simulate
Walks minute walk, take one deep belly
deep meditationbreath and hold it for as long as
possible. Once you run out of
oxygen, rather than gasping for air,
inhale only through the nose.

Holotropic

Start with a class led by a certified
A method for
Breathwork facilitator.
achieving a
psychedelic
experience via
breathwork alone
Pranayama

30 cycles of continuous breathwork,
Stimulates hypoxia
Breathing with no pause between each
and can mimic
inhalation and exhalation. At the
training at high
end of the 30 cycles, exhale and
altitude
--- END PAGE 133 ---

--- PAGE 134 ---
hold your breath for as long as
possible with no air in your lungs.
When you eventually feel the urge
to breathe, inhale and hold your
breath for a final 15 to 30 seconds,
or as long as you can. Repeat for 2
or 3 rounds.
THREE OTHER POTENT WAYS TO
REDUCE STRESS
In addition to the breathwork techniques listed above, there are myriad
other ways to banish stress, kiss high cortisol goodbye, and fix HPA axis
dysfunction. While breathwork is a fast and free way to address stress,
here are three other highly effective tactics.
1. Avoid Excessive Exercise
Overtraining, which can lead to chronically elevated cortisol levels, is the
quickest path to HPA axis dysfunction and leads to brain fog, mood, and
irritability issues, especially in exercise enthusiasts and exceptionally
active individuals. In many people, including myself, it can generate a
paradoxical increase in the risk of cardiovascular disease because of
plaque formation in the coronary arteries, arterial stiffness, and
inflammation. The researcher James O’Keefe has identified the Goldilocks
zone for exercise to be no more than 150 minutes per week of moderate-
intensity aerobic exercise or 75 minutes per week of vigorous-intensity
aerobic exercise, which is often exceeded by those who think they are
doing their fitness a favor when they are in fact creating long-term
cardiovascular inflammation and damage. A 2023 systematic review and
--- END PAGE 134 ---

--- PAGE 135 ---
meta-analysis concluded that, at above 60 minutes per week, hard and
heavy strength training may begin to backfire, and above 130 minutes per
week, your life expectancy from this style of training becomes the same as
if you were sedentary! Another systematic review published in the British
Journal of Sports Medicine found an association between strength training
and all-cause mortality, with a maximum risk reduction of heavy strength
training being observed at a dose of 30 to 60 minutes per week. After 60
minutes, the benefits started to diminish, and above 140 minutes per week
was associated with an increased risk of all-cause mortality.
Don’t get me wrong: I have nothing against hitting the weights
multiple times per week, but if every set is a grind to the max (generally 85
percent-plus intensity to failure, or very heavy powerlifting and
competitive strength training), the benefits top out more quickly than
you’d think.
Unfortunately, most standard cholesterol panels or blood tests won’t
give many clues about this, but newer tests—namely an AI-based
diagnostic imaging tool called a CLEERLY scan (a CT scan of the heart), a
HART blood test by Prevencia, and an arterial stiffness index test—can be
much more insightful. New medical clinics like Next Health and Fountain
Life offer comprehensive screenings that can include these tests and many
others, including a full-body MRI, DEXA bone-density scan, GI health
mapping, and epigenetic DNA testing.
Active Recovery 101
There is no rule that avoiding excessive exercise means you spend a day off
from the gym lying on the couch with a bag of roasted vegetable chips. For
example, a typical recovery day for me includes
• Morning nasal breathing and a breath-hold walk in the sunshine
--- END PAGE 135 ---

--- PAGE 136 ---
• Frequent movement breaks during office work to perform jumping jacks,
bodyweight squats, push-ups, and mini-trampoline sessions
• Reading magazines or doing easy yoga in a dry or infrared sauna to move
lymphatic fluid and detox via sweat
• A few cold showers spread throughout the day, or a hot-cold contrast
session of alternating sauna and cold-pool immersion
• A full-body foam-rolling routine or deep-tissue massage
You get the idea. Just because you are not performing intense exercise
doesn’t mean you can’t improve your fitness or breathing, decrease stress,
and satisfy that urge to do something other than lounge around.
Fact is, there are plenty of ways to move the body without crushing
weights at the gym or pounding the pavement during a run. Even on rest
days, you can engage in active recovery, which is far more effective than
passive, unengaged recovery. Active recovery tactics include tai chi, qi-
gong, yoga, heart rate variability training, hot-cold contrast therapy, cold
thermogenesis, electro-stimulation, and sauna.
2. Shut Down Inflammation
In mice, researchers have experimented with a protein called NF-kB,
which is involved in inflammation in the hypothalamus. When NF-kB is
switched off in mice, they live about 20 percent longer! Chronically
elevated levels of NF-kB not only accelerate aging but also decrease
another protein called GnRH. When GnRH is turned down, fewer new
brain cells are created, and aging is accelerated even more. As you can see,
the effects of inflammation in the hypothalamus spread far beyond the
HPA axis.
If you wake up with a fuzzy brain—which can happen after a late night
out, too much alcohol, or a night of disrupted sleep—you can address it
--- END PAGE 136 ---

--- PAGE 137 ---
with a few of my favorite sleep deprivation and anti-inflammatory or DNA
and cell repair strategies, including curcumin, exogenous ketones, NAD,
creatine, vitamin C, and CBD. These can be stacked for incredible healing
results if you’ve been burning the candle on both ends, traveling across
multiple time zones, or training aggressively.
3. Sleep
The only time your body fully repairs neurons, processes emotions, and
consolidates memories is when you are asleep, specifically during deep-
sleep stages. Assuming you are going to sleep sometime between 9:30 and
11:30 p.m., your body temperature reaches its lowest point between 2 a.m.
and 6 a.m. This process can be enhanced by sleeping in a cool
environment, avoiding heavy meals and exercise in the three hours leading
up to bedtime, and even taking 5 to 10 g of glycine (or better yet, the Deep
Sleep Gummy recipe from Boundless Kitchen) before sleep. If you are not
getting quality sleep, then you face an uphill battle to fully repair your
HPA axis. In fact, because of the crucial role that sleep plays in the health
of the nervous system, getting adequate sleep is likely the most important
strategy you can implement for fixing your brain and enhancing cognition.
Even if you incorporate all the other biohacks, nutrition tips, and
strategies in the first three chapters of this book, you are never going to
experience optimal brain and nervous system performance if you don’t
sleep properly. (I’ll talk in detail about sleep hygiene and advanced sleep
strategies in chapter 7.) In other words, when it comes to mental function
and brain health, sleep trumps all.
THE LAST WORD
--- END PAGE 137 ---

--- PAGE 138 ---
Chronic stress can lead to HPA axis dysfunction and accompanying fatigue
and brain fog. You can reduce stress and sharpen your focus just through
conscious breathing techniques, like those I’ve described in this chapter.
Avoiding excessive exercise, decreasing inflammation, and getting
good sleep are also excellent stress-reducing tactics, and they’re all
interrelated and interdependent. As you implement each of these
strategies, your HPA axis will operate far more efficiently. When you pair
these techniques with those for fixing neurotransmitters and the blood-
brain barrier described in chapters 1 and 2, you can venture forth into the
next chapters of Boundless with a head that is fully primed and prepped for
an upgrade.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
There are many forms of breathwork, but it is handy to know at least one
energizing form and one relaxing form. So you have two tasks today: First,
energize your body before a workout or during a bout of tiredness with
one to three rounds of Wim Hof–style breathing (thirty to forty short,
rapid, forced inhalations followed by short, rapid, unforced exhalations,
with an exhale and inhale hold after each round). Second, before bed or
during a stressful time of the day, engage in one to two minutes of
alternate-nostril breathing (breathing in through your right nostril with a
finger covering your left nostril, exhaling through the left nostril with a
finger covering the right nostril, and then repeating with the opposite
nostrils).
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
--- END PAGE 138 ---

--- PAGE 139 ---
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/3. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 139 ---

--- PAGE 140 ---
04
EAT YOURSELF SMART
HOW TO FUEL YOUR BRAIN
Apple chips. Coconut flakes. Roasted nuts. Standing in the “natural” section of
the airport newsstand with nary a candy bar in sight, I felt proud, self-righteous,
and überhealthy. I had not been lulled by the siren song of Cinnabon, nor had I
fallen prey to the Starbucks bakery case or, heaven forbid, the $12 preservative-
infused “healthy” Mediterranean snack box on the airplane.
--- END PAGE 140 ---

--- PAGE 141 ---
But now I was hungry. So I grabbed a bag of organic, low-calorie, spirulina-
infused popcorn and glanced at the ingredients label, expecting—well—
spirulina and popcorn.
Canola oil. Safflower oil. Cane sugar. Green dye #143. Oh, and finally,
popcorn and a fairy-dusting of spirulina.
I gulped, set the bag back down, and walked away, unsettled that the
sugar and rancid seed oils are still being shoveled into our gaping maws as
we innocently perceive ourselves to be nourishing our bodies with so-
called superfoods.
Why am I so adamantly opposed to something as seemingly
inconsequential as a teaspoon of seed oil in a giant bag of spirulina
popcorn? And why would I rather mow through an entire bag of pure
white sugar or eat a stick of cotton candy than munch on french fries, an
apple fritter doughnut, or a big ol’ canola oil–soaked bag of trail mix from
a gas station convenience store?
In this chapter, I’ll explain all-too-common compounds—including the
wrong kinds of fats—that damage your neurons and the best foods,
nutrients, and diet-optimizing strategies for your brain. Don’t get me
wrong: I’ll occasionally order food at a nice restaurant without
interrogating the chef about the oils they use, and if I were starving and
didn’t have any other food options, I’d mow through a bag of vegetable
oil–coated trail mix from the gas station or a mess of scrambled eggs
cooked in margarine, but besides that, I ruthlessly avoid vegetable oils,
and you’re about to learn why you should, too.
BRAIN FOOD 101
You are what you eat. You have probably heard this phrase before, along
with the slightly less well-known but equally important phrase “You are
what you eat ate.” Yes, that’s right: you’d better think twice about whether
--- END PAGE 141 ---

--- PAGE 142 ---
your steak was raised on grass or GMO corn, whether your chicken ate
bugs or herbicide-laden grains, and whether your fish consumed worms or
pieces of ground-up fish and fish farm meal. Nowhere is this more
important than when it comes to fueling your brain.
I first understood the importance of this concept when I interviewed
Dr. Cate Shanahan, the author of the books Deep Nutrition and Dark
Calories, who believes that a diet high in “crappy fat,” like the vegetable
oils and trans fats found in french fries, doughnuts, and most packaged
foods, is far worse than a diet high in sugar. When she works with
professional sports teams, she recommends that they switch to a diet
based on bone broth, tubers, organic dairy, bone marrow, seeds, nuts,
vegetables, grass-fed beef, and wild-caught fish. Another friend of mine,
Dr. Joseph Mercola, reports in the journal Nutrients how intake of linoleic
acid (LA) has increased dramatically worldwide, primarily due to the
rising consumption of vegetable oils. While LA is considered an essential
fatty acid and supports health when consumed in modest amounts, an
excessive intake of LA leads to the formation of oxidized linoleic acid
metabolites (OXLAMs), impairs mitochondrial function, and contributes
to many chronic diseases that have become an epidemic in the twentieth
century. The standard American diet packs fourteen to twenty-five times
more omega-6 fatty acids than omega-3 fatty acids, with the majority of
omega-6 intake coming from—you guessed it—LA.
Why is this so important? Well, you are fat. No, I don’t mean that you
are fat. But you are, at a fundamental level, partially made of fat.
Cells in your body have membranes responsible for allowing
compounds to move in and out of the cells so they can function properly.
These membranes are primarily formed from the fats you consume. This
means that how flexible and permeable these membranes are depends on
the quantity and, more importantly, the quality of the fats you get from
your diet.
--- END PAGE 142 ---

--- PAGE 143 ---
If your diet is high in heavily processed oils or oils that are prone to
oxidation when exposed to heat and light, such as corn, canola, safflower,
peanut, or sunflower oil, or if your diet is high in trans fats from butter
substitutes and baked goods, or if your fish oil supplement is rancid and
exposed to too much light and heat, or if your steak is a slab from a big ol’
corn-and-grain-fed cow, then those damaged fats get incorporated into the
building blocks of your cell membranes—including those of your neurons.
If you care to impress your friends at a cocktail party, you can mention
HNE, which stands for 4-hydroxynonenal. HNE forms when corn oil,
canola oil, and soybean oil are heated or fried, and high reactivity of HNE
results in damaging effects on proteins in your body, changing their
function and stability while accelerating the cellular senescence process
that results in “zombie cells” and accelerated aging.
Damaged, highly reactive fats are found in most brands of potato
chips, french fries, fried packaged foods, and pretty much any other fatty
food that has been (1) heated at too high a temperature for the fat to
remain stable, or (2) exposed to too much pressure for the fat to retain its
natural structure. A common example is olive oil that has been heated to
above 400 degrees Fahrenheit and used for frying multiple times.
Although a spicy, dense, flavonol-rich extra-virgin olive oil is great for you,
olive oil that’s been exposed to high heat is not, and you may be eating
damaged olive oil at high-end restaurants without even knowing it. You
can also encounter olive oil that has been cut with canola oil to save
money (as I discovered in my interview with Dr. Shanahan, this happens
even at five-star Napa Valley restaurants!). Your cells take these damaged
fats, incorporate them into the membrane that wraps around the cell, and
voilà! You have literally become what you ate: crappy, damaged fatty acids
that hang around in your body not for days or weeks, but for months or
even years (the half-life of LA is approximately two years)!
--- END PAGE 143 ---

--- PAGE 144 ---
SMOKE POINT
FAT/OIL BEST USES
(UNREFINED/REFINED) •
high-heat
cooking

Avocado oil 520°F
• low-heat cooking
• dressing
• finishing•
high-heat

Butter, ghee 300/480°F
cooking
• baking•
high-heat
cooking

Coconut oil 350/450°F
• sautéing
• baking•
high-heat

Duck fat 375°F cooking
Lard (pork, bacon
• high-heat
375°F fat) cooking•
low-heat cooking

Macadamia nut oil 410°F
• dressing
• finishing•
high-heat
cooking

Olive oil 320/465°F
• low-heat cooking
• dressing
• finishing•
high-heat

Peanut oil 230/450°F cooking
Rice bran oil 415°F •
low-heat cooking
Sesame oil 450°F • dressing
--- END PAGE 144 ---

--- PAGE 145 ---
•

finishing•
high-heat

Tallow (beef fat) 400°F cooking•
dressing

Walnut oil 400°F • finishing
No organ demonstrates this effect better than the brain. There are
copious amounts of fat in neuronal membranes. These fats insulate your
brain, protect it from shock, and help your nervous system maintain a
healthy temperature. The transmission of electrical signals across neuron
synapses also depends on fatty acids, as do neurotransmitter levels.
This is why I would rather mow through an entire bag of sugar than
consume just about any fried food on the face of the planet: the sugars
aren’t going to serve as the building blocks of my body. Sure, sugar can
spike my blood glucose, cause some vascular inflammation, produce
gastric bloating, and create a surge of insulin. But at least I can do things
to negate most of the damage and lower the sugar spike or burn the sugar
away: drop and do some burpees, or go for a run, or eat some bitter melon
extract, Ceylon cinnamon, or apple cider vinegar. You simply can’t do that
with bad fats: they get incorporated into your cell membranes whether
you exercise or not, and there is no immediate way to undo the damage.
About the only strategy you may have at your disposal, which is handy to
know if you’ve had a big night at a steakhouse, is consuming spirulina or
glycine, two compounds that may help sop up the damage, but even that
evidence comes from rats fed vegetable oil. So give me a choice between a
stick of cotton candy and a bag of potato chips, and I’ll eat the cotton
candy, hands down.
--- END PAGE 145 ---

--- PAGE 146 ---
Hidden Unhealthy Oils in Common Health
Foods
You would be surprised at how many “healthy” or organic foods and so-
called superfoods are jam-packed with rancid, damaged oils, just like the
spirulina-infused popcorn I encountered in the airport. Don’t be fooled by
the fancy labels and certifications on the packaging: these oils have oozed
into packaged foods far beyond the obvious threats like french fries,
doughnuts, potato chips, and cookies. The following is a list of nineteen
common “health” foods that often contain these rancid oils:
• Pasteurized dairy products, such as commercially produced milk,
cheeses, butter, and, yes, even many organic yogurts
• Organic packaged pasta and rice meals (the “healthy” equivalents of
Rice-A-Roni and similar foods)
• Many big-name trail mix blends, often marketed as high-protein, low-
sugar trail snacks
• Many brands of organic nut spreads, such as almond butter, cashew
butter, and peanut butter
• Store-bought bags of peanuts, almonds, cashews, and other nuts,
including many of the nut mixes in the bulk food section of the grocery
store
• Baking chocolate and semisweet chocolate, often marked as organic or
non-GMO
• Many store-bought sauces, including those advertised as low-calorie
• Gluten-free or organic cereal bars, granola bars, and many protein bars
• Most salad dressings, even those from the organic or natural section of
the grocery store
• Many non-GMO vegetable chips, sweet potato chips, and coconut chips
• Gluten-free and/or organic packaged pretzels, cookies, rice crackers, and
multigrain crackers
• Fried eggs at many breakfast joints, or any eggs prepared with high heat
• Sautéed or stir-fried foods at most restaurants, including fish, vegetables,
and leafy greens
--- END PAGE 146 ---

--- PAGE 147 ---
• Many dairy-free ice creams, including those made with coconut, cashew,
or almond milk
• Butter substitutes and spreadable fats like margarine
• Premade packaged popcorn, especially cheddar-flavored and caramel
popcorn
• Both dairy and nondairy coffee creamers
• Most popular frozen meals marketed as healthy
• Gluten-free and/or organic frozen pizzas
The best defense? Check labels!
The role fats play in cell membranes is not the only reason to be
careful with damaged fats. A consistent intake of these fats leads to
chronic inflammation. Acute inflammation is part of the body’s natural
response to infection and tissue damage and is even important for muscle
growth after exercise. But chronic inflammation can lead to many
physiological problems, from obesity and muscle loss to atherosclerosis
and arthritis. According to many nutritionists and scientific studies, sugar
is the most inflammatory aspect of any diet. High sugar intake is indeed
inflammatory, but it is not as terrible as consistent processed-oil
consumption.
Processed oils like canola or vegetable oil are polyunsaturated fats,
which are molecularly unstable and prone to cell-destroying oxidation.
Oxidants are reactive molecules that are used to transfer electrons from
one atom to another. They are naturally produced both inside your body
and the environment, but in excess they can react with other cellular
molecules in your body, such as proteins, DNA, and lipids, often
contributing to disease and inflammation in the process. (This is why
antioxidants are so important—they help prevent oxidation-related
damage.)
--- END PAGE 147 ---

--- PAGE 148 ---
So any brain-fueling strategy must begin with the elimination of every
source of overheated, overpressured vegetable oils and polyunsaturated
fats. Then you have to increase your consumption of healthy fats and
cholesterols from natural, whole-food sources. Dr. Shanahan writes in
Deep Nutrition, “A necessary outgrowth of the indictment of cholesterol is
a rejection of the traditional, natural fats that have sustained humankind
for thousands of generations. It’s a little like the idea that Nestle
successfully used in the 1940s to sell infant formula to my grandmother
and many other women, claiming it was ‘more perfect than breastmilk.’
Those who mean to replace natural, traditional foods with modern-day
food-like products in the name of health are championing the position
that nature doesn’t know best; a corporation does. This is an extraordinary
claim requiring extraordinary evidence—a burden they have failed to
meet.”
She goes on to explain that for centuries, fat has been an integral part
of many ancestral diets. The ancestral Northern European diet, for
instance, is high in fatty fish, red meat, and fermented full-fat dairy
products, which means that if your ancestors were Northern European,
you have inherited a wealth of genes that rely heavily on fats. The same
concept applies to a traditional Mediterranean diet. Sure, a Mediterranean
diet includes ample carbohydrates like bread and pasta, but in coastal
countries like Italy, a large part of the daily meal plan includes foods full of
healthy fats, such as fish, nuts, full-fat milk, and cheeses like pecorino or
mozzarella di bufala (buffalo mozzarella), along with plenty of fasting and
caloric restriction. Because your brain is composed of and uses so much
fat (60 percent of your brain is fat!), a diet that is low-fat or fat-free, or
that consists of inflammatory fats, can significantly damage your cognitive
health.
There are several notable exceptions to this rule that will be addressed
in chapter 14, including certain genetic populations who can get by on less
--- END PAGE 148 ---

--- PAGE 149 ---
fat. But for now, the important takeaways are that processed, damaged fats
are bad for your brain and that healthy, natural fats are some of the best
fuels for your brain.
Should You Eat at the Whole Foods Salad
Bar?
If you are the average health enthusiast who doesn’t mind paying $27 for a
salad, you have undoubtedly spent time hunting and foraging at the hot bar
and salad bar of a fancy, highfalutin grocery store like Whole Foods Market.
Fact is, many of the prepared foods at these bars—from the marinated yams
to the rotisserie chicken to the vegetarian Buffalo wings—are drenched in
canola oil.
Should you be worried? It depends. Not all canola oil is created equal.
Whole Foods only uses non-GMO canola oil that’s been expeller-pressed—a
mechanical process that simply squeezes out the oil instead of using
chemical solvents to extract it. So it is safe to say that compared to the
average chemically processed, GMO canola oil, the canola oil you find in the
Whole Foods salad bar is relatively healthier.
But all canola oil is still refined, partially damaged, and high in erucic acid, a
fatty acid associated with heart damage, high blood pressure, and blood
clotting. It also contains trans fats. All of this can deleteriously affect
cholesterol levels and cardiovascular health.
While the canola oil you consume at the salad bar of a health-food store is
likely healthier than the canola oil you get in a basket of french fries and a
burger, you are still filling your body with a less-than-ideal fat. I advise
moderation, even with non-GMO, expeller-pressed canola oil.
Finally, to limit the potential damage that seed oils like canola, sunflower,
and safflower oil can cause to your cell membranes, consider the advice of
Dr. James DiNicolantonio, author of Superfuel, who says that
supplementation with 20 g of glycine (preferably split into four servings of 5
g each) and 2 to 5 g of spirulina may help mitigate the damage.
--- END PAGE 149 ---

--- PAGE 150 ---
9 FOODS THAT BREAK YOUR
BRAIN
Damaged fats and vegetable oils are not the only foods that can break your
brain. Here are nine additional foods to be cautious with if your goal is
cognitive optimization.
1. Histamine- and Oxalate-Containing
Foods
Histamines are compounds released by mast cells, a type of white blood
cell that tends to proliferate as part of an immune response to stressors
like cuts, scrapes, and allergens. Once released, histamines dilate blood
vessels and increase blood flow to the stressed area (such as your nasal
cavities during allergy season), resulting in inflammation.
Excessively high histamine levels can cause brain fog and headaches,
especially in those sensitive to histamines. An inherited genetic condition
called systemic mastocytosis, which can be aggravated by histamine-
induced brain inflammation, is a mast cell disorder associated with
psychiatric symptoms such as diminished attention and memory, anger,
irritability, and depression. While low levels of histamines are necessary
for brain function, motor activity, and healthy circadian rhythms,
excessive levels cause parts of the brain to shut down in an inflammatory
response, especially if you have mastocytosis. In addition, mast cell
activation syndrome (MCAS) is an immunological condition in which
mast cells inappropriately and excessively release chemical mediators that
can also result in histamine sensitivities. MCAS can be brought on by a
leaky gut, an infection, or even excess levels of chronic stress. To diagnose
MCAS, a physician will often test for plasma histamine and diamine
--- END PAGE 150 ---

--- PAGE 151 ---
oxidase, but these markers are considered unreliable as they fluctuate
significantly. Better tests will look at N-methylhistamine, prostaglandin
D2, heparin, and tryptase, which can all indicate excess mast cell activity.
No discussion of mast cells and histamine would be complete without
mentioning the work of Dr. Neil Nathan, whose book Toxic: Heal Your Body
from Mold Toxicity, Lyme Disease, Multiple Chemical Sensitivities, and Chronic
Environmental Illness is a must-read for anyone who suspects they have a
histamine sensitivity, excess mast cell activation, mold exposure, or Lyme
disease (two other excellent resources on sensitivities and infections that
influence digestion are my podcast with Chris Motley and the book From
Fatigued to Fantastic by Dr. Jacob Teitelbaum). For stabilizing mast cells,
Dr. Nathan’s typical starting point is 500 mg of quercetin taken thirty
minutes before each meal and at bedtime (for a total of 2,000 mg per day).
This is because a mast cell stabilizer such as quercetin must be in the body
before you eat or drink in order to work. In addition, at his company
Seeking Health, Dr. Ben Lynch has developed a decent suite of histamine-
blocking and histamine-digesting enzymes, including diamine oxidase
(DAO), which is the main enzyme responsible for the degradation of
ingested histamine. A quick search for “natural antihistamines” on
Amazon will reveal a few other decent options.
One way to combat excess histamine in the brain, especially if you are
sensitive to histamines, is to avoid foods that contain high levels of
histamines. While many healthcare practitioners feel this is unnecessary
or ineffective, I personally know many folks who have eliminated
headaches by simply eliminating certain foods, including the following:
• Fermented beverages, such as wine, beer, and kombucha. I limit myself
to one such drink per day. (Yes, this means that if you drink a giant
kombucha with lunch, you may want to consider forgoing your nightly
glass of wine.)
--- END PAGE 151 ---

--- PAGE 152 ---
• Fermented foods, such as sauerkraut, vinegar, soy sauce, kefir, and
yogurt. I eat these foods but treat them more as condiments than as
major components of my diet.
• Vinegar-soaked foods, such as pickles and olives
• Cured or smoked meats, such as bacon, salami, hot dogs, and smoked
fish
• Soured foods, such as sour cream, sour milk, and buttermilk
• Dried fruit
• Aged cheeses
• Peanuts
• Leftovers, especially if they’re more than a few days old. (This is a
good reason not to eat at a restaurant on a Sunday or Monday, which
are typically the two days of the week when a restaurant serves the
least-fresh food.)
Don’t get me wrong: I am not trying to rudely rip the charcuterie
platter out of your hands. But if you have brain fog and headaches, you
should consider the fact that one person’s superfood may be another
person’s villain, and reducing your intake of these foods could help.
Instead, consume foods with lower amounts of histamines, such as the
following:
• Freshly cooked meat, fish, and poultry (not smoked, cured, or
preserved)
• Eggs
• Low-gluten grains, such as amaranth, buckwheat, millet, quinoa,
sorghum, teff, and rice (brown, white, and wild)
• Fresh fruits, such as mangos, pears, watermelons, apples, kiwis,
cantaloupes, and grapes
--- END PAGE 152 ---

--- PAGE 153 ---
• Fresh vegetables (not canned or preserved)
• Extra-virgin olive oil and coconut oil
• Leafy herbs, such as parsley and cilantro
• Herbal teas
There is no single conclusive way that doctors can diagnose histamine
intolerance, but the best currently available test for discovering
sensitivities is the StrateGene analysis. If an allergist or immunologist
suspects that you have a histamine intolerance, they will often begin by
testing for food allergies and intolerances and place you on a diet that
eliminates foods high in histamines to see if that relieves symptoms.
Physicians can also request a blood test to check levels of DAO.
Although it tends to fly under the radar, many people are now
discovering the benefits of limiting oxalates in their diet, which seems to
provide relief from symptoms of inflammatory conditions, autoimmune
issues, mineral deficiencies, and perhaps even autism. Many of the
symptoms of oxalate sensitivity overlap with those of histamine
sensitivity, and if the elimination of histamines does not relieve your
issues, you may want to consider also limiting oxalate-rich foods,
including beer, beets, chocolate, coffee, spinach, nuts, tea, and soy. In
addition, if oxalic acid is elevated without an elevation in glyceric or
glycolic acid, it is often because of a candida overgrowth or excessively
high vitamin C intake. A urinary organic acids test (OAT) from Great
Plains Laboratory or an at-home Metabolomix test from Genova
Diagnostics can show elevated glyceric, glycolic, and oxalic acids, which
can give a clue that you are oxalate-sensitive, have high oxalates, or both.
Several genes that can be looked at on a genetic test, notably AGXT,
GRPHR, and HOGA1, can indicate a tendency toward oxalate sensitivity or
excess oxalates.
--- END PAGE 153 ---

--- PAGE 154 ---
2. Glucose Fluctuators
Within your brain are cells called microglia and astrocytes. When these
cells are frequently exposed to high amounts of sugar and blood glucose
fluctuations, it can cause chronic neuroinflammation, neuronal loss, and
progression in dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. My friend Dr. Nora
Gedgaudas refers to astrocyte-induced neuroinflammation as the neuronal
equivalent of a bunch of tiny, rabid Chihuahuas (your hyped-up
astrocytes) sprinting around your brain while firing off machine guns.
High blood glucose levels increase not only astrocyte-induced
neuroinflammation but also the susceptibility of your neurons to injury.
This means that a diet high in sugar and starch, which spike blood glucose
levels, can be damaging to the brain. Excessive glucose fluctuation can also
lead to hyperinsulinemia (elevated insulin levels), which, in turn, causes
hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) and neuroglycopenia (a shortage of
glucose in the brain, which affects neuronal function), all of which
ultimately lead to brain damage.
The exact opposite effect is achieved by periods of intermittent fasting
or adherence to a ketogenic diet or a low-carb, high-fat diet. (While the
terms are often used interchangeably, a ketogenic diet is not necessarily
synonymous with a low-carb, high-fat diet. The former creates a metabolic
state in which fatty acids are broken down into ketones, which your body
primarily uses for energy, and in addition to diet, this state can be
achieved via the consumption of ketones, strict carbohydrate restriction,
fasting, exercise, or a combination of all of the above. The latter simply
involves eating a low amount of carbohydrates and a high amount of fat.)
These strategies improve insulin signaling and reduce the side effects
associated with roller-coaster blood sugar patterns. In fact, one study
showed that after just six months on a ketogenic diet that restricted blood
sugar fluctuations, one patient with congenital hyperinsulinism was free of
epileptic seizures and showed marked recovery in psychological
--- END PAGE 154 ---

--- PAGE 155 ---
development. Mary Newport, author of the book Alzheimer’s Disease: What
If There Was a Cure? The Story of Ketones, improved her husband’s
Alzheimer’s via coconut oil–derived ketones. The vast majority of people
who have followed a diet like the one she prescribes have also reported
surprising improvements in cognitive function.
Finally, in his book The End of Alzheimer’s, Dr. Dale Bredesen highly
recommends a plant-based, mildly ketogenic diet that incorporates sugar
restriction, ten to fifteen servings of vegetables per day, and at least twelve
hours of intermittent fasting per twenty-four-hour cycle.
There are several kinds of diets that control carbohydrate intake, and
the terminology can be confusing. What exactly is high-carb? What is low-
carb? What is ketogenic? Here’s the answer: Technically, a high-
carbohydrate diet has more than 45 percent of calories coming from
carbohydrates (the 2015 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends
getting between 45 and 65 percent of your daily calories from carbs, and
this is the way most Americans eat). A moderate-carbohydrate diet has 26
to 45 percent of calories from carbs. A low-carbohydrate diet, in contrast,
includes less than 130 g of carbohydrates per day, which is less than 26
percent of a typical 2,000-calorie-per-day diet (although I consider hard-
training athletes who eat 150 to 200 g of carbohydrates per day to easily be
in low-carb mode). A very-low-carbohydrate diet or ketogenic diet
typically includes only 20 to 50 g per day of carbohydrates, or less than 10
percent of daily calories.
Of course, these percentages can vary widely, especially if you are a
highly active individual or an athlete engaged in multiple workouts,
practices, scrimmages, or competitions in any given week. Very active
people often need to pay closer attention to ensuring they consume
adequate carbohydrates to keep their liver and muscle glycogen stores
topped up, and to maintain joints and other tissues that require glucose.
Ideally, these individuals should consume carbohydrates before, during, or
--- END PAGE 155 ---

--- PAGE 156 ---
after physical activity, when they are far less likely to cause wild glucose
fluctuations. (I prefer to eat carbohydrates toward the end of the day,
when the post-carb serotonin release can assist with sleep.) Because of
this, most of the athletes and highly active individuals I coach, including
myself, engage in daily carbohydrate refeeds of 100 to 200 g, typically with
the evening meal, every day except rest and recovery days.
Finally, while a diet that limits glucose fluctuation is important, don’t
get me wrong: your brain does indeed need some amount of glucose. As a
matter of fact, every mammalian brain depends on glucose as its main
source of energy, and tight regulation of glucose metabolism is critical for
brain physiology. In adults, neurons demand more energy than any other
kind of cell, requiring continuous delivery of glucose from blood. In
humans, the brain accounts for about 2 percent of the body weight, but it
consumes over 20 percent of glucose-derived energy, making it your
body’s main consumer of glucose. Problems with glucose metabolism in
the brain underlie several diseases affecting the brain. For example, one of
the earliest signs of Alzheimer’s disease is a reduction in cerebral glucose
metabolism, and both human studies and animal models suggest that
disturbed glucose metabolism is associated with Alzheimer’s progression.
So how many carbohydrates do you need to eat per day to give your
brain enough glucose? While your brain consumes roughly 100 to 150 g of
glucose every day, all this glucose doesn’t necessarily need to come from
dietary carbohydrates. During a process called gluconeogenesis, your liver
can convert fatty acids and amino acids into glucose, which is then used by
the brain. In addition, some amount of carbohydrate restriction can lead
to the production of ketones, which serve as an alternative fuel source for
the brain (and may offer up to 60 percent of the energy the brain needs).
But even with the contribution of ketones and gluconeogenesis, the brain
still needs 20 to 30 g per day of carbohydrates from dietary sources, which
most people easily get unless they are on a severely carbohydrate-
--- END PAGE 156 ---

--- PAGE 157 ---
restricted diet, which I rarely recommend. My best tip for keeping your
finger on the pulse of your glucose levels is to get a continuous glucose
monitor (CGM), which can now be attained prescription-free from a
company like Levels or Siphox. A CGM sensor, which typically lasts two
weeks, will monitor your blood glucose 24-7 via a small patch that you
place on the back of your arm, belly, or butt, giving you valuable data
about what spikes or lowers your blood glucose. Every few months, I wear
one for a couple weeks to check in on how my diet and lifestyle are
affecting my blood sugar levels, and I’ve discovered a host of valuable data
in the process, including the fact that weightlifting, walking for ten
minutes before or after a meal, or regular cold-water exposure can all be
incredibly effective at controlling glucose fluctuations. Supplements such
as Kion Lean, BioStack GDAid, and Pendulum Glucose Control have also
been highly effective based on my own testing.
3. Artificial Sweeteners
In light of all the adverse effects of sugar, it might seem reasonable to turn
to artificial sweeteners and sugar alternatives.
As good an idea as this may seem, many artificial sweeteners may be
neurotoxic. In fact, in many animal studies, research has shown that
artificial sweeteners can cause weight gain, brain tumors, and bladder
cancer, and human studies have also linked them to cancer. There are five
artificial sweeteners on the FDA’s “generally recognized as safe” list of
additives: saccharin, aspartame, sucralose, neotame, and acesulfame
potassium. But just because they are thought to be safe doesn’t mean they
are optimum brain fuel. And it’s disconcerting that the FDA establishes an
“acceptable daily intake” of artificial sweeteners, similar to toxic
substances like pesticides.
--- END PAGE 157 ---

--- PAGE 158 ---
Take aspartame, for example. When aspartame is heated above 86
degrees Fahrenheit, as it is inside your body, the wood alcohol it contains
converts to formaldehyde (embalming fluid). The formaldehyde then
converts to formic acid and causes metabolic acidosis, a chemical
imbalance in which your body produces or contains more acid than it can
efficiently remove. In addition, one of aspartame’s metabolic by-products
is the amino acid phenylalanine. One in twenty thousand people is born
with a genetic condition known as phenylketonuria. People with this
condition cannot metabolize phenylalanine, which can accumulate and
cause brain damage. (This is why diet sodas display the warning,
“Phenylketonurics: Contains phenylalanine.”) But even if you do not have
phenylketonuria, phenylalanine can still cause DNA and protein damage in
your brain.
Splenda isn’t any better. Despite the claim that it is “made from sugar,”
Splenda, also known as sucralose, is not actually sugar. Like aspartame, it
is a chlorinated artificial sweetener. In fact, Splenda is more chemically
similar to the pesticide DDT than it is to sugar! While the FDA claims they
reviewed over one hundred studies on the safety of consuming Splenda,
what they don’t reveal is that in animal studies, higher doses of Splenda
are associated with decreased male fertility and brain lesions. In mice,
consuming Splenda has also been shown to negatively impact the
beneficial gut bacteria—bacteria like Ruminococcaceae Ruminococcus,
Streptococcaceae Streptococcus, and Lachnospiraceae Ruminococcus—that
regulate inflammation. Similarly, the artificial sweetener acesulfame
potassium has been shown to negatively impact the gut microbiome in
mice.
If you do opt for alternative sweeteners, the best options are stevia,
monk fruit extract, allulose, and trehalose. Popular sugar alcohols like
erythritol, mannitol, and sorbitol can be metabolically healthy but can
cause significant gas and bloating (yep, including those low-carb keto
--- END PAGE 158 ---

--- PAGE 159 ---
cupcakes and baked goodie alternatives that have become so popular).
Stevia is derived from plants in the Stevia genus, which contains more
than two hundred species. Stevia has no negative effects on the brain and,
unlike sugar, has little effect on blood glucose levels, making it a great
option for preventing or managing diabetes. Monk fruit extract also has no
negative effects on the brain and has little to no effect on blood sugar, and
it contains mogrosides, a group of potent antioxidants. Allulose is a rare
sugar that occurs naturally in fruits like figs and raisins and, paradoxically,
can actually lower your blood glucose and insulin! Trehalose is a naturally
occurring sugar found in some mushrooms, seaweed, honey, and yeast,
and it has been gaining attention among scientists for its use as a
therapeutic agent for metabolic diseases and its support of the gut
microbiome as a prebiotic.
4. Condiments
As you may know, most condiments (think soy sauce, mustard, and your
average salad dressing) contain high amounts of salt. In fact, one
tablespoon of soy sauce contains nearly 40 percent of the daily
recommended sodium intake. Excess sodium can cause hypertension
(high blood pressure), a condition that results in the blood vessels,
including those in the brain, growing narrow and weak. Hypertension can
lead to transient ischemic attack (a temporary disruption of blood to the
brain), stroke, dementia, and mild cognitive impairment. It can also cause
a myriad of other issues, including kidney failure, kidney artery aneurysm,
retinopathy (damage to blood vessels in the eyes), sexual dysfunction,
bone loss, coronary artery disease, enlarged left heart ventricle, heart
failure, aneurysm, pregnancy complications, aortic dissection (severe
damage to the body’s main artery), and obstructive sleep apnea.
--- END PAGE 159 ---

--- PAGE 160 ---
Please don’t interpret this to mean that salt is bad. Heck, studies show
a low-salt diet can actually worsen cardiovascular disease and raise the
risk for early death among people at high risk of heart disease.
Concentrated sodium chloride is the stuff to largely avoid. This is because
more than 90 percent of the world’s salt is used for industrial purposes
that require pure sodium chloride, such as in the oil industry to increase
the density of mud and soil for efficient drilling, or to de-ice roads. The
remaining 10 percent is used for the preservation of food and for common
table salt. This refined salt has been dried at extremely high temperatures,
which can alter its structure and result in chemically cleaned sodium
chloride that has been stripped of a host of good minerals. This means
table salt and the salt used to preserve packaged foods is about 97.5
percent refined sodium chloride, and the rest is chemicals like moisture
absorbents, calcium carbonate, magnesium carbonate, and aluminum
hydroxide. On the flip side, when lowering salt in processed foods, many
manufacturers add monosodium glutamate (MSG). Due to its ability to
overexcite neurons, MSG consumed in excess may raise your risk for
neurological disorders such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s.
In contrast, natural salt, such as a good fleur de sel, mineral-rich Aztec
salt, or Celtic salt, is a better, more mineral-dense, less chemically altered
source. I’m often asked, “Why not Himalayan or sea salt?” The answer is
simple: it tends to be higher in heavy metals and other contaminants. In
fact, the average adult male body contains 92 g of sodium, half of which is
found in extracellular fluid, making sodium crucial for normal cell
function. But you run into problems with hypertension, nerve signaling,
gastrointestinal irritation, and other issues when you consume high
amounts of sodium chloride without also consuming other minerals.
Unless you are consuming extremely high amounts of sodium chloride
(over 4,000 mg per day), you probably don’t need to reduce your sodium
--- END PAGE 160 ---

--- PAGE 161 ---
intake at all. What you need to do is increase your potassium and
magnesium intake.
Sodium and potassium exist in your body in a delicate balance: while a
high sodium intake can increase blood pressure, a high potassium intake
can relax blood vessels and decrease blood pressure. Having a correct
potassium-to-sodium balance influences your risk for high blood pressure
and heart disease to a far greater extent than high sodium, and this is
another problem: processed foods are typically low in potassium and high
in sodium. Certain cultures, primarily Asiatic cultures, consume high
amounts of sodium-rich foods like soy sauce and miso, but they don’t
suffer the negative effects of sodium chloride because they also consume
other minerals, like potassium and magnesium, in foods such as seaweed.
There is less conclusive evidence on the efficacy of magnesium compared
to potassium in reducing blood pressure, but much of the evidence that
does exist is positive and warrants further research. The ratio of dietary
sodium to potassium should be about 1:1, so for every 100 mg of sodium
you consume, match it with about 100 mg of potassium. You don’t want to
exceed a daily intake of 1,500 mg of magnesium, as higher doses can cause
loose stool.
Even if you are consuming plenty of potassium and magnesium, you
may want to consider the high amounts of refined, processed vegetable
oils in most mayonnaise and salad dressings, the neurotoxins
chloropropanol and salsolinol in soy sauce, and the high-fructose corn
syrup in barbecue sauce. Chronic exposure to these compounds leads to
brain inflammation and, ultimately, cognitive decline. When it comes to
condiments, check the labels and stick to the natural stuff, such as Primal
Kitchen, Maranatha, Annie’s Naturals, Trader Joe’s, or your own
homemade versions.
5. Trans Fats
--- END PAGE 161 ---

--- PAGE 162 ---
Small amounts of trans fats, a form of unsaturated fatty acids, occur
naturally in some meat and dairy products, such as beef, lamb, and butter.
But most trans fats these days are industrially manufactured and are found
in manufactured spreadable oils, where they form as a by-product of
hydrogenation. Just about any spreadable oil found on grocery store
shelves, such as margarine, frosting, or vegetable shortening, contains
extremely volatile and highly oxidative trans fats—and most premade
cakes, cookies, pie crusts, and crackers contain vegetable shortening,
making them rich in trans fats. High blood levels of trans fat have been
directly associated with poor cognitive function and low brain volume,
along with heart disease, cancer, type 2 diabetes, low birth rate, obesity,
immune dysfunction, impaired memory, and increased brain
inflammation.
One study observed the effects of dietary trans fats on the word recall
of 1,018 young men and women. The researchers discovered that the more
trans fats an individual ate, the worse their word recall was. Trans fats also
increase oxidative stress and promote endothelial dysfunction, which
results in vascular damage that limits blood flow and the delivery of
energy substrates to cells and tissues. Since memory is particularly
sensitive to poor cellular energy delivery, trans fats can significantly
reduce memory function.
6. Gluten
Gluten is a general term for the proteins found in wheat, including wheat
berries, durum, emmer, semolina, spelt, farina, farro, and graham flour, as
well as in rye, barley, and triticale (a cross between wheat and rye). Gluten
acts as a glue to help foods maintain their shape, but because of its
inherent stickiness and ability to create digestive difficulties, gluten has
become the ultimate pariah among health enthusiasts and hippies. While
--- END PAGE 162 ---

--- PAGE 163 ---
they are less common than many people claim, gluten intolerances, cross-
reactivities, and allergies can be legitimate problems and can even cause
serious health complications, such as gut damage, autoimmune diseases,
and neuroinflammation.
Even if you don’t have an intolerance or allergy to gluten, or if it
doesn’t seem to cause perceivable gut issues, gluten may affect your brain.
In the book Grain Brain, neurologist David Perlmutter suggests that excess
carbohydrates, especially gluten-containing grains, may cause a host of
neurological problems ranging from dysregulation of the autonomic
nervous system (the part of your nervous system responsible for
automatic actions such as breathing and digestion), cerebellar ataxia
(inflammation of or damage to the cerebellum, which causes loss of fine
motor skills), hypotonia (low muscle tone), developmental delays,
learning disorders, depression, migraines, to headaches. Some research
has connected gluten sensitivities to neurological and psychiatric
concerns like autism, schizophrenia, and hallucinations.
Fortunately, you can minimize the effect of gluten on your brain and
the rest of your nervous system. For example, gluten can be broken down
before eating via fermentation, which is why my bread of choice is my wife
Jessa’s mouthwatering homemade sourdough (the recipe is in Boundless
Cookbook!). Through the process of slow fermentation, sourdough
lactobacilli and fungal enzymes called proteases can break down gluten
and, as a bonus, reduce the bread’s glycemic index—how quickly and how
much it raises blood sugar. In contrast, ordinary yeast does not break
down gluten and other problematic proteins like gliadin.
Sprouting is also another grain-preparation technique that may reduce
the effects of gluten. There is a lot of debate over this technique, and there
is no conclusive evidence to support it, but many alternative-diet and
health experts recommend sprouting grains. The basic idea behind
sprouting is that as a seed (such as a grain) germinates, it taps into and
--- END PAGE 163 ---

--- PAGE 164 ---
metabolizes stored carbohydrates to fuel its growth and may partially
break down storage proteins such as gluten. Other sources claim that
during the sprouting process, gluten gets broken down by the seedling as
it taps into the energy contained within the seed’s endosperm. Sprouting
also releases vitamins, minerals, and other bioactive components that are
unavailable for absorption in the unsprouted grain.
Ultimately, gluten-free foods can contain just as many chemicals,
preservatives, and sugars as gluten-containing foods, and unless you have
a condition such as celiac disease or you are fighting a leaky gut from years
of poor eating, you don’t need to avoid gluten entirely. Instead, try to eat
gluten-containing grains when they are prepared via ancestral processes
such as fermentation and sprouting, think twice before snagging the
average “healthy” baked goodie from the coffee shop, and support your
ability to digest gluten by limiting your exposure to chemicals such as
pesticides and herbicides, like glyphosate. You can also take supplements
like Gluten Guardian or gluten polypeptidases to help break down the
gluten you do eat. That way, you can have your cake and eat it too,
although you shouldn’t turn into a complete breadhead.
Finally, it’s important to realize that despite high amounts of gluten
being not that great for you, many people find that their digestive distress
is solved not by going gluten-free, but rather by avoiding FODMAPs.
FODMAP stands for fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides,
monosaccharides, and polyols, which are short-chain carbohydrates
(sugars) that the small intestine absorbs poorly. Since wheat (along with
foods like apples, onions, and garlic) is high in FODMAPs, the gluten in
wheat is often mistakenly blamed for gut problems. The best way to
determine whether this is the case for you is to get a test like a Zoomer or
Cyrex to see if you’re truly gluten-intolerant. If not, and you still have gut
issues when eating wheat, you’re quite possibly sensitive to FODMAPs
because you have small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO), which can
--- END PAGE 164 ---

--- PAGE 165 ---
be tested via a breath test such as the Trio Smart Breath test or at-home
FoodMarble device, then solved with a low-fermentation diet, the best of
which is from Dr. Mark Pimentel’s book Microbiome Connection. My friend
Dr. William Davis has had massive success with his SIBO patients by
having them consume one cup a day for four weeks of a special homemade
yogurt recipe using a thirty-six-hour yogurt maker fermentation with the
probiotic strains L. reuteri, L. gasseri, and Bacillus coagulans. The recipe is
in his book Super Gut and in Boundless Kitchen.
7. Foods High in Heavy Metals
Remember the Mad Hatter from Lewis Carroll’s classic children’s book
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland? Like the saying “mad as a hatter,” the
character has its origin in the hat-making industry in England in the 1800s,
when a mercury solution was often used during the process of turning fur
into felt. Hat-makers inhaled the fumes of this highly toxic metal and the
mercury accumulated in their bodies, causing loss of coordination, slurred
speech, loose teeth, memory loss, depression, irritability, and anxiety—a
cluster of effects that came to be known as “mad hatter syndrome.”
Mercury, found all too often in dental amalgams, fish, vaccines, and
coal-burning power plants, isn’t the only heavy metal that can cause
neural issues like mad hatter syndrome. Aluminum, arsenic, lead, lithium,
manganese, and thallium are also highly neurotoxic and have a host of
deleterious cognitive effects. For example, lead inhibits the synthesis of
heme, the nonprotein part of hemoglobin, the molecule that transports
oxygen in your blood, and can affect brain function by interfering with
neurotransmitters; methylmercury damages specific areas in the adult
brain and especially developing nervous systems.
There are a plethora of ways to detox your body, such as ingesting
charcoal or algae species like chlorella. But if you decide you are going to
--- END PAGE 165 ---

--- PAGE 166 ---
detox metals from your body and you don’t go about it properly, you can
suffer the same brain damage as those poor hatters. Why? Charcoal,
chlorella, cholestyramine, and other popular detox supplements are
known as “weak binders.” They act in much the same way that a magnet
acts with metal shavings: they have a weak bond with the metals, and, as
they pull the metals with them through your intestinal tract, some of
those bonds can break, and the metal will then move back into your
system, with the dangerous possibility of crossing the blood-brain barrier.
In other words, rather than removing the toxins, these weak binders can
end up allowing them to cross into deeper tissues, most notably the brain.
It is critical to use a true binding agent in a properly structured detox
protocol to prevent toxins from recirculating after they have moved out of
your cells. My friend Dr. Dan Pompa gave himself so-called “mad hatter
syndrome” by detoxing in a way that resulted in metals and toxins in his
brain, but went on to develop his True Cellular Detox protocol. Another
friend, Dr. Chris Shade, experienced severe mercury toxicity and later
invented a “push-catch” detox protocol with his company, Quicksilver.
There are even more advanced, expensive procedures that can act like an
oil change for your body, such as therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) and
ozone plasmapheresis. Ozone treatments in general are incredible for
other issues such as mold and toxin exposure, viruses, and infections, and
many health enthusiasts—including myself—swear by a regularly
scheduled EBOO (extracorporeal blood oxygenation and ozonation),
ozone with UBI (ultraviolet blood irradiation), a small plug-in ozone
generator that can be used in suspect hotel rooms, and even ozone
capsules taken orally or rectally, such as those made by SimplyO3 and
Resistor.
In the meantime, avoid frequent consumption of foods that are high in
heavy metals, including these:
--- END PAGE 166 ---

--- PAGE 167 ---
• Fish, especially larger fish or predatory fish such as king mackerel,
bigeye tuna, sharks, and swordfish (mercury)
• Processed or powdered bone broth from nonorganic sources (lead)
• Large amounts of brown rice (arsenic)
• Refined wheat flour (cadmium)
• Soft drinks from soda fountains (the machine may have cadmium in
the pipes)
• Canned foods (lead)
If you want to test for heavy metals, you can get a Nutrient & Toxic
Elements blood test from Genova Diagnostics, which will test for
aluminum, arsenic, cadmium, lead, and mercury as well as potassium,
magnesium, calcium, zinc, copper, and selenium. Another good test is one
from Doctor’s Data called a urine provocation test, which involves
“provoking” a release of metals with a chelating (binding) substance called
DMSA, which pulls stored levels of toxic metals out of tissues and organs
and makes it possible to detect them in urine. Another urine test is the
Doctor’s Data urine porphyrins test, since abnormal levels of urinary
porphyrins are associated with high-level exposure to toxic chemicals or
metals. A hair tissue mineral analysis (HTMA) is an easy, dirt-cheap at-
home option for testing both metals and mineral balances and can be so
insightful that my friend Dr. Leland Stillman uses it extensively with his
patients. Finally, the Great Plains Laboratory offers a hair test for metal
toxicity and mineral deficiency.
The problem with most tests is that they depend on your body’s ability
to excrete metals, and since most people with heavy-metal toxicity have
compromised detoxification ability, testing can show low levels of metals
even when someone is highly toxic. This is why most good functional-
medicine practitioners use a variety of tests to get an accurate picture and
may even prescribe a spectrographic test with a device called an
--- END PAGE 167 ---

--- PAGE 168 ---
OligoScan, an autonomic response test, or an energetic test. I recommend
National Integrated Health Associates (NIHAdc.com) in Washington, DC;
on their website you can find a list of integrative medical and naturopathic
practitioners and dentists who can identify and treat heavy-metal toxicity,
as well as similar toxic burdens. You can also visit HolisticDental.org for a
list of certified holistic dentistry practitioners, although you’ll need to ask
if they specialize in removing metals from the mouth or metal
detoxification in general.
8. High-Fat and High-Carb Meals
Lipopolysaccharides (LPS) are toxic molecules found in the outer
membrane of gram-negative bacteria. (You may recall from high school
biology that the difference between gram-negative and gram-positive
bacteria is that gram-positive bacteria lack this outer membrane. Gram-
negative bacteria include E. coli, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and other well-
known pathogens.) LPS are classified as endotoxins—whereas exotoxins
are released by bacteria, endotoxins are contained within the cell
membrane until it is destroyed, at which point the endotoxin is released.
In people, most endotoxins are produced by bacteria found in the gut.
Of all the small molecules floating around in human plasma, 25 to 33
percent are derived from gut bacteria, including LPS. When blood
endotoxin levels get too high, they cause metabolic endotoxemia, a
condition associated with cardiovascular disease, chronic inflammation,
type 2 diabetes, lipid abnormalities, insulin resistance, nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease, obesity, and stroke. Interestingly, one of the contributing
factors to a higher risk of LPS-induced metabolic endotoxemia is a high-
fat diet.
Wait a minute! Haven’t I already claimed that fats are good for your
nervous system? They are, but here is the deal: high-fat diets also have the
--- END PAGE 168 ---

--- PAGE 169 ---
potential to induce endotoxemia. Problems arise when you consume lots
of fats alongside lots of carbohydrates—the classic potato chip, pork rind,
cheesecake, baked goodie, follow-up-your-rib-eye-steak-with-a-chocolate-
soufflé type diet. I have witnessed a fair share of healthy eaters complain
of endotoxemia-like brain fog, then continue to chow down on dark
chocolate peanut butter cups, roasted chicken glazed in brown sugar, and
piles of avocados on rice crackers. And yes, this means that if one of your
favorite meals (like mine) is a nice, fatty cut of rib-eye steak with sweet
potato fries, you want to go easy on the fries, especially if your primary
objective is cognitive enhancement.
How does endotoxemia happen? High-fat, high-carbohydrate meals are
known to raise the levels of reactive oxygen species and inflammatory
cytokines, leading to oxidative stress and inflammation. Consuming a
high-fat, high-carbohydrate meal may also increase the permeability of
your intestinal wall due to damage caused by the LPS. When your
intestinal barrier permeability increases—a condition known as “leaky
gut”—it allows bigger particles into your bloodstream, including LPS,
pathogens, and allergenic proteins, all of which can exacerbate systemic
inflammation. In addition, as you learned in chapter 2, a leaky gut is often
associated with a leaky blood-brain barrier. So if you consume fats and
carbohydrates together, it could potentially set off a chain reaction that
results in brain damage or neuroinflammation. This means that any
strategy to reduce your level of circulating endotoxins must include anti-
inflammatory gut strategies (which are explored in detail in chapter 13)
and a focus on reducing glucose fluctuation (as discussed above).
9. Moldy Foods
The word mold conjures images of decaying corpses, old hamburger meat
in your refrigerator, or a nasty growth on your shower wall. Molds are
--- END PAGE 169 ---

--- PAGE 170 ---
collections of microorganisms that are decomposers of dead organic
material such as leaves, wood, and plants. The tiny spores and hairlike
bodies of individual mold colonies are too small for us to see without a
microscope but constantly float about in the air around us. Some of the
most harmful components of certain molds are mycotoxins, toxic
substances that are capable of causing damage to the brain, along with
disease and death, in both humans and animals.
The problems of mold in our homes have been well publicized. High
amounts of indoor mold exposure can alter blood flow to the brain, affect
autonomic nerve function and brain waves, and diminish concentration,
attention, balance, and memory. It can impair the cognitive development
of young children and cause hemorrhagic infarcts (areas of dead tissue
caused by blocked veins) in the brain. A person who suffers from toxic
mold exposure can go from being a highly efficient thinker able to analyze
patterns and problems to experiencing complete brain fog, insomnia,
anxiety, loss of appetite, and confusion and being misdiagnosed with
depression or even bipolar disorder. Dr. Neil Nathan, author of the book
Toxic, estimates that for 80 percent of his environmental toxin–sensitive
patients, mold toxicity is the primary trigger for their symptoms. (The
remaining 20 percent are triggered by Lyme disease.)
You can have a licensed contractor perform a test such as an ERMI
(environmental relative moldiness index) to determine if your house has
mold in it. But for many people, the primary source of mycotoxins isn’t
household mold: it’s diet.
You might think that avoiding moldy foods is a no-brainer. But
mycotoxins are so prolifically dispersed throughout global agriculture that
they are virtually unavoidable in the average modern diet. For example,
commercially grown corn is typically heavily sprayed with pesticides that
can cause a mutation in fungi that colonize corn. These mutated fungi
grow in corn roots and pump toxins directly into the plant. Other
--- END PAGE 170 ---

--- PAGE 171 ---
common crops like barley, wheat, peanuts, and even coffee beans can be
notoriously high in mycotoxins. But it is important not to confuse “moldy”
with “fermented.” You are not necessarily exposed to mycotoxins if you
eat fermented foods such as cheese, pickles, buttermilk, sour cream, and
smoked fish. Sure, when consumed in high amounts, these foods can place
you at higher risk for mycotoxin exposure, but many people remove moldy
foods from their diet, keep eating fermented foods, and get well just fine.
You may have heard that mold or mycotoxin levels may be lower in
organic foods, but the mycotoxin content of a given crop depends on a
variety of factors. For example, the amount of the mycotoxin
deoxynivalenol in a product can depend on tillage practice, weather
conditions, location of origin, and crop rotation. Indeed, while organic
systems generally seem able to keep mycotoxin levels low, the available
research doesn’t indicate whether going organic reduces your risk of
consuming mycotoxins. It’s also important to know that candida—a
fungus that’s present in everyone but can sometimes grow out of control
—almost always plays a role in mold sensitivities, and for candida
overgrowth, mold infection, and even Lyme disease, you should be eating
a low-carb, low-sugar diet because carbohydrates, particularly sugar and
fruit, feed candida and many other fungal species.
The good news is that research does indicate antioxidants such as
superoxide anion scavengers (enzymes that mop up free radicals in the
body) can minimize the impact mycotoxins have on the body. Vitamin A,
vitamin C, selenium, and glutathione are all good examples of antioxidants
you can consume in food or supplements. Other strategies to eliminate
mycotoxins include consuming binders such as activated charcoal,
sweating in a sauna, and eating garlic or supplementing with allicin, the
active ingredient of garlic. Although many practitioners recommend high-
dose methylation therapy via the use of methylated vitamins, usually
delivered via IV, I do not. While it is true that the addition of methyl
--- END PAGE 171 ---

--- PAGE 172 ---
groups to molecules in the body can upregulate metabolic function and
cellular efficiency, it may not be a good idea for those with a toxin or
infection to use this type of therapy. This is because it is the mitochondria
that recognize the presence of a toxin or infection due to a change in the
electrical charge of the cell, and it is the mitochondria that then set off an
orchestrated series of events to protect the cell. This includes halting
methylation to protect the cell. If the cell is intentionally shutting down
methylation when you get sick to protect itself, it certainly doesn’t make
sense to flood the body with a host of excess methyl groups.
Supporting Detox with Binders
Binders latch on to chemicals and toxins, such as bacteria, heavy metals, or
mold, rendering them inactive and making it possible for the body to
excrete them. Natural binders such as activated charcoal and clay have been
used by both humans and animals for thousands of years to treat issues
such as gas, bloating, stomach pain, and food poisoning, and also as a
protocol during intestinal cleansing. They enhance the natural detoxification
systems.
The following is a short list of some of the most popular binders:
Activated charcoal: In 1831, in a famous act performed in front of the
French Academy of Medicine, a French physician consumed a lethal dose
of the poison strychnine but suffered no deleterious effects because he
consumed charcoal at the same time. The clinical benefits of charcoal
have been well researched since then. Activated charcoal has been
shown to effectively absorb pesticides and herbicides, mold toxins,
endotoxins, and more. It can also remove inflammatory molecules
associated with a hyperactive immune response, such as interleukins and
tumor necrosis factor, so it may be beneficial in calming an overactive
immune system.
Bentonite clay: The use of bentonite clay dates back to early populations
in the Andes, who carried balls of clay to consume as protection against
poisons and toxins. It is particularly good at absorbing aflatoxin, a
--- END PAGE 172 ---

--- PAGE 173 ---
mycotoxin often found in peanuts, coffees, and grains, and it can also
absorb pesticides, herbicides, and the cyanotoxins found in lakes polluted
by algal blooms. It also has antibacterial properties and a healing effect
on the lining of the gut.
Chitosan: Chitosan is created by enzymatic breakdown of chitin, a
substance that forms the cell walls of fungi and exoskeletons of shellfish.
In a book of medicine from the Ming Dynasty, it is written, “Break a crab
shell, grind it, make a ball out of it, and eat it to treat anything that swells
or grows.” Chitosan promotes the growth of the good gut bacteria
bifidobacteria and lactobacillus, and it can bind to bile salts that emulsify
fat, so it can reduce fat absorption from a high-fat meal. It also binds and
removes toxins present in bile salts, metals, polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), phthalates, and bisphenol A (BPA). It has also been shown to
have protective effects against mercury-induced gene damage.
Silica: Silica bound to a thiol group (which is a special binding molecule
containing sulfur and hydrogen) can be found in several supplements,
including one made by Quicksilver Scientific. It delivers insoluble thiol
groups that bind to and eliminate mercury and other heavy metals. The
use of thiolated forms of silica dates back to the 1970s, when this
compound was used to address mercury poisoning in Iraq. It performed
even better than penicillamine, a common medical metal-chelating agent
at the time. It is especially helpful in cases of mercury toxicity.
Aloe vera and acacia gum: Both aloe vera and acacia gum can ease the
constipation that often occurs with the use of binders. Acacia gum
contains dietary fiber that feeds the friendly bifidobacteria and
lactobacillus bacteria in the gut, and it increases levels of butyrate, a
short-chain fatty acid with anti-inflammatory effects that helps to heal a
leaky gut. The bifidobacteria that the acacia feeds can lower endotoxin
levels, normalize gut function, and reduce inflammation. Aloe vera has a
soothing effect on the gut and has a long history of use for
gastrointestinal disorders associated with inflammation, including peptic
ulcers, gastritis, and inflammatory bowel disease.
There is no universal binder that works equally well on all toxins, so your
best bet may be combining the binders listed here for a synergistic effect
against any toxins. Dr. Joseph Brewer, one of the world’s leading mold
experts, has discovered that certain toxins are preferentially bound by
--- END PAGE 173 ---

--- PAGE 174 ---
certain binders. To be more specific, ochratoxins appear to be bound best
by compounds such as cholestyramine and activated charcoal; aflatoxins are
bound by activated charcoal and bentonite clay; trichothecenes are bound
by activated charcoal, chlorella, and bentonite clay; and gliotoxins are bound
by bentonite clay, Saccharomyces boulardii (a probiotic yeast), and N-
acetylcysteine (NAC). A mold and mycotoxin test from a website like
SurvivingMold.com can help pinpoint which toxins you have and therefore
help you decide which binders to use.
For a list of good supplement options that include these binders, see
BoundlessBook.com/4.
If you have been significantly exposed to mold, there are certain
healing steps that I recommend you take. The first is to address the limbic
system, a group of structures in the brain that are particularly involved
with emotion, including the amygdala, which is primarily responsible for
how you process emotions. Signs that the limbic system region of the
brain is being significantly affected by mold sensitivity or infection include
severe anxiety, depression, despair, hopelessness, and depersonalization
(feeling like you’re not yourself ), along with low energy, impaired
cognition, and pain. One of the best methods for restabilizing the limbic
system is a program designed by Annie Hopper called Dynamic Neural
Retraining, which uses mental exercises to rewire the limbic system (visit
retrainingthebrain.com to learn more). Second, because the vagus nerve
tends to become sympathetically overactive after mycotoxin exposure, I
recommend a series of exercises by a body worker named Stanley
Rosenberg, explained in his book Accessing the Healing Power of the Vagus
Nerve. These exercises, which take about ten minutes a day to perform,
can quiet the vagus nerve and the connecting cranial nerves. In
conjunction with the exercises, I recommend osteopathic craniosacral
work, which can be very effective for improving vagal nerve tone (which
increases vagus nerve activity). Osteopath James Jealous has a directory of
--- END PAGE 174 ---

--- PAGE 175 ---
practitioners trained in a particular form of this therapy on his website,
jamesjealous.com.
If you’re among the 25 percent of the population that possesses an
immune response gene that prevents you from properly removing
biotoxins, mold becomes an even bigger issue because it circulates
throughout your body and can result in a condition of biotoxin
accumulation called chronic inflammatory response syndrome (CIRS),
which you can test for through a company such as Life Extension or True
Health Labs. If you have this accumulation, you need to be hypervigilant
about not only what you eat but also the structures you enter, since up to
50 percent of buildings in the US are water-damaged. This is a serious and
increasingly common issue that is a hidden cause of chronic disease
worldwide. The best resources to learn more about CIRS are the websites
CIRSx.com and SurvivingMold.com, along with the book The Art and
Science of CIRS Medicine by Dr. Ritchie Shoemaker.
To test for mold in your body, I recommend two options: (1) urine
testing via the Real Time Laboratory, Mycotox, or Great Plains Laboratory,
which will identify the specific toxins and mold strains that you have, or
(2) the GENIE (Genomic Expression by Nanostring: Inflammation
Explained) test from SurvivingMold.com, which is a newer and more
comprehensive blood test that can identify unusual levels of gene activity
associated with mold and mycotoxin exposure, failure of regulation of
genes associated with CIRS, molds, mycotoxins, and more. In addition to
the mycotoxin levels themselves, other biomarker clusters that can
indicate some level of mycotoxin buildup (a full list with explanations is at
SurvivingMold.com) include the following:
• High levels of antigliadin antibodies (AGA)
• Low vasoactive intestinal polypeptide (VIP)
• High cortisol
--- END PAGE 175 ---

--- PAGE 176 ---
• Low vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
• Low melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)
• High TGF beta-1
• High C4a
• High anticardiolipins antibodies (ACLA)
• Low antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
• High matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP-9)
• High leptin
You might want to take 500 mg of oral glutathione twice daily for a
week before a urine test for mycotoxins to make sure you get an accurate
reading. This is because many people with mold or mycotoxin exposure
have difficulty mobilizing these toxins, but using oral glutathione, 500 mg
twice daily, for a week and then collecting the urine improves the
diagnostic capabilities by mobilizing the toxins. So does sitting in an
infrared sauna or a hot tub for ten to thirty minutes just prior to the urine
collection because sweating mobilizes toxins too and can be especially
effective for detoxification if done an hour or two after taking a binder
such as activated charcoal.
You can also take a free visual contrast sensitivity test at VCSTest.com.
This test—even in the absence of blood or urine testing—can give you
good clues about your exposure to toxins, including certain species of
mold and the mycotoxins they produce, along with parasites, heavy metals
like mercury and lead, and the pathogens responsible for Lyme disease
and its common coinfections, such as babesiosis, bartonellosis,
ehrlichiosis, mycoplasma infection, and Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
This test can be paired with a NeuroQuant Analysis. Because cognitive
symptoms are found in over 90 percent of CIRS and mold sufferers, the
NeuroQuant Analysis is an accurate way to measure objective central
nervous system injury from CIRS. It reads your brain’s volume and gray
--- END PAGE 176 ---

--- PAGE 177 ---
matter metrics to analyze for “mold” points, Lyme points, and other
conditions and can be used for diagnosis or for assessing response to
treatment.
A Medical Approach to Mold Management
Dr. Beth McDougall of Jyzen Labs in Mill Valley, California (a comprehensive
biohacking facility worth a visit) has a proven approach to eradicate mold
and mycotoxin. Both my wife and I have worked with her and have been
impressed by the results. Dr. McDougall’s approach begins with the sinuses,
targeting them with a spray or nebulizer several times per day. Her favorite
product for this purpose is Argentyn 23, which is a silver hydrosol that has
been shown to kill mold, viruses, and bacteria and even break down biofilms.
For more serious cases, she combines it with EDTA (which breaks up
biofilms) and a pharmaceutical antifungal drug like ketoconazole,
fluconazole, or nystatin. For the lungs, she recommends nebulizing silver
hydrosol or a 10:1 ratio of saline to food-grade hydrogen peroxide, twice per
day for a month.
For the intestines, Dr. McDougall uses A-FNG, a potent herbal tincture that
requires starting at a low dose and ramping up very slowly as tolerated. She
recommends beginning with one drop in a shot glass of water both morning
and evening and working up to twenty-five drops. She also recommends an
oral protocol of gut binders with ingredients like activated charcoal and
bentonite clay, such as Quicksilver’s binder, combined with sublingual
glutathione to help the liver clear the bound mycotoxins. For example, upon
waking and again prior to bedtime, you can take a binding agent and then
follow it with two pumps of glutathione under the tongue.
Finally, because mycotoxins can cause significant mitochondrial damage, Dr.
McDougall “sweeps” them out of the cell membrane and mitochondria by
using an intravenous protocol called the Patricia Kane (PK) protocol. This
protocol involves phosphatidylcholine (PC) IVs in progressively larger doses
to address the cell membrane, followed by IV glutathione and the
methylating agents folinic acid and methylcobalamin to remove the toxins.
Often, her patients complete ten treatments over five to ten weeks,
combined with frequent sauna and colonic therapy, along with the oral
--- END PAGE 177 ---

--- PAGE 178 ---
binding agents described earlier. She has documented the success of this
strategy with urine mycotoxin testing that she sends to the highly accurate
IGL Labs in Germany, along with EEG brain mapping, which can show
diminished brain waves and signs of inflammation due to mycotoxin illness
or mold inflammation.
In addition, because the symptoms of mold exposure and Lyme disease
often overlap, it can be useful to test for Lyme as well, preferably using a
test called the IGeneX Western blot. You can read even more about HLA and
CIRS, along with testing for molds and mycotoxins, at CIRSx.com and
SurvivingMold.com, and in Dr. Neil Nathan’s book Toxic. At
LymeActionNetwork.org, there is a helpful questionnaire that is surprisingly
accurate at predicting the possibility of Lyme disease or Lyme co-infection
(also known as multiple systemic infectious diseases syndrome, or MSIDS).
Smart Drugs
A smart drug is a medication used to treat a cognitive disorder like ADHD.
Sometimes these medications are designed to treat the disorder but are
increasingly used off-label for focus, energy, and sleep deprivation. (An off-
label use is anything a drug hasn’t been approved to treat by the FDA. For
example, treating migraines with Botox injections, now a common practice,
was considered an off-label use until the FDA approved Botox to treat
migraines in 2010.) There are distinct differences between synthetic smart
drugs and more natural herbal or food-based nootropics, such as lion’s
mane mushrooms, Gingko biloba (ginkgo), and Bacopa monnieri (bacopa).
Adderall (amphetamine and dextroamphetamine) is one of the most popular
smart drugs, with Provigil (modafinil) and Ritalin (methylphenidate)
following close behind. These drugs can produce significant spikes in
neurotransmitters such as serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine, which
can lead to neurotransmitter imbalances, drug tolerance, sleep disturbances,
habit formation, and dopamine desensitization, which means things that
normally make you feel good, like food, sex, or music, need to be consumed
in higher or more intense amounts to have the original effects—the topic of
the book Dopamine Nation. Drug tolerance is particularly dangerous
--- END PAGE 178 ---

--- PAGE 179 ---
because as your tolerance increases, you need more of the drug to notice its
effects, and going without it can cause withdrawal symptoms. Higher
dosages, in turn, can damage important physiological functions such as
appetite, mood stability, and stress regulation.
True nootropics—natural, not synthetic, substances—on the other hand, do
not seem to carry the risks of tolerance development, habit formation,
neurotransmitter imbalances, and impaired cognitive function. In fact,
nootropics seem to protect and enhance the brain. The nootropic piracetam,
discovered in the 1960s, and its relatives oxiracetam and nefiracetam can
even reverse amnesia induced by electroconvulsive therapy and hypoxia, as
well as reduce the effects of dementia.
If a drug is strongly felt on a consistent basis whenever you use it and it
makes you high, wired, or sedated, it is acting more like a smart drug or
performance enhancer and is likely not a natural nootropic. Nootropics are
sustainable for long-term use, while smart drugs are not. If you have a
prescription for Adderall or a similar stimulant, it is critical that you don’t slip
into overdosing, even a little, and people who take stimulant-class drugs
without a prescription should be very cautious. Smart drugs do not support
natural cognitive processes, can be toxic, and may depress or overstimulate
the brain. I’ll talk much more about nootropics and smart drugs in chapter 5.
HOW TO EAT YOURSELF SMART
By avoiding foods that break your brain, you can combat and even reverse
the damage caused by unhealthy eating patterns, mold, heavy metals, and
endotoxins. But it’s not just a matter of preventing damage—you can also
eat yourself smart with the following four strategies.
1. Increase Ketones
Ketosis is a metabolic state in which some of your body’s energy supply
comes from ketone bodies, by-products of burning fat. This stands in stark
--- END PAGE 179 ---

--- PAGE 180 ---
contrast to a state of glycolysis, in which blood glucose provides the
primary source of energy. Generally, ketosis occurs when your body
metabolizes fatty acids at a relatively high rate and converts those fatty
acids into ketones.
The ketogenic diet was developed in the 1920s to reduce the frequency
of seizures in children with epilepsy. Although they didn’t fully understand
the biological mechanisms, medical professionals at the time did know
that elevated levels of ketones in the blood seemed to correlate with a
significant decrease in epileptic episodes. Since then, ongoing research has
revealed a variety of ways that ketosis improves brain function.
Although many people are aware that limiting dietary carbohydrates
and eating slower-burning fuels such as healthy fats can help control
hunger and reduce body weight via improved fat metabolism, it’s less well
known that the benefits of ketosis go much deeper, to a cellular level.
First, ketosis makes for healthier mitochondria, the driving forces of
each cell in your body. When your mitochondria malfunction, they can’t
produce enough energy. As a result, tissues with high energy demands,
such as muscles, the heart, and the brain, suffer, resulting in complications
that can include blindness, deafness, movement disorders, dementia,
cardiomyopathy (disease of the heart muscle), myopathy, renal
dysfunction, and accelerated aging. Ketosis is effective at reversing
mitochondrial dysfunction because it increases the number of
mitochondria and the production of oxidative ATP, particularly in
neurons. So by improving the number and energetic output of the
mitochondria in your brain, you can significantly enhance cognition and
protect yourself from neurodegeneration. (Incidentally, if this information
about mitochondria intrigues you, I recommend you take an even deeper
dive with the book Mitochondria and the Future of Medicine by Lee Know.)
Depending on your level of physical activity, after fasting for sixteen to
seventy-two hours or after limiting your daily carb intake to 20 to 60 g per
--- END PAGE 180 ---

--- PAGE 181 ---
day, after two to three days, your remaining glucose reserves are
insufficient for normal fat oxidation and for fueling your brain. At that
point, the mitochondria in your liver begin to produce the three ketone
bodies: acetone, acetoacetate, and beta-hydroxybutyric acid. These are
derived from excess acetyl-CoA (a key molecule in the metabolism of
proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids), which accumulates as you metabolize
fats. This entire process of producing ketones is called ketogenesis. The
ketone bodies are then converted into other compounds and metabolized
into energy in your cells, including your neurons. This process can even be
measured with a blood, urine, or breath ketone monitor (blood is the most
accurate), with a value of 1.5 to 3.0 mmol/L usually being adequate to feel
all the effects of ketosis.
Ketone metabolism can create much lower levels of oxidative stress
than glucose metabolism, resulting in reduced inflammation and improved
mitochondrial health. This is especially important for your brain, since
neurodegenerative disorders characterized by demyelination (degradation
of the myelin sheath surrounding part of a nerve cell), such as multiple
sclerosis, are thought to be heavily influenced by chronic inflammation.
Research also suggests that fasting or a fasting-mimicking diet (such as a
ketogenic diet or the use of exogenous ketone supplements) can improve
neurodegenerative disorders by upregulating brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF), which supports the continued growth and development of
neuronal connections. A ketogenic diet has also been proven to facilitate
the conversion of glutamate into the neurotransmitter GABA, which is
important because chronically elevated glutamate levels can overstimulate
brain cells and lead to neural inflammation.
Now, don’t get me wrong: I don’t necessarily endorse a high-fat, low-
carb ketogenic diet for everyone, especially high-intensity athletes who
burn through large amounts of carbohydrates. For this group, I
recommend including at least 200 g of carbohydrates per day, which is still
--- END PAGE 181 ---

--- PAGE 182 ---
low-carb, but not as little as the paltry 40 to 60 g that some keto athletes
consume, which is an improper application of a therapeutic ketogenic diet
recommended for a largely inactive population to a very active one. In
fact, high fatty acids combined with low glucose and a high amount of
physical activity or stress can paradoxically cause insulin resistance as the
body does everything it can to get sugar into needy tissues and can also
result in the increasingly common phenomenon of cold, hungry, and
libidoless biohackers who just aren’t eating enough carbohydrates, or
often enough calories, to support thyroid hormones, testosterone, and
metabolism.
But when it comes to your brain, ketones are the cleanest-burning fuel
you can get, so a diet high in healthy fats combined with intelligent fasting
and limitation of added sugars is a useful strategy to get into ketosis and
achieve greater clarity, focus, and cognition. New drinkable exogenous
ketones made by companies like HVMN and KetoneAid can enhance this
process and ease the transition into ketosis, and they are far friendlier on
the gut than salted ketone powders, which require very high, gut-
distressing intakes to attain ketosis. Finally, not all keto diets are created
equal: eating a burger with no bun at a fast-food restaurant, dumping
oodles of butter into your coffee, and grabbing the fattiest pieces of pork
you can find is a “dirty keto” approach that is far unhealthier than a low-
carb, Mediterranean-style diet rich in fats such as olive oil, avocados,
walnuts, and salmon; rich in greens, fermented vegetables, berries, and
natural cheeses; and wise in timing of healthy carbohydrates like sweet
potatoes, sourdough bread, or rice if burning through carbs with intense
exercise.
2. Fast
--- END PAGE 182 ---

--- PAGE 183 ---
Earlier, I alluded to fasting as a strategy for entering a state of ketosis. But
fasting accomplishes far more than that and is, in fact, a potent way to
both heal your brain and protect it from future damage. But before
jumping into how fasting works, it is important to understand the
distinction between fasting and caloric restriction.
Caloric restriction is an intentional reduction of your daily or weekly
caloric intake. It works on a “calories in, calories out” basis, so that your
energy output is greater than your energy input, which forces your body to
burn stored fat for energy.
Fasting, on the other hand, especially intermittent fasting, does not
necessarily require caloric restriction. It simply involves not eating for a
given amount of time and then eating within a limited period called a
compressed eating window. You don’t eat less; you eat less often. Indeed,
even when I perform a twenty-four-hour fast, such as when I stop eating
after dinner on Saturday and don’t eat again until dinner on Sunday, I
often eat more than 2,500 calories for Sunday dinner, so there’s no overall
drop in calories. Similarly, my friend Todd White of Dry Farm Wines fasts
every day until dinner and, although his metabolism is healthy and his
weight is stable, often punishes an entire bottle of organic wine and an
enormous slab of red meat, salmon, hollandaise sauce, mayonnaise, and
other calorically dense and scrumptious foods for dinner (referred to as a
one meal a day or “OMAD” approach).
Why is it important to make this distinction? Frankly, many lean,
highly active people attempt to engage in frequent twelve-to-sixteen-hour
intermittent fasts, regular twenty-four-hour fasts, or three-to-five-day
fasts, and then they encounter thyroid downregulation, hormone
depletion, low energy, and poor sleep because they are attempting to
marry caloric restriction–based fasting with an extremely active, calorie-
decimating lifestyle and a body that doesn’t have a ton of energy stores to
tap into.
--- END PAGE 183 ---

--- PAGE 184 ---
Don’t get me wrong: caloric restriction can certainly be good for you. A
Confucian principle that certain long-lived Asiatic peoples abide by is
“Hara hachi bu”—“Eat until you are 80 percent full” (a loose translation).
But fasting, especially short bursts of intermittent fasting, can be
particularly effective for both losing fat and improving brain health and
function without necessarily restricting calories (although fasting often
naturally leads to a 20 to 30 percent daily caloric reduction). In other
words, if you are overweight, obese, sedentary, or in need of giving your
gut a serious break from calories, fasting can give you the benefits of
restricting calories without actually restricting calories.
One of the ways that intermittent fasting improves brain function has
to do with a process called neuronal autophagy, the intentional and
healthy self-destruction of aging neurons to make room for new ones.
Abnormal or restricted autophagic activity is associated with
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s,
Huntington’s, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (also known as Lou
Gehrig’s disease). Frequent feeding, particularly on sugars and proteins,
causes elevated insulin, which reduces neuronal autophagy, resulting in
metabolic dysregulation and neurodegeneration. Intermittent fasts,
especially fasts between sixteen hours and twenty-four hours long (such
as a weekly twenty-four-hour fast) can significantly reduce insulin levels
and allow the brain to engage in neuronal autophagy. Intermittent fasting
also reduces inflammation, including neuroinflammation induced by the
same lipopolysaccharides I discussed when introducing you to
endotoxemia.
Entire books have been written on fasting techniques, including the
excellent The Complete Guide to Fasting by Dr. Jason Fung and Jimmy
Moore. But the most common, practical kinds of fasts are the 12-12 and 16-
8 strategies. The 12-12 strategy involves twelve hours of fasting followed by
a twelve-hour eating window. This is a relatively simple habit to get into
--- END PAGE 184 ---

--- PAGE 185 ---
on a daily basis, even for very active individuals, and it still allows you to
get the neural benefits of fasting. A sixteen-hour intermittent fast can be
even better because sixteen hours is the point at which cellular autophagy
increases. But a word of caution: for very lean, active individuals
(especially premenopausal women), sixteen hours of fasting—even
without caloric restriction—seems to be capable of causing hormonal
imbalances and metabolic dysfunction. My recommendation? A daily
twelve-to-sixteen-hour fast for men and postmenopausal women; a daily
ten-to-twelve-hour fast for premenopausal women; a dinner-to-dinner fast
two to four times per month so that you go longer than sixteen hours
occasionally; and a longer cleansing-style fast such as a bone broth fast,
juice fast, fasting mimicking diet (FMD), kitchari cleanse, or water fast
two to four times per year.
3. Feed Your Gut Bacteria
The quality, quantity, and diversity of the bacteria in your gut have a
profound influence on your brain. Dr. David Perlmutter explores this gut-
brain phenomenon in his book Brain Maker: The Power of Gut Microbes to
Heal and Protect Your Brain—for Life, in which he explains, “These hundred
trillion bacteria that live within your gut are so intimately involved in your
brain at a number of levels. They manufacture neurochemicals, for
example. Things like dopamine and serotonin. They manufacture
important vitamins that are important to keep your brain healthy. They
also maintain the integrity of the lining of your gut.”
When your gut lining is compromised, the result is leaky gut
syndrome. This increases systemic inflammation as compounds spill from
the gut into the bloodstream, which can serve as a cornerstone for
virtually all brain disorders, including Alzheimer’s, multiple sclerosis,
Parkinson’s, and autism.
--- END PAGE 185 ---

--- PAGE 186 ---
Dr. Perlmutter also writes about how gut bacteria are at the cutting
edge of neurology research:
Being a brain specialist dealing with brain disorders, my whole career I’ve
been stymied by not having really powerful tools to implement to bring about
changes in individuals who have these issues. Now we’re beginning to get
those tools, and they are in the gut. Who knew? In neurology school, we
didn’t study the makeup of the gut bacteria and how that would ever
influence the brain, and yet, this is leading-edge science. This is what our
most well-respected researchers and peer-reviewed journals are talking
about: not only are the gut bacteria fundamentally involved in brain health,
but you can change the gut bacteria through interventions—taking
probiotics and choosing to eat foods that are rich in prebiotics and to
enhance the growth of good bacteria—and even more aggressive therapies
[such as fecal transplants].
While fecal transplant options in the form of done-for-you capsules
from healthy donors are increasingly available, I don’t think a fecal
transplant is necessary to optimize your brain. But there are gut bacteria–
feeding strategies you can use to nourish and protect your microbiome
and your brain. For example, you can opt for foods that are friendly to the
gut bacteria, such as aged meats, cultured dairy products, sauerkraut,
kimchi, kombucha, and fiber-rich prebiotics, like jicama, Jerusalem
artichokes, garlic, and dandelion greens. It is important to note that
pasteurized fermented foods often contain no living bacteria, so be sure
that the products you purchase actually contain living microorganisms.
New research also shows that probiotics such as the akkermansia made by
Pendulum or the synbiotic (a mixture of probiotics and prebiotics) made
by SEED can nourish the brain by nourishing the gut. Finally, one person’s
superfood can be another person’s poison, and if you have a histamine
intolerance, you should be cautious with your intake of fermented foods
and consider taking a histamine-digesting enzyme if you do eat them.
--- END PAGE 186 ---

--- PAGE 187 ---
4. Focus on Supportive Nutrients and
Substances
In addition to the dietary strategies above, you can support your gut and
brain by seeking the following compounds in both real foods and
supplements.
CONJUGATED LINOLEIC ACID (CLA)
CLA is a fatty acid that can improve immune responses and may be
helpful in protecting the brain. It is found in high concentrations in the
meat and dairy of cows, sheep, and goats. Incorporate grass-fed, grass-
finished beef or lamb or raw dairy products from those animals into your
diet.
BUTYRIC ACID
Butyric acid, also called butyrate, is a fatty acid found in milk, cheese, and
butter. It acts as an anti-inflammatory agent by inhibiting NF-kB
activation in your colon. NF-kB regulates genes involved in immune
inflammatory responses, so by shutting down diet- or microbiota-induced
inflammation, butyrate helps minimize the effects of inflammation on
your central nervous system. As with CLA, you can get more butyrate in
your system by consuming grass-fed butter and other grass-fed dairy
products or by using supplements such as tributyrin or butyrate. Since it’s
a short-chain fatty acid found in the colon, there’s even evidence that
butyrate enemas can be helpful for inflammatory conditions of the colon
(yep: I do a weekly coffee enema and often break open a few butyrate
capsules to include in the brew).
GLUTATHIONE (GSH)
--- END PAGE 187 ---

--- PAGE 188 ---
GSH plays a critical role in shielding cells and cellular molecules from
damaging oxidants and facilitates the excretion of toxins from cells. It
even helps regenerate other antioxidants such as tocopherols and
ascorbate to restore those antioxidants to their active, nonoxidized state.
To produce GSH, your body requires adequate protein intake. Your
protein intake should range from 0.5 to 0.8 g per pound of body weight,
which equates to 85 to 136 g per day for a 170-pound person. To enhance
natural GSH production, consume foods that contain GSH precursors,
including milk thistle, quality whey protein, arugula, broccoli, cauliflower,
and kale, and foods that support methylation, such as avocado, lentils,
liver, garbanzo beans, Brazil nuts, grass-fed beef, and spinach.
You can also supplement your diet with GSH via sublingual
glutathione, liposomal glutathione, injectable glutathione, IV glutathione,
or capsules. Sublingual and liposomal glutathione in particular have been
shown to be highly absorbable. Sublingual glutathione is placed under
your tongue and taken up directly into the blood vessels there, allowing
the glutathione to bypass digestion. Liposomes are small, membranous
bubbles that are similar in structure to the membranes of your cells. By
protecting the glutathione until it reaches its destination and merging
easily with cell membranes, liposomes allow glutathione to be efficiently
taken up. Dr. Ben Lynch recommends S-acetyl glutathione, found in the
product Emothion, as the best liposomal form. Transdermal glutathione
sprays are also available and can deliver a highly absorbable form of
glutathione through the skin. Auro Wellness is a good brand.
Effective doses of glutathione range from 250 to 300 mg daily,
generally taken over a period of two to three months to achieve adequate
levels. NAC (N-acetylcysteine) is a glutathione precursor and proven
nutrient for restoring depleted glutathione levels. It is also important to
note that glutathione can be harmful for some people, especially those
who are deficient in riboflavin or have slow glutathione reductase,
--- END PAGE 188 ---

--- PAGE 189 ---
glutathione peroxidase, or glutathione transferase genes (all testable via a
salivary DNA test). These individuals would be better served by taking
glutathione precursors such as selenium, sulfur, and vitamin C along with
a powerful antioxidant like pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ).
DHA
DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) is an omega-3 fatty acid that’s critical for
brain growth in infants and proper brain function in adults. DHA
deficiency is associated with fetal alcohol syndrome, ADHD, cystic
fibrosis, phenylketonuria, depression, aggressive hostility, and
adrenoleukodystrophy. That last condition is especially dangerous: it
refers to the degradation of the myelin sheath protecting nerve cells. One
study observed the effects of DHA supplementation on the memory and
reaction times of young adults who had a low intake of omega-3 fatty acids
and found that it improved both, particularly the episodic memory of the
women and the working memory of the men. Another study revealed that
DHA prevented aggression toward others from increasing in young
students during times of mental stress. I’ve always wondered if this is why
people who follow low-fat diets or who build up fatty-acid deficiencies
tend to be, in my opinion, a bit more moody or aggressive.
DHA isn’t difficult to incorporate into your diet. It is one of the
primary oils in many species of shellfish and fish, such as shrimp, lobster,
Dungeness crab, king crab, anchovies, salmon, herring, mackerel, tuna,
halibut, and, my favorite, fish roe. So, to increase your DHA intake, you
can increase your seafood intake or consume a high-quality brand of fresh,
unoxidized fish oil—or both. I consume 2 to 4 g of fish oil on the days I
don’t eat fish. Of course, you should be very cautious about eating fish if
you suspect you have heavy metal toxicity, and you may even want to
consider supplementing with krill oil (which is low in metals) instead or
sticking to very small fish far down the food chain, such as anchovies,
--- END PAGE 189 ---

--- PAGE 190 ---
mackerel, herring, and sardines. I get the majority of my fish via a monthly
order from Seatopia, which ships clean, sashimi-grade cuts like Ora King
salmon, Hiramasa kingfish, and steelhead trout flash-frozen to my
doorstep.
If you are allergic to fish or shellfish, DHA is also found in eggs and
grass-fed beef. If you follow a vegan or vegetarian diet, you can still get
DHA, but it takes a bit more effort and expense. Spirulina and chlorella
also contain moderately to highly bioavailable forms of DHA. You may
have heard that seeds and nuts like flax seeds, hemp seeds, and chia seeds
are good sources of DHA, but the fact is, your body’s ability to unlock
those reserves and convert them into usable DHA is pretty low—some
research has indicated that your body is actually incapable of deriving any
DHA at all from seeds and nuts. However, some plants, such as Brussels
sprouts, are rich in short-chain omega-3 fatty acids, and while these are
less potent than DHA, they also act as neuroprotectors and are beneficial
for your cellular and brain health.
Why Fish Don’t Need Fish Oil
Sure, eating fish and consuming fish oil are excellent strategies for getting
large amounts of absorbable EPA and DHA, but what about fish? Fish,
especially nonpredatory fish that aren’t eating smaller fish, don’t really
consume much fish oil, do they? So how do fish create EPA and DHA?
Fish produce an enzyme that converts the plants (particularly the algae)
they consume into EPA and DHA. New research shows that humans who
consume adequate amounts of these enzymes or precursors for these
enzymes, along with important compounds such as omega-5, omega-7,
omega-9, omega-11, gamma-linoleic acid, and conjugated linoleic acid, and
supportive minerals such as zinc and magnesium, can upregulate their
conversion of plant-based oils into EPA and DHA, thus lowering their need
for large quantities of fish or fish oil. This is especially good news for plant-
--- END PAGE 190 ---

--- PAGE 191 ---
based eaters who want to get adequate essential fatty acids for the brain
and nervous system.
In a nutshell, a properly structured diet should include saturated,
monounsaturated, and polyunsaturated fatty acids along with
phytochemicals, antioxidants, and minerals. This includes fish and roe, olive
oil, grass-fed meats, seeds, nuts, organic vegetables, roots and tubers, and
whole fruits. With this kind of balanced diet, the body has what it needs to
produce much of its own EPA and DHA—just like fish!
The chart below provides a summary of the food sources of the fats and oils
that should be included in the diet. As you can see, simply popping a few
fish oil capsules each morning does not give the body the full spectrum of
fats, enzymes, and minerals it needs for full brain and nervous system
support (and indeed, excess omega-3 supplementation can actually
downregulate many of the pathways in the chart by competing with all the
other forms of fatty acids!). Finally, new research shows that the
curcuminoids in turmeric and curcumin may assist with the body’s own
natural formation of EPA and DHA.
EPA
Like DHA, EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) is an omega-3 fatty acid that’s
highly available in algae and oily fish, as well as fish oil. EPA levels in the
brain are typically 250 to 300 times lower than DHA levels, so EPA is not
as critical for neuronal health, but it still plays a role in protecting cells in
general and neurons in particular. EPA helps improve the strength of cell
membranes and influences behavior and mood. It also acts as a precursor
to eicosanoids, which are signaling and inhibiting molecules crucial in
inflammatory and allergic reactions. Vegetarians and vegans sometimes try
to get EPA by consuming terrestrial plants rich in ALA (another omega-3
fatty acid that I’ll discuss below), but it is important to note that the
conversion rate of ALA to EPA is fairly low. Research suggests that only 2
to 10 percent of ALA is converted to EPA or DHA. While they are slightly
--- END PAGE 191 ---

--- PAGE 192 ---
pricier than fish oil and most plants, consuming spirulina, chlorella, or
both may be the most effective tactic. Interestingly, many skeptics claim
that fish oil consumption can cause inflammation, which might be true if
you consume heated, poorly preserved, or rancid fish oils, but a host of
epidemiological data, including a multitude of studies I have discussed on
my podcast with omega fat researchers like Dr. Bill and Kristina Harris,
suggests otherwise.
ALA
ALA (alpha-linolenic acid) is a plant-based omega-3 fatty acid that cannot
be synthesized in the human body: it must be obtained through food.
Research suggests that ALA increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor,
which plays a major role in maintaining neurons and improving learning
and memory. ALA can be found in olives, extra-virgin olive oil, avocados,
and walnuts. These Mediterranean diet–type fats can even provide
benefits beyond those of anti-inflammatory omega-3 fatty acids. For
example, olive oil primarily consists of a monounsaturated omega-9 fatty
acid called oleic acid. Oleic acid possesses antioxidant properties that
protect omega-3s from oxidation and is also a primary component of
myelin sheaths.
Finally, the following whole foods are ideal to include in your brain-
boosting diet.
AVOCADOS
The vitamin K in avocados helps prevent blood clots in the brain. In
studies on diabetic rats, avocados exerted antioxidant effects on the brain
and improved the function of brain mitochondria. Avocados have also
been shown to improve spatial working memory and attention span.
BEET JUICE
--- END PAGE 192 ---

--- PAGE 193 ---
Beet juice contains concentrated nitrates that decrease blood pressure and
improve cognitive performance. In addition, the nitric oxide from beet
juice helps increase neurovascular function and circulation to the brain.
You’d have to eat at least three or four whole beets to get this same effect,
and that amount of fiber, sugar, and calories can be difficult for some
people’s digestive systems to handle!
BLUEBERRIES, COCOA, VIRGIN OR EXTRA-VIRGIN
COCONUT OIL
Blueberries, cocoa, and coconut oil all contain high levels of flavonoids
and flavonols, which can help protect the brain from oxidative stress.
Coconut oil can also prevent age-related memory loss and has medium-
chain triglycerides, which give added protection against oxidative stress.
BONE BROTH
Bone broth contains high levels of glycine, a nonessential amino acid that
can improve neurological function by enhancing memory.
BROCCOLI AND EGGS
Broccoli and egg yolks not only pair fantastically in an omelet but also
contain choline, which helps improve both verbal and visual memory.
KALE, SWISS CHARD, AND ROMAINE LETTUCE
The nutrients found in kale, Swiss chard, and romaine lettuce can be
beneficial in preventing cognitive impairment and dementia.
OLIVE OIL AND WALNUTS
One of the minor constituents of olive oil that I haven’t yet discussed is
oleocanthal, which can reduce the neuron-damaging effects of ADDLs
(amyloid beta–derived diffusible ligands, a protein found in many
--- END PAGE 193 ---

--- PAGE 194 ---
cosmetics, plastic products, and putties). These ADDLs can be a
particularly nasty culprit when it comes to increasing Alzheimer’s risk, and
thus olive oil can have a preventative effect on Alzheimer’s disease.
Walnut extract can also help protect against ADDL-induced oxidative
stress and cell death.
ROSEMARY
Rosemary extract, found in fresh rosemary or rosemary essential oil,
possesses potent antioxidant properties. In particular, the antioxidant
carnosic acid occurs in high levels in rosemary leaves and helps prevent
chronic neurodegenerative diseases. Ever put a sprig of rosemary in a
piping-hot cup of morning coffee? Try it for a pleasant, invigorating brain
boost.
SALMON
Salmon is naturally high in omega-3 fatty acids and boosts the
phospholipid bilayer that encases each neuron, thus strengthening the
membranes of the cells in your brain. The fatty acids also strengthen the
synaptic connections between neurons.
TURMERIC
Turmeric’s active ingredient is curcumin. Research has shown curcumin to
be an antioxidant and anti-inflammatory compound that improves
cognitive function in people with Alzheimer’s. It also enhances the uptake
of amyloid-beta plaques by the body’s cleanup crew of phagocytic white
blood cells, resulting in improved neuroprotection and reduced
inflammation in the central nervous system. Although turmeric is
notoriously difficult to absorb beyond your gut, it can be much more
bioavailable when combined with black pepper extract (bioperine) or,
--- END PAGE 194 ---

--- PAGE 195 ---
better yet, converted to a water-soluble extract of turmerosaccharides, as I
have done when formulating Kion Flex.
Simple Brain-Boosting Recipes
The following are a few tasty ways you can combine the foods you have
discovered in this chapter.
• Slice an avocado, pour extra-virgin olive oil over the top, and add a pinch
each of sea salt, black pepper, turmeric, and cayenne pepper, or a dash of
fresh lime juice.
• Add avocado oil–based mayonnaise to a can of wild-caught salmon and
wrap it all in a green lettuce leaf, a nori seaweed wrap, or a tortilla made
of almond, coconut, or cassava flour.
• Mix flax seeds, chia seeds, and hemp seeds into grass-fed, organic plain
yogurt and top with a sprinkling of organic blueberries, Ceylon cinnamon,
and vanilla extract or liquid stevia drops.
• Smash an avocado, add salt and pepper, and smear it onto a green
lettuce leaf or a tortilla made of almond, coconut, or cassava flour. Add
organic, pastured scrambled eggs for a breakfast burrito.
• To avoid eating the inflammatory oils most restaurants use, bring a small
container of extra-virgin olive oil when you travel or go out to restaurants
to drizzle (or dump) on your salad or meal. I am notorious for showing up
at restaurants with my own fancy oils and salts.
• Combine almond milk, sea salt, chia seeds, and liquid stevia drops in a
mason jar and shake well. Chill the jar in the refrigerator overnight for a
quick grab-and-go breakfast of chia pudding. Try adding nuts and seeds,
such as walnuts and flax seeds, for even more healthy fatty acids.
• Chop up some kale, spread it in an even layer on a baking sheet, top with
avocado oil, sea salt, and flax seeds or ground cashews, and bake at
275°F for about twenty minutes for nutty-flavored kale chips.
• Add a can of wild-caught sardines to a salad or a bed of zero-calorie,
zero-carb shirataki noodles for a meal rich in protein and healthy fats.
--- END PAGE 195 ---

--- PAGE 196 ---
• Avoid “greasy fried triangles of death” and instead snack on seed-oil-free
tortilla and potato chips, such as the tallow chips by Ancient Crunch.
THE LAST WORD
Congratulations: you are now equipped with a grocery list and food and
supplement protocol for optimizing your brain and enhancing cognition.
Remember, to give your brain the fuel it needs, it’s most important to
seek out healthy fats from natural sources and avoid damaged, unstable
fats (primarily in industrial oils, which sneak into a wide range of
packaged and processed foods). You’ll also prevent and repair damage to
your neurons by limiting the following:

• Histamine- and oxalate-containing foods
• Glucose-fluctuating foods
• Artificially sweetened foods
• Condiments
• Trans fats
• Gluten
• Foods high in heavy metals
• Meals that are high-fat and high-carb
• Moldy foods
• Excess energy drinks and stimulants
At the same time, you can support your brain by pursuing ketosis,
fasting, feeding your gut bacteria, and seeking out supplements and foods
that contain certain nutrients.
--- END PAGE 196 ---

--- PAGE 197 ---
Keep in mind, the more clearly you can think, the faster you can react
and remember information, and the more robust your nervous system, the
more equipped you are to live a life of boundless energy each day.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Each day this week, as you settle into healthy-fat consumption, your task
is to incorporate the mighty avocado bowl into your diet. Take an avocado,
slice it in half, and drizzle it (or drench it, if the spirit so leads you) with a
high-quality, spicy, savory extra-virgin olive oil, then add sea salt and
whatever other zests might titillate your taste buds, including turmeric,
black pepper, or (one of my favorites) a slab of mouthwatering coconut
manna. For a snack, eat half the avocado, or, for a full, surprisingly
satiating meal, eat the whole avocado on a bed of arugula or other dark
leafy greens.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/4. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 197 ---

--- PAGE 198 ---
05
LIMITLESS AND LUCY
NOOTROPICS, SMART DRUGS, AND
PSYCHEDELICS
--- END PAGE 198 ---

--- PAGE 199 ---
Breathing carefully, I clutched the Costco special edition family-size glass bottle
of vodka and extracted 100 milliliters with a miniature glass pipette, which I then
transferred to a small amber glass bottle. Then, with my nine-year-old son’s tiny
set of school scissors, I snipped exactly one-tenth of the blotter square of LSD I
had ordered from a psychedelic drug website on the dark web the week prior—
with a cloaked browser, of course, so the feds didn’t come knocking at my door. I
dropped the LSD into the bottle, gave it a thirty-second shake, and then placed
it in the pantry next to my protein powder and creatine. I smiled. Within twenty-
four hours, I would be ready to sample my first homemade, volumetric
microdose of a drug reported to increase lateral thinking patterns, improve
creativity, and massively boost productivity.
Why have I, a straitlaced kid from the backwoods of Idaho, spent time in
my kitchen mixing up LSD, psilocybin, ketamine, ibogaine, synthetic DMT
tabs, and more—all while my children munch away at their scrambled eggs
in the breakfast nook? And why do I, on cognitively demanding days, stir
my cup of coffee with a nicotine-coated toothpick, sneak a heaping
spoonful of powdered lion’s mane mushrooms into my morning smoothie,
or dump a packet of Chinese adaptogenic herbs into the pouches of my
cheeks?
It all comes down to my investigation into how you can enhance your
mind by combining ancestral wisdom and herbs such as bacopa and
ginkgo with modern science and compounds like LSD and racetams.
Your coworker in the next cubicle could be achieving their hyperfocus
via a microdose of LSD, a hit of huperzine, or a nicotine patch. Words like
nootropic and smart drug (yes, there is a difference) are quickly becoming
household terms, especially due to all the recent media hype about their
popularity with everyone from Silicon Valley CEOs to professional
athletes to college students, along with the emergence of movies like
Limitless and Lucy, popular TV shows such as Wormwood and Hamilton’s
Pharmacopeia, and unprecedented titles such as Michael Pollan’s
psychedelic exploration book How to Change Your Mind. Why are these
--- END PAGE 199 ---

--- PAGE 200 ---
compounds so increasingly rampant? Think about how much sensory
information we have to process each day. From big-city noise pollution to
ringing phones, artificial lighting, and chemical-laden air fresheners
inundating your senses, to electromagnetic fields piercing your brain, to
the complicated new procedure you have to learn at work requiring fierce
concentration, the human brain has to organize and cope with massive
amounts of information, all while keeping you upright and sane.
The brain does indeed have incredible skills and unimaginable
capabilities, but modern living creates unprecedented stress and sensory
overload. Sensory overload has even been shown to cause irritability,
anxiety, mood swings, depression, ADHD, fibromyalgia, PTSD, and chronic
fatigue syndrome. So maintaining your ability to learn, process
information, and form new neural connections is crucial for optimizing
brain health, longevity, and, ultimately, boundless energy.
But you don’t have to lock yourself in a dark, quiet room to protect
your skull from the onslaught of stimuli. There are research-backed
compounds that can amplify cognitive function, help your brain deal with
sensory overload, get you through a period of sleep deprivation, and
increase your creativity during an intense bout of work or study. When
combined into “stacks” and taken in the correct doses, these compounds
can noticeably change how your brain performs—for the better, if used
correctly. They impact receptor sites for neurotransmitters, alter levels of
enzymes that break down neurotransmitters, change cell membrane
structures and control the movement of molecules in and out of the cell,
improve blood flow to the brain, affect the development of neurons, and
regulate hormones.
I have taken a deep dive in the wonderful world of smart drugs,
nootropics, and psychedelics, and I’ve had the opportunity to interview
some of the brightest minds in this strange and often confusing field. In
this chapter, I will spill the beans on it all, including how to navigate the
--- END PAGE 200 ---

--- PAGE 201 ---
oft-confusing world of smart drugs and nootropics, which are the best-of-
the-best of the brain-boosting compounds I have used, and how to
procure and microdose psychedelics.
I know you’re probably chomping at the bit to discover how to
microdose with magic mushrooms or upgrade that cup of coffee to last a
few hours longer without jitters, but before we dive into these intriguing
topics, you have to understand the difference between a smart drug and a
nootropic, as well as how to choose which one to take.
SMART DRUGS 101
Many people use the terms nootropic and smart drug as if they mean the
same thing, but they’re actually very distinct. A smart drug is any
substance that enhances memory, mood, concentration, or another aspect
of cognitive function. Nootropics (the name means “mind director”)
target the same functions, but by definition they must also be
neuroprotective and nontoxic, and they are usually derived from natural,
nonsynthetic sources. A Belgian pharmacologist named V. Skondia
developed a medical definition for nootropics—they are compounds that
meet all of the following criteria:
• They have no effects on blood pressure or heart rate.
• They have no effects on EEG brain waves.
• They can pass through the blood-brain barrier.
• They have minimal side effects.
• They increase metabolism in the brain.
• They have been proven in clinical studies to enhance brain function.
--- END PAGE 201 ---

--- PAGE 202 ---
Dr. Corneliu E. Giurgea also proposed the following standards that
focus more on the positive effects of nootropics. For a supplement to be
considered a nootropic, it must do all of the following:
• Enhance learning and memory
• Enhance learned behaviors under conditions known to disrupt them
• Protect the brain from physical or chemical injury
• Enhance the tonic cortical and subcortical control mechanisms in the
brain
• Exhibit few side effects and extremely low toxicity
• Lack the pharmacology of typical psychotropic drugs (such as motor
stimulation and sedation)
For example, Adderall is a smart drug that doesn’t qualify as a
nootropic under either definition because it is a powerful stimulant that
frequently causes negative side effects, such as high blood pressure and
heart rate. There are many smart drugs on the market, the most well-
known of which are the psychostimulants Adderall and Ritalin, both of
which increase activity in the central nervous system. Other common,
similar smart drugs are modafinil, ampakines, and L-deprenyl. Later in
this chapter I’ll examine specific nootropics and their uses, but first, let’s
look at how each of these smart drugs work and their benefits and
potential risks.
Methylphenidate (Ritalin)
Methylphenidate was first used in medicine in 1960 to treat narcolepsy
and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It works by
inhibiting the reuptake of dopamine and norepinephrine, which causes a
flood of dopamine and norepinephrine in the synapses and amplifies the
--- END PAGE 202 ---

--- PAGE 203 ---
signals sent between neurons. These effects are similar to those of
amphetamines (which I’ll talk more about later in this section), which are
synthetic, addictive, mood-altering stimulants used illegally in sports and
legally as prescription drugs to treat children with ADHD and adults with
narcolepsy. It is incredibly easy to become addicted to methylphenidate.
Misuse is shockingly prevalent, with students, biohackers, soccer moms,
and busy executives popping it like candy.
Methylphenidate’s side effects include insomnia, stomachache,
headache, and anorexia. Overdoses (which may easily occur because it can
be difficult to estimate and regulate doses) can lead to agitation,
hallucinations, psychosis, lethargy, seizures, tachycardia (rapid heart rate),
dysrhythmia (irregular heart rhythms), hypertension (high blood
pressure), and hyperthermia (high fever).
Methylphenidate is particularly dangerous for developing brains, such
as those of children and adolescents, who are frequently prescribed the
drug or, especially in the case of many teenagers and college students, use
it without a prescription. The prefrontal cortex, which is responsible for
cognition, personality expression, and rational decision-making, continues
to develop well into the midtwenties. In the central nervous system, and
particularly in the prefrontal cortex, dopamine levels must have a natural
rise and fall for healthy rational thought processes (executive control) to
develop. When methylphenidate is abused or used too frequently in rats, it
can negatively impact this healthy cognitive development by keeping
dopamine levels high. I have never used, nor do I plan to use, this smart
drug.
Modafinil (Provigil)
The stimulant modafinil reduces fatigue and sleepiness. Its exact
mechanism of action is not fully understood, but research suggests that,
--- END PAGE 203 ---

--- PAGE 204 ---
like methylphenidate, modafinil works by inhibiting dopamine reuptake,
which keeps dopamine levels high. Research also suggests that modafinil
stimulates the hippocampus to release more of the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine, leading to improved cognitive performance and memory.
Modafinil’s risks are also similar to those of methylphenidate.
Improper dosing or abuse of the drug may lead to the disrupted
development of decision-making abilities and working memory in
adolescents, warranting further research into modafinil’s effects. Its
effectiveness may also depend on your IQ. Two university studies
determined that in a test of attention span, modafinil improved cognitive
performance only in the group with lower IQs.
While modafinil is safer than other stimulants because it has a milder
effect on neurotransmitters, there are risks associated with any kind of
drug that affects dopamine. Keeping dopamine levels high can lead to
addiction and, like the case of a pornography user who needs increasingly
deviant porn to achieve the same results, can produce a resistance or
reduced sensitivity to dopamine.
I keep a small emergency stash of modafinil in my pantry to call upon
in the same way that a narcoleptic might use—to keep from falling asleep
during a period of intense sleep deprivation, such as when I return home
from an international flight at 3 a.m. and need to record a podcast or be at
my son’s piano recital at 10 a.m. But although I use it only one or two days
out of every month, the energy it gives me does not feel natural, the
potential for developing dopamine insensitivity concerns me, and I always
have to make sure I get extra acetylcholine or choline from supplements
and foods such as walnuts and eggs in order to avoid feeling very irritable
when using this smart drug.
Amphetamines (Adderall)
--- END PAGE 204 ---

--- PAGE 205 ---
Amphetamines are among the most powerful synthetic, stimulant-class
smart drugs available and work by targeting dopamine, serotonin, and
norepinephrine. These neurotransmitters are known as monoamines, and
amphetamines block their uptake by clogging monoamine transporters.
This leads to higher levels of monoamines in synapses, which causes the
psychostimulant effects characteristic of drugs like Adderall.
Research has shown that amphetamines, even when used to treat
neurological disorders like ADHD, can cause anorexia, weight loss, and
insomnia. High doses can cause psychotic behavior, and even normal
doses can produce symptoms of psychosis that range from short-term
memory loss to visual and auditory hallucinations.
Ampakines (Alzheimer’s Drugs)
Ampakines are derived from the popular nootropic aniracetam, but they’re
chemically altered in a way that makes them act more like a smart drug.
Their primary function is to bind to glutamate receptors. Glutamate is
crucial for learning, memory, and synaptic plasticity (the adaptability of
your neurons) and can bind with these glutamate receptors to enhance
cognition. But when excess glutamate is produced and reacts with the
receptors, the result can be excitotoxicity, cell death caused by toxic levels
of excitatory amino acids. Research suggests that excitotoxicity plays a
significant role in the development of neurodegenerative conditions like
schizophrenia, delirium, and dementia.
Because ampakines bind to glutamate receptors, they block the uptake
of glutamate and help prevent excitotoxicity, and research suggests that
this minimizes the effects of conditions like Alzheimer’s. But ampakines
are now tightly regulated because exceeding safe doses can cause neuronal
damage from glutamate toxicity—the very neurodegeneration that
ampakines are supposed to prevent!
--- END PAGE 205 ---

--- PAGE 206 ---
Consumption of certain ampakines may also lead to a reduction in
long-term synaptic depression (LTD), the process by which synapses are
purposely weakened to avoid any plateaus in their efficiency. In other
words, LTD gives your neurons and synapses a break so they can continue
to develop and grow, and ampakines can keep this from occurring.
Research suggests LTD is necessary for healthy synaptic plasticity,
memory function, and motor skills. Granted, there is some debate about
whether cognitive functions like motor skill acquisition actually depend
on LTD, but if you were to take an excessively high dose of an ampakine,
the overstimulation could suppress LTD and affect memory and motor
skills.
L-deprenyl (Selegiline)
L-deprenyl is used to treat patients newly diagnosed with Parkinson’s, but
it’s also one of the darlings of the antiaging and smart drug communities.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) like L-deprenyl are considered to
be last-resort antidepressants and work by inhibiting the action of
monoamine oxidase (MAO), an enzyme found in most tissues that
promotes the oxidation and deactivation of monoamine
neurotransmitters. Research suggests that MAO dysfunction is
responsible for psychological and neurological disorders like Parkinson’s,
schizophrenia, ADHD, addiction, and depression. MAOIs help treat these
conditions by lowering the elevated MAO levels.
Some research also suggests that L-deprenyl has some neurotrophic
(neuron-stimulating) and neuroprotective effects in models of cerebral
ischemia and stroke and, in rats, following traumatic brain injury. But it is
critical to take the correct dose of L-deprenyl at the correct time. This is
because when you take too much or take it too often, the drug loses its
effectiveness. In fact, 40 mg per day provides no more benefit than 10 mg
--- END PAGE 206 ---

--- PAGE 207 ---
per day. Side effects are also a serious concern. L-deprenyl’s potential side
effects—especially at higher doses—include twitching and uncontrollable
repetitive spasms in the tongue, lips, face, arms, and legs, blurred vision,
chest pain, difficulty breathing, dizziness, irregular heartbeat, and
irritability. In 17 percent of the cases in one study of the drug, the
researchers had to stop treatment because of adverse side effects. I’m a
bigger fan of several of the natural dopamine-modulating nootropics
covered later in this chapter, including Mucuna pruriens, tryptophan, a
good ol’ cup of coffee, and, yes, even nicotine.
Weighing the Risks and Benefits
Are you getting the impression that using synthetic stimulants to flood
your brain with excess neurotransmitters may not be a good idea,
especially when done frequently or in high doses?
Fact is, in small amounts, all these smart drugs can be relatively safe.
But I am not convinced of their long-term safety or efficacy.
Sure, some are less risky than others, and these are increasing in
popularity among biohackers and medical professionals. They are also
popular among students, e-gamers, and athletes—among these groups,
smart-drug doping is becoming more frequently banned. In academic
settings and competitions, many of these compounds are now banned as
performance-enhancing drugs. Yes, this means you could potentially get
kicked off your university’s chess club or debate team, or have your Call of
Duty gaming title stripped if you’re discovered to have modafinil in your
system. But I would carefully consider the pros and cons of using any
smart drugs as daily brain enhancers, especially in light of the safer
alternatives you are about to discover: nootropics.
--- END PAGE 207 ---

--- PAGE 208 ---
NOOTROPICS 101
So smart drugs are a modern, largely synthetic, and somewhat risky
strategy for enhancing cognition. Proceed with caution. On the flip side, I
would classify nootropics as the complete opposite: traditional herbs and
extracts for cognitive enhancement, derived from ancestral practices and
time-honored wisdom. Sure, it’s possible to swallow too much St. John’s
wort or overdose on ginkgo and create the same neurotransmitter
imbalances you could create with a synthetic smart drug, but it is far more
difficult to harm your nervous system with a nootropic. And while you can
get synthetic nootropics, even those are more natural and not as harmful
as smart drugs because they don’t alter neurotransmitters, cardiovascular
function, or hormones quite as significantly.
Ayurvedic Nootropics
Traditional Indian and Chinese medical practitioners have tapped into the
cognition-boosting effects of plants and herbs for at least five thousand
years, since long before the first synthetic nootropic was created. Indian
Ayurvedic medicine includes a group of nootropic plants called medhya
rasayana, the four primary plants of which are mandukaparni,
yashtimadhu, guduchi, and shankhpushpi. One of the most common
supplements in Ayurvedic medicine is brahmi (otherwise known as
bacopa, water hyssop, thyme-leaved gratiola, herb of grace, and Indian
pennywort). Brahmi, which is most often called bacopa, is named after
Lord Brahma, the creator god and originator of Ayurveda, and has been
used for centuries to treat conditions ranging from pain and inflammation
to epilepsy and memory dysfunction.
Bacopa’s exact mechanism of action is not fully understood, but
research suggests it promotes antioxidant activity and protects neurons in
--- END PAGE 208 ---

--- PAGE 209 ---
the prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and corpus striatum against
cytotoxicity (cell death) and DNA damage associated with Alzheimer’s.
These parts of the brain control several important functions: the
prefrontal cortex is critical for rational, social, and personality behavior;
the hippocampus is thought to be the seat of memory and the limbic
system; and the striatum plays a role in the reward-associated release of
pleasurable neurotransmitters such as dopamine. So the protective effects
of bacopa help prevent the degeneration of many important cognitive
faculties. An effective dose ranges from 300 to 450 mg per day.
The product Brain Fuel, a liquid shot by my favorite all-things-from-
bees resource Beekeeper’s Naturals, is my preferred way to get bacopa, as
it combines bacopa with beehive-derived royal jelly and ginkgo biloba.
Should you want a creativity-enhancing experience, the nootropics
company Wukiyo has the product Bliss, a blend of bacopa, ashwagandha,
reishi, and a microdose of psilocybin that acts as a serotonin HT2A
receptor agonist to increase brain entropy, so all your neurons talk to each
other in a blissful way that lends itself well to creative pursuits or sensory-
enhanced adventures such as hiking or snowboarding. Wukiyo also has a
powerhouse of a product called Apex, which is a single tablet containing
several of the nootropics and smart drugs in this chapter, along with FL-
66, an ingredient that can inhibit the reuptake of dopamine by binding to
the dopamine-reuptake pump, leading to a focused, feel-good increase in
brain dopamine levels, and the neuroprotective agent CRL-21X, which
enhances cellular metabolism and reduces free radicals in neurons.
Warning: This one will keep you going for ten to twelve hours with a near-
modafinil-like effect, albeit a shorter-lasting one.
Ashwagandha, also called winter cherry, is another well-known
Ayurvedic nootropic that can improve cognitive development, memory,
and intelligence and reduce the effects of diseases like Parkinson’s,
Huntington’s, and Alzheimer’s. The optimal dose of ashwagandha is 2 g
--- END PAGE 209 ---

--- PAGE 210 ---
three times a day, for a total of 6 g per day. Like many ayurvedic herbs, the
quality of ashwagandha varies widely, but one good version is KSM-66.
The lesser-known but highly effective aloeweed, one of four Ayurvedic
herbs referred to as shankhpushpi, is also used to improve memory and
intellect, as well as to treat hypertension, epilepsy, and diabetes. Effective
doses range from 20 to 40 g per day. If ashwagandha doesn’t work for you,
aloeweed often will (Banyan Botanicals has a good one).
Celastrus paniculatus, also known as “intellect tree,” is one of the more
interesting Ayurvedic plants and one that I consume in the multi-
ingredient supplement Qualia Mind. In India, C. paniculatus is traditionally
taken in seed form, starting with ten seeds and working up to fifteen and
finally twenty. (On BoundlessBook.com/5, you’ll find links to both whole-
seed and powdered-seed forms.) Malkangni oil, derived from C.
paniculatus, is also a good supplement. It can be used to enhance memory
and intellectual capacity, improve dream recall, and induce lucid dreams.
In one study performed on healthy rats, malkangni oil was shown to
improve twenty-four-hour memory retention after a single dose, an effect
accompanied by a reduction in monoamine neurotransmitters. This
indicates a lower rate of loss of these neurotransmitters, which may help
treat conditions like depression. In another study, malkangni oil
administered for fourteen days reversed stress-induced spatial learning
and memory impairment and restored working memory. In mice with
memory deficits caused by the antinausea drug scopolamine, the oil has
been shown to improve both spatial and fear memory (a type of
conditioning through which an organism learns to avoid dangerous
situations or events).
Traditional Chinese Nootropics
--- END PAGE 210 ---

--- PAGE 211 ---
One of the most popular and well-known traditional Chinese nootropics is
ginkgo, derived from the Chinese maidenhair tree. It is seen as a symbol of
longevity and vitality, and research suggests that it can even stimulate the
growth of new neurons. Research also suggests that ginkgo flavonoids, the
main constituents of ginkgo extract, are potent antioxidants that have
been shown to reduce the effects of Alzheimer’s in mice as well as stabilize
and improve the cognitive performance of Alzheimer’s patients for six
months to one year. Effective doses of ginkgo range from 120 to 240 mg
taken one to four hours before a cognitively demanding task. To reduce
age-related cognitive decline, consume 40 to 120 mg three times daily.
Polygala tenuifolia (Yuan Zhi) is an herb used in traditional Chinese
medicine (TCM). As an anti-inflammatory, antidepressant, and anxiolytic,
it is used to improve memory and for colds and mild respiratory problems.
It can help protect against Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and other age-related
cognitive disorders; can promote the expression of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the hippocampus, resulting in improved
learning and memory; and has antidepressant activity due to monoamine
oxidase inhibition (MAOI), which promotes the release of dopamine and
norepinephrine. Like phosphatidylserine, it can inhibit the release of
cortisol, providing anti-anxiety benefits. This one stacks well with
Sabroxy, derived from a flavonoid found in the bark of the Oroxylum
indicum tree, which is another interesting compound researched for its
role in supporting cognitive well-being, including aspects of learning,
focus, and mental acuity, along with increasing levels of BDNF. These two,
along with L-tyrosine and L-theanine, are found in the nootropic blend
Notable Focus.
Another traditional Chinese brain-booster is danggui-shaoyao-san
(DSS). Research suggests that DSS can induce angiogenesis (the growth of
new blood vessels) and neurogenesis (the growth of new neurons), which
makes it a potential treatment in ischemic stroke therapy. Research
--- END PAGE 211 ---

--- PAGE 212 ---
suggests that DSS also improves free radical–mediated neurological
diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s, exhibits anti-inflammatory
and antioxidant activities, and reduces cell death in the hippocampus. This
promotes better moods, enhanced memory, and more balanced autonomic
nervous system function. Currently, there is limited research on proper
DSS dosing; for the most recent guidelines, visit BoundlessBook.com/5.
Vanillin
I love the musky, sweet smell and flavor of vanilla—but it’s more than a
flavor enhancer or perfume ingredient. Vanillin, the main component of
vanilla (also found in ginger, allspice, capsaicin, and cloves), enhances
cognition by boosting dopamine; brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF), which supports the development of neurons; and a similar
neuronal support factor, glial-derived neurotrophic factor (GLNF).
Vanillin also has potent pain-killing and mood-supporting effects and has
been used traditionally as a treatment for inflammation, anxiety, and
depression. The best way to prepare yourself a vanillin nootropic cocktail
is to purchase organic vanilla bean powder and mix it into coffee or tea, or
make your own vanilla extract: purchase organic vanilla beans (I prefer
Madagascar vanilla beans, which have a rich and full flavor and aroma;
avoid the tonka variety, as it can cause both liver damage and significant
blood thinning), slice the beans in half, and soak them in vodka for four to
six weeks to make your own vanilla tincture. This is far better than
purchasing vanilla extract because most store-bought extracts contain
artificial flavorings, corn syrup, and caramel color. Vanilla extract or
powder is also a wonderful flavor addition to a cup of coffee.
Caffeine
--- END PAGE 212 ---

--- PAGE 213 ---
Perhaps the most well-known and widely used natural stimulant and
neuroenhancer is—drumroll, please—caffeine. Research suggests that
caffeine can prevent memory deficits in experimental models of
Alzheimer’s and may even restore memory following impairment. In
studies with college students, caffeine was shown to have particularly
potent effects on memory improvement when consumed during students’
nonoptimal time of day, early in the morning.
In nature, caffeine is never found in an isolated state; it is always found
in a plant, such as tea leaves or coffee beans, that contains other
compounds that enhance caffeine’s effects, including cholesterols,
polyphenols, and antioxidants. In fact, one study determined that caffeine
alone does not account for the cognition-enhancing benefits of drinking
coffee. Rather, the phytochemical content of coffee (which contains over a
thousand different natural chemicals!) gives it potent antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory properties that complement caffeine’s neuroprotective
effects on the central nervous system. Effective doses of caffeine range
from 60 to 100 mg, which you can easily get from an 8-ounce cup o’ joe.
A word of caution: Some people are slow caffeine oxidizers, as revealed
by a salivary genetic analysis. These individuals carry copies of a gene
called COMT that makes them more likely to produce high amounts of or
have reduced turnover rates of a catecholamine class of neurotransmitters
—which includes dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. For these
individuals, a single cup o’ joe can bestow some serious jitters, and
multiple cups of caffeinated coffee are certainly not advised.
Nicotine
Although cigarettes have rightfully been vilified when it comes to health
and longevity, nicotine itself has been shown to improve working memory
—though it’s best obtained some way other than sucking it through a
--- END PAGE 213 ---

--- PAGE 214 ---
cancer stick. Research also suggests that oral consumption of nicotine
improves memory consolidation during learning by increasing the density
and efficiency of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) in the
cholinergic system, the part of the nervous system responsible for
memory function. In addition, people suffering from cognitive deficits
combined with a psychiatric condition (such as patients with
schizophrenia) may enjoy even greater neuroprotection from nicotine
consumption than healthy individuals.
Interestingly, nicotine’s addictive potential and its cognition-
enhancing benefits are inextricable: the processes are closely linked
through the neurotransmitters they depend on. Nicotine is addictive
because it binds to nAChRs, which trigger the release of feel-good
neurotransmitters like dopamine and glutamate, and your body responds
by creating more nAChRs—and then you have to consume more and more
nicotine to continue to feel its effects. When you attempt to quit, you
experience withdrawal symptoms, and you have to smoke or consume
some form of nicotine just to function normally.
But just as it plays a role in the action-reward cycle that creates
nicotine addiction, dopamine also plays a role in enhancing a number of
cognitive processes, such as working memory. It enhances cognition by
acting on dopamine pathways and modulates addiction by acting on limbic
pathways. These pathways are largely distinct—there may be some
overlap, but not much—but nicotine stimulates strong dopaminergic
activity in both.
Research has shown that while moderate doses of nicotine typically
enhance cognition, high doses can inhibit cognitive performance. So, when
it comes to dosing nicotine, moderation and precision are key. Effective
doses range from 2 to 4 mg administered over twenty to thirty minutes,
doses easily available in the form of nicotine gum or spray.
--- END PAGE 214 ---

--- PAGE 215 ---
While I am not a fan of the artificial sweeteners it contains, I keep a
small stash of 2 to 4 mg nicotine gum in my fanny pack for occasional use.
The Rugby transdermal patch by GSK is also handy and, when slapped on
the lower right side of the abdomen, can even assist with constipation by
stimulating the vagus nerve and increasing bowel motility. Finally, in a
podcast with Jonathan Otto available on my website, we discuss how
nicotine can block pesticides, herbicides, vaccine adjuvants, and other
toxins from attaching to cell receptors.
Of course, nicotine can be addictive and can cause acid reflux and
esophageal irritation when overused orally. It can also raise blood pressure
and even contribute to erectile dysfunction due to its vasoconstrictive
effects. So I recommend limiting yourself to no more than one or two
toothpicks, mints, or pieces of gum per day and using them only on more
cognitively demanding days or, since nicotine is also a performance
enhancer, prior to a workout. To enhance physical performance, consume
100 mg or more of caffeine and 2.5 mg or more of nicotine. If you struggle
with nicotine addiction, black pepper extract or essential oil can quell
cravings, especially when you use a special chemical-free inhalation device
called the FUM (think vaping without the vaping).
Health Vaping 101
One nifty trick I learned from health pioneer Paul Chek is that using a
vaporizer in a nontraditional way can give you a dose of uplifting nicotine
from organic tobacco and also provide a lung-based delivery for a host of
compounds for either stimulation or relaxation, depending on the blend you
pick.
For example, one pick-me-up blend I use in the Da Buddha vaporizer that
sits on my desk combines organic tobacco, dried and ground green tea
leaves, and a couple of drops of cinnamon oil or frankincense. For a more
relaxing blend, I use an indica cannabis strain, dried and ground chamomile
--- END PAGE 215 ---

--- PAGE 216 ---
tea leaves, and a small sprinkling of lavender essential oil. It’s fun to come up
with your own recipes, but here are a few ideas to get your brain spinning:
• Peppermint leaves or oil, which improves blood circulation, raises
alertness, and clears the lungs and respiratory passages
• Gotu kola leaves or extract, which sharpens memory and concentration
• Skullcap or hops, which act as mild sedatives and have a calming effect.
(Skullcap is also good for headaches, which makes me wonder if that’s
how it got its name.)
• Wild oats, which reduce mental tension and anxiety
• Cloves, which reduce food cravings
• Primrose, which helps heal lung damage from smoking
• Chamomile, which acts as an antidepressant and promotes relaxation and
sleep
• Ginger root, which is good for indigestion or stomach cramps, and makes
a good digestif before meals
• Marijuana—indica strain for relaxation, sativa strain as a pick-me-up
Whatever you choose, be sure to select herbicide- and pesticide-free leaves
and plants. I recommend the Da Buddha or the Volcano vaporizer because
they offer a variety of temperature settings for different strains and blends
(Paul Chek uses the Volcano).
Cannabidiol
Cannabidiol, or CBD, makes up about 40 percent of a cannabis plant.
Unlike THC, the compound that produces psychoactive effects and is
most often associated with the effects of marijuana, CBD contains potent
medicinal properties that do not lead to a high or paranoia. Many forms of
CBD are legal in most states and countries and are approved for use by
most sports governing bodies. CBD has been shown to enhance focus,
creativity, and mood and reduce general anxiety, social anxiety, chronic
pain, stress, ADHD, insomnia, headaches, and inflammation.
--- END PAGE 216 ---

--- PAGE 217 ---
Since CBD doesn’t get you high and has far less addictive potential
than THC, you can function quite well, reduce anxiety, maintain focus,
and sleep better when consuming small daily amounts of CBD. But there
is one caveat: CBD is not highly absorbable and needs to be blended with
compounds such as curcuminoids or rendered more bioavailable for oral
absorption. This means the most effective delivery mechanisms are
vaping, a sublingual oil, or a capsule that has been blended with turmeric
extracts. In addition, combining CBD and THC allows you to microdose
marijuana for a mild cognitive edge without the lack of focus, increased
appetite, or short-term memory loss associated with the high that THC
tends to cause.
An effective dose of CBD begins at 10 mg. If you combine it with THC,
blend it in a ratio of ten parts CBD to one part THC, or five parts CBD to
one part THC (for example, 10 mg of CBD and 1 mg of THC). I
recommend starting on the lower end and slowly increasing the dose to
find your optimal microdose. I personally have found 10 to 20 mg of CBD
to help manage anxiety and stress and boost focus. Higher doses of
between 30 and 40 mg can help you fall asleep more easily. In fact, I have
taken doses as high as 100 mg before bed, slept like a baby, and woken up
with no grogginess. In contrast, in addition to causing free radical damage
in the brain’s mitochondria, THC can reduce REM sleep, resulting in less
dreaming, emotional processing, and memory consolidation during sleep.
CBD tolerances vary from individual to individual, and if you take it and
notice nothing, I recommend you try more. Just be sure to get it from an
organic source since the cannabis plant is a bioremediant that can collect
metals and toxins from the soil it’s grown in.
Traditional Nootropics from Around the
World
--- END PAGE 217 ---

--- PAGE 218 ---
Much to the chagrin of folks who argue that our ancestors never would
have taken a supplement, especially one that affects cognition, the fact is
many ancestral populations around the world have used nootropic plants
for millennia.
For example, Indigenous Andean groups in South America have used
maca root for thousands of years. It is used to improve sexual function,
memory, and learning as well as to reduce the effects of osteoporosis.
Effective doses range from 1,500 to 3,000 mg.
Yerba mate is a tea made from a plant of the holly family (similar to
mistletoe) and is consumed by many tribes across South America. It has
been shown to improve cholesterol levels, protect the liver, and stimulate
central nervous system activity. Effective doses range from 990 milliliters
to 1.5 liters of tea per day.
Green tea is widely consumed in many cultures, especially in Asia, and
is known to have potent health benefits due to its polyphenol content,
especially the flavanols and flavonols. In cell cultures and animal studies,
the polyphenols in green tea have prevented neurotoxin-induced cell
injury. Green tea also has anti-inflammatory properties and, according to a
study performed on mice, may delay age-related memory loss. It is safe to
drink several cups of green tea per day, but it may be more efficient to take
a green tea extract supplement to reach a daily dose of 400 to 500 mg of
epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), the primary active component of green
tea.
Black ant extract is another fascinating nootropic. Powdered extract
from the polyrhachis ant is an ancient Chinese tonic derived from ants
that live up high in the mountains, often found among ginseng roots. This
stuff has been named the “herb of kings,” and for good reason: it contains
a surprising amount of amino acids, vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants.
In addition to containing high amounts of ATP, it acts to modulate the
immune system, build stress resistance, and even provide high amounts of
--- END PAGE 218 ---

--- PAGE 219 ---
ecdysterone, a growth hormone in insects that can have anabolic (muscle-
building) effects. Black ant extract is also extremely high in zinc, a mineral
vital for muscle contractions, cellular growth and division, vision, the
immune system, and libido. In my own experimentation with small
amounts (½ to 1 teaspoon) of black ant extract, I’ve found it to be a
perfect preworkout energy boost that also gives about four to five hours of
focused energy and mental performance.
Then there’s one of my favorites: lion’s mane. Also known as the
hedgehog mushroom, lion’s mane is an edible fungus with a long history of
use in traditional Chinese medicine. It is particularly rich in ß-glucan
polysaccharides, which are responsible for the neuroprotective and
cognition-enhancing properties of this mushroom. Lion’s mane increases
nerve growth factor levels, which causes enhanced neuronal growth,
neuron regeneration, and synaptic plasticity. It can also improve
myelination, resulting in enhanced neuronal communication and nerve
regeneration, improve memory, decrease neuronal excitability and
excitotoxicity, protect neurons from inflammatory damage, and even
reduce anxiety and stress. In clinical studies evaluating the effects of lion’s
mane on cognitive function, dosages from 750 mg up to as much as 5 g per
day have been used.
Synthetic Nootropics
The realm of natural nootropics is accompanied by a family of synthetic
nootropics not found in nature but synthesized in a laboratory, called
racetams, which includes piracetam, aniracetam, oxiracetam,
phenylpiracetam, and the anticonvulsant drugs levetiracetam and
seletracetam. Most racetams act on central nervous system receptors,
neurotransmitters, the AMPA receptors responsible for fast synaptic
--- END PAGE 219 ---

--- PAGE 220 ---
transmission, and muscarinic receptors (interestingly, this is the same
excitatory receptor that the fringe nootropic black ant extract acts on).
Piracetam, one of the more popular racetams, directly enhances
learning, memory, and attention and can, with no observed adverse side
effects, restore cognitive performance in patients who have suffered
cranial trauma, inflammation, strokes, and ischemic complications (loss of
blood flow to a region) following coronary bypass surgery. It can also
improve symptoms of delirium and reduce depression and anxiety. In
adults, the standard dosage of piracetam ranges from 1,200 to 4,800 mg
divided into three smaller doses throughout the day.
Aniracetam has been shown to protect cells from the effects of
glutamate excitotoxicity, resulting in an overall neuroprotective effect.
While you may not be shoveling mouthfuls of glutamate down your hatch
or eating cartons of MSG-laden Chinese food each night, aniracetam can
help protect your brain from inflammation caused by other central
nervous system irritants, such as herbicides, pesticides, and rancid oils.
Effective doses of aniracetam range from a single 400 mg dose to two
doses of 500 to 750 mg per day, taken with meals.
The following are some other popular synthetic nootropics.
NOOPEPT
The neuroprotector noopept can improve memory and attention and
reduce depression and anxiety. Noopept acts similarly to racetams to
improve overall brain function. Effective doses range from 10 to 30 mg per
day.
PHENYLETHYLAMINE
Phenylethylamine can improve mood and increase attention and
concentration. Known as the “love drug,” it has been shown to heighten
feelings of arousal, excitement, and euphoria. There is little research that
--- END PAGE 220 ---

--- PAGE 221 ---
indicates an effective dose, but recommendations range from 300 to 1,000
mg per day.
URIDINE MONOPHOSPHATE
Uridine monophosphate enhances learning, memory, and overall cognitive
function. Effective doses range from 500 to 1,000 mg per day.
PHOSPHATIDYLSERINE
Phosphatidylserine naturally occurs in high concentrations in the brain
and has been shown to reduce stress, cortisol levels, and physical fatigue;
improve ADHD and forgetfulness; and increase mental processing and
memory. An effective dosage is 100 mg taken three times daily, but
anything over that may lead to adverse side effects such as insomnia.
HORDENINE HCL
Hordenine HCl occurs in high amounts in plants, such as barley grass, and
is known to help burn fat, improve metabolism, and increase energy,
alertness, and concentration. There is insufficient evidence to make any
claim about dosage, but most supplements contain 30 mg to be taken two
or three times daily.
VINPOCETINE
Vinpocetine protects the brain against toxins, increases blood flow to the
brain, lowers inflammation, reduces fatigue, and increases attention,
memory, and alertness. Effective daily dosages range from 15 to 60 mg,
best split into separate doses and taken three times per day, preferably
with meals.
PARAXANTHINE
--- END PAGE 221 ---

--- PAGE 222 ---
Paraxanthine is a bit like caffeine’s cool, collected cousin who shows up to
the party and steals the show. It’s basically a natural metabolite of caffeine
that’s been engineered to enhance cognitive function and athletic
performance without the pesky side effects such as jitters, sleep
disruption, or withdrawal that come with consuming too much caffeine.
As a nootropic, it enhances cognitive functions such as memory, focus,
and overall mental performance. By blocking adenosine receptors,
paraxanthine can increase the levels of other neurotransmitters, such as
dopamine and norepinephrine, leading to improved alertness and
wakefulness. Yet, oddly, I can use paraxanthine prior to an evening
workout and sleep just fine afterward.
Paraxanthine can also enhance cerebral blood flow, have a positive
impact on mood and motivation, and increase endurance and reduce
perceived effort during exercise. It may even have neuroprotective
properties, potentially helping protect the brain from damage or
degeneration. Most notably, it produces in many people a unique increase
in confidence and swagger, making it great for social functions, cocktail
parties, dates, or big speeches. Most of these effects kick in at about 200 to
400 mg of paraxanthine. My preferred delivery method is the Update
energy drink, which blends paraxanthine with a stack of nootropics
including N-acetyl L-tyrosine, taurine, alpha GPC, L-theanine, 5-HTP, and
vitamin B .12
METHYLENE BLUE
More commonly known as “fish tank cleaner,” methylene blue can be a
potent mitochondria booster and cognitive enhancer—assuming you take
a pharmaceutical-grade version free of impurities like arsenic, aluminum,
cadmium, mercury, and lead. Warning: Unless you use a dropper bottle,
place the dropper at the base of your tongue, and chase it with a glass of
water, it will turn your mouth Smurf blue for hours, though swishing with
--- END PAGE 222 ---

--- PAGE 223 ---
baking soda can help remove the blue stains more quickly. It can also
irreversibly stain anything it comes into contact with unless you clean it
up quickly with an alcohol-based sanitizer before it is absorbed.
Methylene blue has been used to treat Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s,
Parkinson’s, and dementia; to prevent amyloid plaque buildup in the brain;
to restore mitochondrial function; and to act as a powerful antiviral and
potential treatment for Lyme disease. In one clinical trial, methylene blue
improved attention span, short-term memory, and memory retrieval from
long-term memory. It has also been shown to increase memory
consolidation (a process that maintains, stabilizes, and strengthens
memories stored in the long-term memory) and even to have
neuroprotective effects against brain inflammation and glutamate-induced
excitotoxicity.
Effective doses recommended by many medical practitioners range
from 1 to 4 mg per kilogram of body weight, but more is not better, since
excessive use can lead to high levels of free radicals, oxidation, and
inflammation. For example, I use only 10 to 30 mg per day, on just two to
four days per week, 60 to 90 minutes prior to any red-light therapy. In his
book Magic Bullet, Dr. John Lieurance describes how his clinic utilizes
methylene blue IVs and suppositories, often combined with red light and
hyperbaric oxygen (HBOT), a tactic I and many other biohackers have
adopted at home with oral methylene blue supplementation.
A few good brands include Dr. Lieurance’s MitoZen products,
Troscriptions under-tongue troches, and the BioBlue or 10X liquid
dropper. Because methylene blue and, similarly, dark black shilajit or a
greenish-blue photocyanin like spirulina or chlorella can interact with
photons of red light to help the body produce more ATP, these compounds
are fantastic for mental energy when paired with an infrared sauna, red-
light therapy, or even a walk in the sunlight. Finally, refrain from using
methylene blue if you have a G6PD deficiency, kidney or liver issues, or
--- END PAGE 223 ---

--- PAGE 224 ---
low blood pressure, and be cautious and consult with a healthcare
professional if you are on medications that increase serotonin levels, like
MAOIs and SSRIs, as combining them with methylene blue can lead to a
potentially fatal condition called serotonin syndrome.
HOW TO ENHANCE THE EFFECTS
OF NOOTROPICS AND SMART
DRUGS
Certain compounds can enhance the effects of nootropics, smart drugs,
and psychedelics (addressed later in this chapter) and even prevent the
crash so often associated with such brain-boosters. These compounds,
specifically the following seven, work primarily by providing you with
molecules and nutrients that can quickly become depleted as your brain
works harder and faster. When you intelligently combine nootropics,
smart drugs, and psychedelics with choline donors, amino acids,
adaptogens, neurovitamins, neurominerals, anti-inflammatories,
antioxidants, and peptides, you can prevent many of the deficiencies,
jittery side effects, and crashes that tend to arise with high, frequent doses
of brain-boosters, as well as enhance and prolong the effects of your
supplementation protocol.
1. Choline Donors
Choline is essential for brain development, detoxification, metabolism,
muscle movement, digestion, and liver and gallbladder function. Choline
donors work through different pathways in the nervous system to ensure
your brain and body get adequate amounts of choline. When you are
--- END PAGE 224 ---

--- PAGE 225 ---
deficient in choline, you are more likely to crash after using a brain-
booster, and the brain-booster itself may not work as efficiently. The
following are the most potent choline donors.
CENTROPHENOXINE
Centrophenoxine protects the brain, enhances and improves working
memory, and has antiaging and antioxidant effects. Effective dosages
range from one to three doses of 250 mg per day, but elderly individuals
may respond better to three to six doses per day.
CITICOLINE
Citicoline is a combination of choline and cytidine that is used to reduce
memory impairment, cognitive decline, and brain damage and to improve
learning and attention. Effective doses range from 1 to 2 g per day.
ALPHA GPC
Alpha GPC prevents cognitive decline, protects the brain, reduces
inflammation, and increases attention span, memory, and growth
hormone production (which may also slow the effects of aging and help
you lose weight). An effective dosage is 400 mg three times per day.
2. Amino Acids
Amino acids are precursors to neurotransmitters and perform many
physiological functions, such as repairing tissues, providing energy,
improving mental and physical performance, and helping to grow or
maintain muscle. The specific amino acids listed here are especially
beneficial for the brain.
ACETYL-L-CARNITINE
--- END PAGE 225 ---

--- PAGE 226 ---
Acetyl-L-carnitine can easily cross the blood-brain barrier and enhances
cognitive processes such as memory, learning, and focus. It also improves
brain-energy metabolism, reduces fatigue, and has potent antiaging and
brain-protecting effects, and it can induce the production of more
mitochondria, which increases energy production. Effective doses range
from 500 to 1,500 mg per day.
N-ACETYL-TYROSINE
N-acetyl-tyrosine improves focus, motivation, memory, learning, and
mood. Effective doses range from 500 to 2,000 mg per day. Some research
indicates that the effectiveness of tyrosine supplementation depends on
proper neurotransmitter synthesis and function. This means your
response to tyrosine may depend on the health of your neurotransmitters.
TAURINE
Taurine acts as an antioxidant and can improve memory, reduce anxiety,
and promote sleep and relaxation. Effective doses range from 500 to 2,000
mg, although doses as high as 3,000 mg can be taken with little risk of
adverse effects.
L-THEANINE
L-theanine is an antioxidant with neuroprotective properties. It can
improve mood, focus, and memory, reduce anxiety, and promote sleep and
relaxation. Effective doses range from 100 to 200 mg daily. I have found
that 400 mg in a cup of coffee can significantly reduce caffeine’s side
effects, such as excessive wakefulness or the jitters.
DL-PHENYLALANINE
DL-phenylalanine is a combination of two forms of the essential amino
acid phenylalanine—the “D” form and the “L” form—and can easily cross
--- END PAGE 226 ---

--- PAGE 227 ---
the blood-brain barrier. DL-phenylalanine enhances mental alertness,
mood, memory, and learning and reduces pain and depression. Effective
doses range from 1 to 5 g per day.
As a word of caution, some people may not be able to handle
phenylalanine due to a condition called phenylketonuria (PKU). PKU is a
genetic disorder characterized by a deficiency of phenylalanine
hydroxylase, the enzyme that breaks down phenylalanine. When excess
phenylalanine accumulates, it can lead to growth failure, microcephaly (an
abnormally small head, often due to poor brain development), seizures,
developmental delay, severe intellectual impairment, and, in mild cases, a
musty odor in the breath, skin rashes, hyperactivity, and anxiety.
There are less severe forms, such as variant PKU and non-PKU
hyperphenylalaninemia, that are associated with a smaller risk of brain
damage, and people with very mild cases of PKU may not even require
treatment as long as they consume a low-phenylalanine diet. PKU can be
easily detected with a simple blood test, and all states in the United States
require a PKU test for every newborn—so if you live in the US, you likely
already know whether or not you have it.
ESSENTIAL AMINO ACIDS (EAAS)
The nine essential amino acids—histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine,
methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine—are
essential because your body can’t produce them on its own; you must
consume them via diet or supplements. A balanced supply of EAAs is
necessary for optimal brain function, and while there is limited
information on the precise mechanisms by which different EAAs benefit
cognition, research suggests that amino acids such as histidine and
tryptophan are necessary for neurotransmitter function and neuronal
signaling.
--- END PAGE 227 ---

--- PAGE 228 ---
Rather than taking all the amino acids listed above individually, you
can try my shotgun approach, which is to take a blend of EAAs mixed in a
precise ratio to make them as effective as possible. This is the exact ratio
found in Kion Aminos, which you can find at GetKion.com. I dose with
about 10 to 20 g per day.
3. Neurovitamins
Many vitamins can enhance brain regulation and developmental processes
and prevent damage to neurons. The following are the best vitamins to
enhance any nootropic or smart drug you use.
VITAMIN B1
Also known as thiamine, vitamin B is best taken in the fat-soluble form
1 benfotiamine, which increases energy, mood, and alertness and reduces
pain and advanced glycation end products (compounds that accelerate
brain degeneration). Research suggests that, since high doses of vitamin B1
usually result in large amounts of unabsorbed B1 being excreted, a dose of
30 mg per day is sufficient. As a word of caution, alcohol can inhibit
absorption of vitamin B , so if you want the full benefits, limit or avoid
1alcohol on days you take vitamin B .1
VITAMIN B3
Vitamin B , when consumed in the form niacinamide (also called
3nicotinamide), can reduce inflammation, anxiety, and age-related
cognitive impairment. An effective dose is 15 mg per day, but people
suffering from trauma, hypoxia, stress, or genetic mutations can benefit
from higher doses. The supplements NR, NMN, and NAD are even better
ways to boost niacinamide since they can simultaneously raise NAD+, a
--- END PAGE 228 ---

--- PAGE 229 ---
molecule that your body uses to regulate cellular metabolism, aging, and
DNA repair.
VITAMIN B5
Vitamin B ’s water-soluble form calcium pantothenate improves
5concentration, memory, and learning and reduces brain fog. Effective
doses range from 500 to 1,000 mg per day.
VITAMIN B6
When taken in the highly bioactive form pyridoxal-5-phosphate, vitamin
B₆ increases mental and physical energy, prevents neuronal damage, and
plays a role in memory formation, focus, motivation, and mood and sleep
regulation. Effective doses are 1.5 mg per day for healthy women and 2 mg
per day for healthy men, although women who are pregnant or lactating
may need to take up to 2 mg.
VITAMIN B12
When taken in the form methylcobalamin, vitamin B can improve mood,
12 memory, focus, and energy, and reduce anxiety, pain, and cognitive
decline. Effective doses range from 1 to 2 mg per day.
VITAMIN C
Vitamin C in the form of ascorbic acid has antioxidant and
neuroprotective effects, reduces fatigue, and improves mood and blood
flow. Effective doses range from 90 to 150 mg per day.
VITAMIN D3
When taken in an absorbable form like cholecalciferol or, even better, the
calcifediol found in the supplement Dvelop, vitamin D₃ has powerful
--- END PAGE 229 ---

--- PAGE 230 ---
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects and delays brain degeneration
and cognitive decline. Effective doses range from 1,500 to 2,000 IU per
day.
Interestingly, many people (including me!) have genetic factors, such
as high pigmentation or interference with the conversion of cholesterol to
vitamin D in response to sunlight, that prevent them from properly
synthesizing vitamin D from sun exposure. This can be ascertained with a
salivary genetic test that looks at the genes CYP27B1 and GC. These
individuals may need to supplement with vitamin D₃ no matter how much
sunlight they get. Just be sure that if you use vitamin D₃, you pair it with
vitamin K₂ at 100 to 150 mcg per day and magnesium at 200 to 400 mg per
day. Otherwise, you’ll experience poor absorption and the potential for a
buildup of excess calcium in your blood.
4. Adaptogens
Adaptogens are plant extracts that protect your body and brain from the
effects of excess stress. A veritable Swiss Army knife for your physiology,
they have been shown to support neurogenesis, hormone production, and
adrenal and HPA axis regulation, regulate cellular energy homeostasis,
regenerate tissue, and improve learning and memory.
MUCUNA PRURIENS
Mucuna pruriens enhances mood, reduces anxiety and stress, protects the
brain, stimulates sex drive, and increases focus and motivation. Effective
doses range from 12.5 to 17.5 mg per kilogram of body weight per day.
COLEUS FORSKOHLII
Coleus forskohlii improves learning, memory, and mental stamina and
reduces fatigue and inflammation. Effective doses are about 7.5 g per day
--- END PAGE 230 ---

--- PAGE 231 ---
for healthy women and about 9 g for healthy men.
RHODIOLA ROSEA (RHODIOLA)
Rhodiola improves mood, motivation, memory, and concentration and
reduces fatigue and oxidative stress. Research suggests that a daily dose as
low as 50 mg can reduce fatigue, while safe neural enhancement occurs at
1,500 mg per day.
REISHI
Reishi, one of my favorite adaptogenic mushrooms for relaxation, can
reduce fatigue and depression, take the edge off if you happen to be, say,
overcaffeinated or overstimulated, and, as a bonus, has potential
anticancer properties. Effective doses of reishi extract are 5 to 10 g per day.
5. Neurominerals
Neurominerals, like neurovitamins, are highly absorbable and can cross
the blood-brain barrier to improve cognition. They are necessary for a
host of physiological processes and, when combined, enhance each other’s
effects.
LITHIUM OROTATE
The mineral lithium orotate preserves cognitive function, improves mood,
and detoxifies the brain. Lithium has also been reported to be beneficial as
an Alzheimer’s treatment. Effective doses range from 5 to 150 mg per day.
MAGNESIUM THREONATE
Magnesium threonate is the most effective form for increasing magnesium
ions in the brain and improving cognitive function. It can improve
--- END PAGE 231 ---

--- PAGE 232 ---
learning, memory, sleep quality, and mood and reduces anxiety and the
effects of neuropathic pain (pain caused by nerve damage). Research
suggests that high doses around 600 mg per kilogram of body weight are
effective.
ZINC PICOLINATE
Zinc picolinate is an antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and immune-system-
boosting mineral that also helps improve memory, mood, and neuronal
growth. Research suggests that the current recommended intake of zinc—
8 to 14 mg per day—is effective at maintaining homeostasis. Mild zinc
deficiency can be treated with two to three times this amount, and
moderate to severe deficiency with four to five times this amount.
6. Anti-inflammatories and Antioxidants
These compounds specifically address oxidative stress and inflammation
in the brain. They also support the transport and utilization of nutrients
and regulate nervous system stimulation, hormonal secretion, and
cholesterol levels. The best anti-inflammatories and antioxidants for the
brain also tend to support mitochondrial health and cellular longevity
(which will be discussed in more detail in chapter 19).
PQQ
PQQ reduces neurodegeneration and cognitive decline, promotes
neuronal growth and survival, and improves sleep, energy, memory, and
stress response. PQQ also has potent mitochondrial and antiaging
properties (I’ll talk more about that in chapter 19). An effective dose is 0.3
mg per day.
QUERCETIN
--- END PAGE 232 ---

--- PAGE 233 ---
Quercetin, found in fruits and vegetables, can delay cognitive decline,
protect neurons from toxins, regulate estrogen and androgen, and reduce
inflammation. As a natural antihistamine, it’s also been shown to stabilize
mast cells (the immune cells that release histamines). Effective doses
range from 50 to 150 mg per kilogram of body weight per day.
CURCUMIN
Curcumin is the active component of the spice turmeric. It possesses
powerful anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects and can improve
memory and mood, reduce oxidative stress and chronic pain, and delay
aging. An effective dose is up to 8 g per day. Curcumin can be made far
more absorbable by blending it with oils such as coconut oil or combining
it with black pepper or the black pepper extract called piperine.
DHA
As you learned in chapter 4, DHA is the omega-3 fatty acid most abundant
in the brain. It has been shown to improve memory, learning, and mood
and reduce oxidative stress, inflammation, and telomere shortening (a
chromosomal indication of how fast you are aging). Effective doses range
from 500 to 1,000 mg daily.
GREEN TEA EXTRACT
Green tea extract enhances learning abilities, memory, and blood flow,
delays aging, and may reduce anxiety and chronic fatigue. When green tea
extract is paired with quercetin and L-theanine, the cognitive effects
become synergistic, meaning they enhance each other to produce a greater
effect. Effective doses range from 50 to 500 mg per day, although higher
doses have been associated with side effects like nausea.
BIOPERINE
--- END PAGE 233 ---

--- PAGE 234 ---
Bioperine is derived from the black pepper extract piperine. It increases
the absorption of other nutrients, has anti-inflammatory effects
(especially when combined with curcumin), and increases motivation,
focus, productivity, and reasoning skills while stabilizing mood. An
effective dose is 20 mg per day.
7. Peptides
No discussion of cognitive enhancement would be complete without
addressing peptides, which are short amino acid sequences that target
intended cells to elicit certain effects—including slowed aging, fat loss,
muscle gain, sexual enhancement, and better brain function—with laser-
like specificity.
The peptide Semax is one of my favorite nootropic-like peptides. It
was originally synthesized in Russia during the 1980s with the express
intention to improve cognitive function. In addition to stimulating the
central nervous system, it works to modulate receptor sensitivity for a
variety of neurotransmitters and brain chemicals, including acetylcholine,
dopamine, serotonin, adenosine, and histamine.
In Russia, Semax is used to prevent and treat circulatory disorders,
including stroke. It is also used as a nootropic, specifically to enhance
memory and control the negative effects of stress on cognitive function. It
has been shown to protect the body and brain from various types of
oxidative damage and can enhance neurogenesis by increasing levels of
BDNF.
Like most peptides, Semax is so potent that only a small dose is
needed to achieve the desired results. For most people, 0.5 to 1.0 mg per
day is plenty. Because most peptides are poorly absorbed when taken
orally, Semax is usually taken as a nasal spray or subcutaneous injection.
Semax combines well with the racetam family of nootropics (see here),
--- END PAGE 234 ---

--- PAGE 235 ---
and, in my experience, a Semax-racetam combo can give four to five hours
of focused cognitive performance and focus without deleteriously
affecting sleep or causing anxiety or jitters.
For an even bigger boost in brain function, Semax works well when
combined with the peptide Selank, which usually comes in a nasal spray
and can be used as two sprays once daily. Selank alone can simulate
stimulants, tranquilizers, ADHD treatments, and antidepressants all at
once. It is also well-studied for cognitive recovery from strokes and can
speed up recovery from traumatic brain injury (TBI).
Dihexa is another peptide that I like for the brain, as it is magnitudes
more powerful than BDNF, can reverse neurological damage caused by
Alzheimer’s, and is useful for treating Parkinson’s disease.
Finally, in my opinion, the two strongest cognitive-enhancing peptides
are P21 and Adamax. You can think of P21 as heavy-duty brain repair and
Adamax as a heavy-duty nootropic. P21 is so powerful that it boosts
neurogenesis in Alzheimer’s brains above that of normal controls. It can
enhance neurogenesis, turbocharge BDNF expression, repair brain
damage, and, in rodent models, has a strong anti-Alzheimer’s effect. For
brain fog, mental clarity, word recall, and verbal acuity, nothing beats it. I
recommend stacking it with Adamax, a more potent form of Semax with
enhanced BBB penetration. It also boosts neurogenesis via both BDNF
and nerve growth factor (NGF) and noticeably increases motivation and
drive while reducing procrastination, strengthens any stimulant you take
along with it, and even increases sensory perceptions such as color and
sound. Doses are 100 to 200 mcg per day of Adamax and 1 mg per day of
P21.
Though I’ve given “per day” references, I don’t recommend stacking
all the peptides every day. These days, I use a Semax/Selank combo about
twice a week and an Adamax/P21 combo twice a week. VIP, mentioned in
--- END PAGE 235 ---

--- PAGE 236 ---
chapter 4 as a useful peptide for brain mold and mycotoxin issues, is
something I use about twice per week.
You should know that many peptides aren’t FDA-approved because
they aren’t patentable; therefore, you won’t see them recommended by
most mainstream health authorities or mentioned on most health
websites. Issues surrounding patents are a big deal in the peptide space.
Unless a drug company is going to be able to patent a peptide, turn it into
a drug, and make a lot of money from doing so, they aren’t going to waste
time, funds, and effort seeking FDA approval. Therefore, most peptides are
not FDA-approved and likely won’t be in the foreseeable future. Even the
FDA itself has issued cautionary letters to compounding pharmacies
pointing out that certain peptides cannot be compounded legally because
they don’t have a monograph in the US Pharmacopeia or National
Formulary, aren’t part of any drug approved by the FDA for human use,
and aren’t included in the 503A list of bulk substances.
While most peptides are not outright illegal, their legal status depends
on their intended use, claims made about them, and whether they are
FDA-approved for a specific use. The fact that most peptides are not FDA-
approved means that they haven’t undergone the FDA’s rigorous review
process for safety, effectiveness, and quality. Given the unregulated nature
of peptides and their exclusion from FDA approval, sourcing them can be
challenging. I have included several helpful resources for peptides on the
resources page for this chapter at BoundlessBook.com/5.
THE BEST BRAIN-BOOSTING
STACKS
There are over a thousand websites and hundreds of reference guides
chock-full of complicated methods for combining the compounds
--- END PAGE 236 ---

--- PAGE 237 ---
described in this chapter, similar to the peptide stacks I just mentioned.
There is a reason for this: as you have probably guessed by now, stacking
nootropics can be far more effective than consuming a single, lonely
nootropic in isolation. For example, adding choline or L-theanine to your
morning coffee can make your brain feel fresh for hours. Mixing curcumin
with black pepper can dramatically amp up the neural anti-inflammatory
effects of both. Combating the edge of microdosed LSD or psilocybin with
an adaptogen like reishi or rhodiola can assist with any jittery feelings.
And ultimately, a teaspoon of lion’s mane mushroom extract just isn’t as
titillating as lion’s mane blended with caffeine, L-theanine, nicotine, a
touch of vinpocetine, and—for the brave soul—a tiny bit of psilocybin.
Take piracetam as another example. Piracetam has been shown to
improve cell membrane function and act as a neuroprotector. When
combined with other membrane stabilizers like choline and DHA,
piracetam can improve and maintain efficient neuronal signaling, which
improves cognition and reduces the risk of a crash after taking nootropics.
The supplement world is saturated with brain-boosting blends. It can
be difficult to cut through the confusion and figure out what works and
what could be a waste of time and money—or downright dangerous. So as
you create your own stack, you must carefully think about your specific
needs and goals.
If you want to reduce anxiety and depression but don’t necessarily care
to enhance your cognitive performance and don’t need to get through a
day of sleep deprivation, you could stick to a single nootropic that
increases dopamine levels, such as Mucuna pruriens or tryptophan. If you
want to reduce anxiety and depression while simultaneously improving
your memory because you are studying for an exam, you could add bacopa
to the Mucuna or tryptophan. Let’s say you want to add long-term, lasting
cognitive performance to the mix: in this case, you would add a racetam
--- END PAGE 237 ---

--- PAGE 238 ---
and, to avoid a crash, a touch of choline or DHA. It’s a bit like creating a
recipe, isn’t it?
But if experimentation and using your noggin as an N=1 isn’t your
thing, I am going to spill the beans on the best stacks and done-for-you
supplement blends I have used, the tried-and-true mixes that combine
ultimate efficacy and safety without nasty crashes or jitters.
1. Caffeine and Nicotine
Coffee and cigarettes have long been a popular combination. Think back
to the 1950s image of a man in a tailored suit perfectly pairing his black
brew with a cigarette hanging out the corner of his mouth as he enjoys the
Sunday paper. Heck, there is even an Otis Redding song called “Cigarettes
and Coffee” and a movie called Coffee and Cigarettes, which features Bill
Murray, Tom Waits, Steve Buscemi, and Cate Blanchett partaking in their
fair share of smoking and sipping.
Aside from the obvious pleasure some derive from this traditional
combo, are there any benefits to simultaneously smoking and drinking
coffee? One study in the Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health
concluded that coffee may indeed provide protection against some of the
damaging effects of cigarettes. In the study, researchers analyzed 497 men
and women with confirmed cases of papilloma, carcinoma, and polyps of
the bladder. All study participants, along with 1,113 control cases, were
interviewed to determine their use of tobacco, exposure to secondhand
smoke, and coffee consumption.
Turns out, when compared to smokers who regularly consumed coffee,
smokers who didn’t drink coffee had twice as much of the cell damage
associated with tobacco use. In addition, the smokers who didn’t consume
coffee were up to seven times more likely to have these growths as
nonsmokers. Regular smokers who drank coffee less than twice a week had
--- END PAGE 238 ---

--- PAGE 239 ---
double the chances of developing cancer of those who drank coffee more
frequently. So ultimately, coffee-drinking cigarette-puffers have some
health advantage over their smoking counterparts who don’t drink coffee.
Of course, the antioxidant content of coffee may not be the only
smoking savior. And no, it is not the tobacco and nasty chemicals in a
cigarette that work the magic: as other studies have proved, it is nicotine.
Nicotine is powerful stuff, not only enhancing locomotive performance
(ability to move with greater control and precision) and cognitive
performance when combined with coffee but also ramping up exercise
performance by 18 percent to 21 percent all on its own!
How do I pull off this stack? I sometimes suck on 1 mg nicotine
toothpicks as I down a cup of coffee (the cinnamon flavor of the
toothpicks blends quite nicely with a cup o’ joe).
Finally, should you want to amp this stack up a notch for even more
memory and cognition enhancement, drop a sprig of rosemary in your
coffee, which has been researched for these effects and lends a pleasant
herbaceous flavor to your brew.
2. Caffeine and L-Theanine
Most people, especially slow caffeine oxidizers, find that they can
eliminate the negative side effects of caffeine (such as jitteriness and
headaches) by adding L-theanine to their caffeine source of choice.
Research suggests that caffeine and L-theanine together can boost
concentration, focus, and energy while reducing anxiety.
For this stack, use a ratio of four parts L-theanine to one part caffeine
—for example, 400 mg of L-theanine with 100 mg of caffeine. You may
want to start with a smaller dose, such as 200 mg of L-theanine and 50 mg
of caffeine, then work your way up to find the best dose for you. (As a
reference point, an 8-ounce cup of coffee has about 100 mg of caffeine.)
--- END PAGE 239 ---

--- PAGE 240 ---
The beauty of this stack is that nature has already given us a perfectly
packaged combination of caffeine and L-theanine in green tea, whether in
the form of a cup of green tea, a bowl of matcha tea, or even a green tea
extract supplement (green tea has less caffeine than coffee—about 25 mg
per 8-ounce cup). Caffeine and L-theanine make a particularly convenient
combination during those times when you don’t want the excess
stimulation of caffeine in isolation, such as a late-evening dinner or the
latter stages of a workday, when a cup of coffee by itself might keep you
awake too late into the night.
3. Caffeine, Tulsi, and Astragalus
Tulsi is one of the greatest calming adaptogens that exists, trusted and
revered for centuries in Ayurvedic medicine and culture. Research
suggests that tulsi can improve mood, support digestion, and promote
stable energy levels. Because it is also an anxiolytic (meaning it reduces
anxiety), tulsi, like L-theanine, helps reduce caffeine’s overstimulating
effects.
You can also blend tulsi with Astragalus propinquus (astragalus), which,
in Chinese medicine, is a boundlessly invigorating herb that provides a
stable source of energy. Astragalus contains an enormous variety of
saponins, flavonoids, and polysaccharides and, when paired with
antioxidant-rich coffee and tulsi, creates a match made in longevity
heaven. For this blend, which I often make if drinking coffee in the
afternoon, I am a fan of Four Sigmatic Adaptogen Coffee, which contains
coffee, astragalus, tulsi, and cinnamon.
4. Ginkgo, Bacopa, and Lion’s Mane
--- END PAGE 240 ---

--- PAGE 241 ---
This unique stack boosts mental focus, memory, learning, and cognitive
performance while reducing anxiety and depression. I have found that it
can significantly boost mental alertness for around six hours at a time
without jitteriness or irritability. It is important to allow a grace period of
about twelve weeks of daily supplementation before you feel the stack’s
full potential, so don’t expect immediate results.
A typical dosage for this combination is 500 mg of lion’s mane per day,
240 mg of ginkgo per day, and 100 mg of bacopa twice per day. For
example, you could throw back a packet of Four Sigmatic lion’s mane
extract with a Beekeeper’s Naturals bacopa and a Brain Fuel gingko shot.
Small amounts (between 100 and 200 mg) of the psychedelic psilocybin
can enhance this stack.
5. Artichoke and Forskolin
Research suggests that artichoke extract supplements (made from the
leaves of artichokes) possess potent antioxidant properties and reduce
levels of blood-vessel-damaging cholesterol particles. Forskolin, derived
from Coleus forskohlii, is one of the few compounds known to naturally
boost cAMP (cyclic adenosine monophosphate), which reduces brain
inflammation, strengthens the blood-brain barrier, and improves neural
signaling in the brain.
I have experienced enhanced memory and word recall when
consuming this stack. Tim Ferriss talked about it quite a bit in my podcast
with him, specifically referencing its presence in the supplement CILTEP.
Made primarily from artichoke extract and forskolin, CILTEP also
contains vitamin B6, L-phenylalanine, and acetyl-L-carnitine. It is
recommended that you take two or three capsules at the beginning of each
day and to skip dosing one or two days per week to achieve optimal
results.
--- END PAGE 241 ---

--- PAGE 242 ---
6. Alpha GPC, AC-11, Bacopa, and
Huperzine
This combination is found in the supplement Alpha BRAIN from Onnit.
According to a clinical trial conducted by the Boston Center for Memory,
Alpha BRAIN can increase cognitive performance in healthy individuals
and may boost memory and learning capacity.
Alpha GPC has several benefits. It provides choline (which increases
production of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine) and appears to support
cellular membranes and reduce cognitive decline. AC-11 is derived from
the rainforest herb Uncaria tomentosa, and research suggests that it may
help slow the development of cancer due to its DNA-repairing antioxidant
properties. Bacopa is known to enhance memory and aid in treating
dementia, Parkinson’s, and epilepsy. Huperzine is derived from the
Chinese club moss Huperzia serrata. Research suggests that it improves
neurotransmitter levels and may also improve memory and protect
neurons, making it a potential treatment for Alzheimer’s and related
conditions.
As a word of caution, a recent review of the scientific literature found
that the quality of the evidence supporting the use of huperzine is low, so
there is still debate over this particular nootropic. If you take a
cholinesterase inhibitor like donepezil (Aricept), rivastigmine (Exelon), or
galantamine (Razadyne)—all of which are used to prevent or manage
Alzheimer’s—the Alzheimer’s Association officially recommends not
taking huperzine.
This stack seems to work best if you take it daily for about two weeks.
After that, the effects become more pronounced over time, so, as with the
ginkgo, bacopa, and lion’s mane stack, you need to let this blend build up
in your system before you judge its effectiveness.
--- END PAGE 242 ---

--- PAGE 243 ---
7. TianChi Chinese Adaptogenic Herb
Complex
The list of herbs and ingredients in the supplement TianChi is too long to
include here, but it contains nearly every Chinese adaptogen and natural
nootropic described in this chapter. So, when it comes to a nonsynthetic
approach to mental enhancement, this blend tops the list.
The herbs in TianChi are gathered from their native, wild
environments or are organically grown, non-GMO, kosher-certified, non-
irradiated, and pesticide-free, then formulated in small batches by a friend
of mine named Roger Drummer, a Chinese herbal medicine practitioner in
Oregon who is a repeat podcast guest. The herbs are extracted in purified
water and test free of heavy metals.
Most adaptogens in today’s market are a standardized 5:1 extract,
meaning that it takes five pounds of herbs to make one pound of extract.
This is not always effective because some herbs may have to be extracted
at a 10:1 ratio to be strong enough to be efficacious. The adaptogens in
TianChi are extracted at a 45:1 ratio, making it one of the most potent
blends available.
I have found the brain-boosting effects of TianChi to be even more
enhanced when consumed with beet juice or beet powder, probably due to
beets’ vasodilating effect. This is one of my favorite blends to mix up
midmorning or midafternoon on an empty stomach for a clear-headed
cognitive high. If you are trying to avoid anything even remotely synthetic,
TianChi is a good choice for you.
8. Qualia
Like TianChi, the nootropic blend Qualia Mind is a shotgun approach,
providing over forty ingredients, including all the adaptogens,
--- END PAGE 243 ---

--- PAGE 244 ---
neurovitamins, amino acids, choline donors, anti-inflammatories, and
antioxidants described in this chapter. It also contains the synthetic
nootropic noopept (which is about a thousand times more potent than
piracetam) and a few other helpful ingredients, including curcumin,
piperine, and, if you opt for the caffeinated version, caffeine.
9. Kava and Kratom
Kava is an extract from the Piper methysticum plant. In the South Pacific,
it’s a popular drink that is used ceremonially for relaxation. The
kavalactones in kava are believed to be responsible for its anxiety-reducing
effects. It’s also traditionally used for stress, withdrawal from
benzodiazepines, feelings of well-being, and sleep issues. This doesn’t
make kava sound like much of a nootropic, but when it’s combined with
the Southeast Asian plant extract kratom (Mitragyna speciosa), derived
from the leaf of a tropical deciduous tree within the coffee family, the
result is notable. Kratom is often used to improve mood; as an anxiolytic;
for insomnia, pain relief, and increased energy; as an anti-inflammatory;
and to lower blood sugar. It elevates mood and euphoria, enhances
physical endurance, and improves anxiety and depression.
So, when you combine kratom and kava, a blend you can find in drinks
such as Feel Free and New Brew, you get simultaneous euphoria and
energy with relaxed focus. The only problem? Like nicotine, kratom can be
addictive and produce withdrawal symptoms like sleeplessness, irritability,
and restless legs if you use too much too often and then suddenly stop. If
you use this stack, my word of caution is to be aware of the potential for
dependency and take it only on a few days of the week and definitely not
in high doses. Although kratom doses widely vary based on extraction
methods, I use just half the recommended dose when taking a kratom
supplement, always combine it with kava, and typically use it on a day
--- END PAGE 244 ---

--- PAGE 245 ---
when I’m demotivated or sleep-deprived, or in the evening as a euphoric
alternative to alcohol.
10. Nootopia
No, Nootopia is not some new fringe country located off the coast of
Madagascar or deep in the heart of the Amazon. Rather, it is a black box
that contains custom nootropics and smart drugs, all hand-selected for
you based on a quiz for the neurotransmitters you learned about in
chapter 1, then delivered to your doorstep. Nootopia has nineteen
different formulations at its disposal for everything from verbal fluency
and word recall to focus and creativity, available in a variety of capsules,
liquids, and powders. The company’s odd but intriguing master
formulator, the mysterious “Mr. Noots,” was a guest on my podcast, and
I’ve included a link to my discussion with him on the resources page for
this chapter. In short, this is a box of done-for-you stacks that offers a
good introduction to the wide world of brain-boosting compounds you’ve
been reading about here.
Feeling overwhelmed? It is not as complex as you might think. At the
end of this chapter, I will reveal what my weekly supplement schedule
looks like. But first, I would be remiss not to mention the latest darlings of
the mind-enhancing industry: psychedelics.
MICRODOSING PSYCHEDELICS
We are entering a new golden age of psychedelics. Microdosing with LSD,
psilocybin, ketamine, and other compounds previously placed in the realm
of party animals and rave enthusiasts is now commonplace for Silicon
Valley entrepreneurs, Navy SEALs, and famous authors.
--- END PAGE 245 ---

--- PAGE 246 ---
My own experience with psychedelics originally spanned several years
of everything from tripping out with psilocybin truffles to DMT inhalation
to dropping acid to sipping ayahuasca. But several years ago, upon
researching more and realizing that the traditional history of large doses
of these compounds is founded in sorcery, shamanism, witchcraft, and the
occult—primarily for divining with the spirit world—I came to the
conclusion that their use clashed with my Christian beliefs and seemed to
be paradoxically drawing me away from sober time spent in prayer,
reading my Bible, and other important elements of my spiritual disciplines
and religious practice. So I no longer endorse or practice so-called
“journeying” with drugs myself, but I still acknowledge their potential
benefits when used in smaller, non-psychedelic doses.
A microdose of a psychedelic is typically referred to as a subperceptual
dose, achieved by ingesting a tiny amount to induce a noticeable and
overall positive physical and mental effect. Subperceptual doses do not
have a significant impact on your ability to function normally, but the
effects are present in your mood and behavior. The lowest dose of a
particular psychedelic that will produce a hallucinogenic effect is known
as the threshold dose; since the goal is not to get a hallucinogenic effect, a
microdose can be well below a psychedelic’s threshold dose.
By integrating microdosing into your weekly routine, you can achieve
greater creativity, more energy, improved mood, increased focus, and
better relational skills. A growing body of research suggests that
microdosing may also assist with depression and anxiety, help with mild
alcohol and tobacco addiction, and mitigate ADHD behaviors. Although
some scoff at the existence of a spirit world or encounters with entities
when using larger amounts of entheogens, I believe such encounters are
all too common and carry the potential for serious psychological and
spiritual harm. The use of more predictable synthetic compounds such as
--- END PAGE 246 ---

--- PAGE 247 ---
ketamine therapy under medical supervision is far safer for self-
exploration or management of PTSD or serious drug addictions.
Where to Buy Psychedelics
A variety of websites sell psychedelics, but not all sources contain good-
quality ingredients, nor is there any guarantee that the substance you
purchase is not laced with undesirable compounds.
I have found these three resources to be quite helpful when purchasing
psychedelics or finding a quality source:•

The Third Wave (thethirdwave.co): This website offers a host of valuable
information and downloadable PDFs on dosing, sourcing, safety, and
techniques—and even an entire instructional course on microdosing.•

Reddit (reddit.com/r/psychedelics): Reddit contains many helpful
personal anecdotes that other users vote up or down, and although it is
rife with N=1 stories that may not apply to your specific situation, I’ve
found it to be a helpful resource for discovering what DIY biohackers and
psychedelic users are experimenting with in their own protocols.• 
Research chemical websites: Many research chemical websites, such as
Sigma-Aldrich and Spectrum Chemicals, source synthetic chemicals like
1P-LSD, ALD-52, ETH-LAD, AL-LAD, 4-AcO-DMT, and many other
psychedelic and nootropic “research chemicals” that are “not sold for
human consumption.” Proceed at your own comfort and risk tolerance.
For online psychedelic purchases, you usually need to use cryptocurrency
and, if you want to remain anonymous, a Tor browser or other cloaked
browser. Availability seems to be changing with increasing legality, and I’ve
stumbled across nootropic companies such as Wukiyo, which has a
psilocybin and herb combination called Bliss that can be ordered online.
Microdosing Psilocybin
--- END PAGE 247 ---

--- PAGE 248 ---
Psilocybin is naturally produced by more than two hundred species of
fungi, otherwise known as “magic mushrooms.” Research from
archaeological evidence suggests that humans have used psilocybin
mushrooms for over seven thousand years. I have found microdoses of
psilocybin to be best for nature immersions, hiking, journaling, and self-
discovery.
Psilocybin primarily interacts with the serotonin receptors in the brain
and has been used in therapeutic settings to treat headaches, anxiety,
depression, addiction, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. There is limited
data to show any adverse drug interactions with the use of psilocybin, and
liver function, blood sugar, and hormonal regulation all appear to be
unaffected during consumption. (However, to prevent any issues with
significant neurotransmitter imbalances, it is best to avoid alcohol and
serotonin-based antidepressants while taking any psychedelic.)
A psilocybin microdose ranges from 0.1 to 0.5 g. I recommend you
start at the lower end of the dosing range with this and any of the other
psychedelics mentioned in this chapter. Trust me: you don’t want to dose
up for a creative day of work and find yourself daydreaming under your
desk while jamming to the Grateful Dead. For psilocybin in particular, you
can combine a small dose with lion’s mane and niacin in a morning cup of
tea for a slight sensory boost without any distracting trip or gastric upset.
Interestingly, blue lotus extract—which is commonly known as an
aphrodisiac but can result in a significant release of the psychedelic
compound DMT (dimethyltryptamine) by the pineal gland—can be
combined with psilocybin alone or the blend above for an even more
pronounced effect that many describe as something similar to an ecstasy
(MDMA) experience. Your pineal gland normally releases small amounts
of DMT, but it is also found in some plants and can be chemically
synthesized. When ingested in high amounts, it can result in a noticeable
ego-dissolving psychedelic journeying effect, while smaller amounts have a
--- END PAGE 248 ---

--- PAGE 249 ---
pleasant nootropic effect. Blue lotus can upregulate your own production
of DMT or, when taken with DMT, can magnify its effects. Essential Oil
Wizardry is a good brand, and you can find a link at BoundlessBook.com/5.
Microdosing LSD
Lysergic acid diethylamide, commonly known as LSD, is derived from a
chemical in rye fungus. It was originally synthesized in 1938 to aid in
childbirth and is widely known for its powerful hallucinogenic effects. It is
less well known for what I use it for: inducing intense sparks of creativity
when a merging of the left and right brain hemispheres is the desired goal,
such as a day on which I need to do a great deal of creative writing or
copywriting. It also works well for keeping you chugging along on a sleep-
deprived or jet-lagged day.
Like psilocybin, LSD affects serotonin levels in the body. A dose of LSD
dramatically increases levels of serotonin in the brain, which causes a feel-
good dopamine release. Research suggests that LSD may also reduce blood
flow to the control centers of the brain, weakening their activity and
allowing for higher amounts of creativity and simultaneous use of both
right and left hemispheres of the brain, unleashing a potent combination
of analytical and creative thinking that would normally be difficult to tap
into. This enhanced brain connectivity is likely why users experience
increased creativity and unique thought patterns. Therapeutic effects of
LSD include treating addiction, depression, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, cluster headaches, end-of-life anxiety, and resistance to behavior
change. It also decreases reaction time, increases concentration and
balance, decreases pain perception, and improves mood.
A typical LSD microdose ranges from 5 to 20 micrograms (not
milligrams!). My approach for dosing LSD—which I described at the
beginning of this chapter—is called the volumetric dosing method. I buy
--- END PAGE 249 ---

--- PAGE 250 ---
blotter paper of LSD or P-LSD, then cut out a square of 100 mcg with
scissors and drop it into a 10-milliliter dropper bottle of vodka. I then
know that a single drop of the liquid contains a neat 10 micrograms of
LSD. This helps me avoid the inaccurate dosing so notoriously associated
with simply cutting out a square of paper and placing it in the mouth,
except for that awkward time that I did the math wrong and took 100 mcg
—right before a massage session! If you take slightly too much LSD, a
small dose of CBD (between 10 and 20 mg) or any of the adaptogenic
herbs in this chapter seem to take the edge off.
Microdosing Ibogaine
Ibogaine is derived from iboga, an evergreen shrub native to the
rainforests in central Africa whose root bark has high concentrations of
psychedelic compounds. It has a rich history in the Bwiti religion in Africa
and has recently found its way into Western medicine to treat drug
addiction, improve physical energy and cognitive performance (in
microdoses), and cause a surge in positive emotions.
To microdose with ibogaine, find a tincture or root bark form (the root
bark form is usually encapsulated). If you use a tincture, look for a source
that has the root bark extracted into its purest form and combined with
iboga alkaloids. A single drop of an iboga tincture equates to about a 0.5
mg microdose of ibogaine. In root bark form, an effective dose is 300 to
500 mg.
I have found an iboga microdose to be most useful before a workout or
any effort that combines both mental and physical demands, such as
tennis, basketball, or energetic sex. It will make you hyperactive and jittery
if taken just before a day of desk work, which makes sense when you
consider that African tribes traditionally whipped themselves into a
frenzied pre-battle state on ibogaine.
--- END PAGE 250 ---

--- PAGE 251 ---
Microdosing Huachuma
Microdosing huachuma, also known as San Pedro cactus or mescaline, can
have subtle yet profound effects, particularly on human connectivity. The
magic behind huachuma’s social alchemy lies in its primary psychoactive
component, mescaline, which interacts with serotonin receptors in the
brain. At doses as low as 200 to 300 mg, mescaline binds to these
receptors, particularly the 5-HT2A receptor. This can lead to increased
serotonin release, promoting feelings of well-being and empathy. The
intricate interplay between mescaline and serotonin pathways may
contribute to the reported cognitive and social benefits observed during
huachuma microdosing.
This interaction can elevate mood, induce feelings of empathy, and
enhance interpersonal communication. Mescaline’s serotonin modulation
may contribute to an increased awareness of emotional nuances, making
social interactions more nuanced and meaningful. People often describe a
heightened ability to read nonverbal cues, fostering a deeper connection
with others and an improved understanding of social dynamics. This
chemical dance within the brain, when orchestrated in microdoses, creates
a cocktail of social-experience-upgrading effects that in my case make a
small dose perfect for a social function or a date night with my wife.
Microdosing Ketamine
Ketamine is a general anesthetic commonly used on animals but originally
devised for and tested on humans. (In fact, my paramedic brother
commonly uses it on the patients he transports in the ambulance.)
Ketamine found notoriety as a party drug in the 1990s but is gaining
momentum as an effective treatment for depression, although I wouldn’t
quite classify the dose being used in such settings as a microdose. When
--- END PAGE 251 ---

--- PAGE 252 ---
administered as an IV infusion, ketamine works quickly on brain receptors
and offers relief from depression symptoms in as little as twenty-four
hours. In contrast, traditional antidepressants can take up to eight weeks
to become effective and are accompanied by a host of negative side effects
that ketamine doesn’t seem to cause. These traditional antidepressants
work by flooding neurotransmitters or blocking their reuptake in the
central nervous system, but ketamine directly blocks glutamate and opiate
receptors, both of which affect depression and pain responses, from being
acted upon by neurotransmitters—resulting in a profound antidepressant
effect without neurotransmitter desensitization and, if a habit is halted
within the first twenty-four to forty-eight hours after ketamine, an easier
time breaking addictions.
Ketamine users have claimed, after even a single session, to experience
benefits such as increased compassion and sensitivity to others, an
increase in overall joy of life, and a reduced fear of death. Ketamine is also
popular in sensory-deprivation situations, such as float tanks—probably
because it does such a good job of deactivating the sympathetic fight-or-
flight response and activating the parasympathetic nervous system,
resulting in a better ability to let go of stressful, distracting thoughts and
enter into a state of deep relaxation.
I had my first ketamine infusion experience at the office of Dr. Matt
Cook in San Jose, California, where I lay quietly on a table for two hours
while experiencing a state of pure bliss. Upon completing the session,
which also included music, meditation, and qigong, I felt light as a feather,
as though I didn’t have a worry in the world. What’s more, my wife and
boys noticed that afterward I seemed more approachable, less worried,
and more positive, particularly in stressful situations. In addition, after
that session and in many sessions since, I’ve been able to access childhood
memories in vivid detail, see parts of my life I’d forgotten about flash by,
and come up with creative new ideas for books and articles. (Pro tip: Have
--- END PAGE 252 ---

--- PAGE 253 ---
a digital recorder handy during your session so you can talk aloud and
write these things down later.)
For therapeutic purposes, ketamine is most commonly administered in
a dose of 0.5 mg per kilogram of body weight, but some people respond to
doses as low as 0.1 mg per kilogram of body weight, and others may
require up to 0.75 mg per kilogram of body weight. I’ve also found
ketamine to be very pleasant when used in an intranasal microdose of
about 5 mg before sex (because it increases sex drive and decreases
inhibitions), particularly when stacked with intranasal oxytocin, so long as
you pay attention to some of the erection tips in chapter 18, since
ketamine is also notorious for causing “droopy dick.” Ketamine is nice for
deep tissue work as well because it can induce full-body relaxation,
decrease pain perception, and allow a massage therapist to dig a bit deeper
into your muscles, not that anyone doesn’t love an elbow rolling up their
thigh.
While I don’t condone drug use as a replacement for the spiritual
disciplines I discuss in my books Fit Soul, Endure, and Precepts, responsible
use of ketamine is a life-changing experience, particularly for people with
depression or those wired to be hard-charging high achievers. (It should
be noted that high-dose MDMA therapy can also be particularly effective
for anxiety, depression, or even couples therapy.)
Should you decide to skip the IV infusion and DIY with oral ketamine,
please know that determining your ideal dose can be tricky, so it is
important to start below the recommended dose. If you are going to use it
orally, taking ketamine sublingually is the most effective and direct route.
A sublingual microdose of ketamine is about 0.75 mg per kilogram of body
weight, although you can get a significant mood enhancement with as
little as 0.2 mg per kilogram of body weight.
Never mix ketamine with any substance that depresses breathing, such
as alcohol, opioids, or tramadol, as it can produce a heavy sedative effect if
--- END PAGE 253 ---

--- PAGE 254 ---
you are not careful or if you combine it with other sedative-like
compounds. Finally, as with any psychedelic drug, a proper set (your
mindset) and setting (your physical environment) are important, which is
why I do not recommend any of the compounds discussed in this section,
including ketamine, for a “party experience” if your goal is to engage in
what I consider to be a more productive use of such compounds,
particularly increasing introspection, creativity, productivity, or a deep,
intimate connection with others.
Getting Started with Microdosing
For any of the psychedelic compounds discussed in this chapter, I
recommend following the protocol laid out by James Fadiman in chapter 16
of his excellent Psychedelic Explorer’s Guide:
• Consume a microdose of your chosen psychedelic twice per week for ten
weeks.
• Allow two to three days between microdosing days (for example,
consume your microdoses on Wednesdays and Sundays).
• Write about your experience and be mindful of your expectations and
desires.
• Especially in the early stages of experimentation, use the compound in a
familiar or controlled setting.
• At the end of the ten weeks (or however many weeks you microdose),
reflect on your experience and ask yourself, “Did I accomplish my
purpose for microdosing?”
For one of the more comprehensive and insightful guides on microdosing, I
also recommend Michael Pollan’s book How to Change Your Mind, in which
the author—an immersive journalist with little to no psychedelic experience
—takes a deep dive into the world of psilocybin, LSD, DMT, and beyond.
--- END PAGE 254 ---

--- PAGE 255 ---
Not the Usual Warning on Psychedelics
While writing this chapter, I was tempted to give some warning or legal
disclaimer about getting thrown in prison for microdosing with
psychedelics. But these substances are more commonly being
decriminalized in several states in the US, and many are fully legal in
Brazil, the Netherlands, Jamaica, and Portugal. Recently, the FDA
approved psilocybin for use in the treatment of depression, and it has
received notable research interest for addiction, too. I predict that within
the next decade, we will see many of these substances, which have had a
sullied reputation for so many years, become more and more legal and
accessible as consumers become more educated. The only potential
problem I foresee is the same problem with someone who owns a wine
cellar or has a few bottles of vodka in the pantry: if you keep this stuff
around, you need to have the self-control to microdose and not use it as an
excuse to get high in the name of “self-discovery.” I will once again
emphasize that in nearly every scenario other than that of licensed and
certified medical supervision, the proper use of psychedelics is as a
subperceptual dose for cognitive or social enhancement, and not as a way
to lie on your bedroom floor drooling out the corners of your mouth and
staring at an imaginary kaleidoscope on your ceiling.
Like synthetic smart drugs, psychedelics can cause a significant influx
into the nervous system of neurotransmitters like serotonin and dopamine
and, as a result, can cause addiction, tolerance, and neurotransmitter
imbalances. So proceed with caution and, as the book Stealing Fire by
Steven Kotler and Jamie Wheal notes, use these compounds with more
stoicism than hedonism.
Furthermore, I feel that anyone who strikes out upon a quest to “find
themselves” via a hedonistic, ego-dissolving journey involving plant-based
compounds such as ayahuasca, DMT, marijuana, psilocybin, or ibogaine
should first engage in a comparatively stoic immersion in the spiritual
--- END PAGE 255 ---

--- PAGE 256 ---
disciplines of fasting, solitude, study, meditation, and prayer—even if that
means delaying, say, a five-day trip to Peru for the alternative of a five-day
solo journey into the wilderness near home. I suspect that many people
will discover they can experience intense physical, mental, and spiritual
breakthroughs via a bout of fasting, silence, and nature immersion, and
that this experience can rival or even exceed any benefits derived from a
plant-medicine journey, with far less of the spiritual and psychological
dangers of venturing into a spiritual realm full of entities who may not
have your best interests in mind, not to mention that sexual abuse,
robbery, and physical harm are rampant in the psychedelics tourism
industry, as recently highlighted in a Cover Story podcast series and in my
own two-part article about why I quit journeying with plant medicines (I’ll
link to both on the resources page for this chapter).
Sure, it’s far simpler to drink tea or eat a mushroom cookie, hire a
shaman to visit your New York City loft with some kind of special brew,
and lie back, slip into a kaleidoscope of colors, and perhaps experience a
new spiritual dimension. But I would challenge you to first tuck a journal
under your arm and a tent into your backpack and venture into the forest
for a few days of meditation and introspection with nothing but a bit of
water, extra clothing, and your own mind. Journeying by yourself in a stoic
setting like this should, in my opinion, be a prerequisite before any
attempt to embark upon a psychedelic odyssey, which seems to have
replaced the types of vision quests and rites of passage that humans used
to experience as part of the transition into adulthood. This is likely one
reason that so many of my acquaintances are on their forty-eighth
ayahuasca trip and still haven’t found resolution to their struggles: they’ve
never attempted to engage in a rigorous immersion in the spiritual
disciplines.
Don’t get me wrong: I believe that everything on God’s good earth was
created for humans to intelligently use and derive benefits from. But in the
--- END PAGE 256 ---

--- PAGE 257 ---
same way that wine, honey, milk, and butter can be abused, so too can
everything from St. John’s wort to THC to mushrooms.
Why Take Supplements, Anyway?
I am often asked what supplements I take, why I take them, and if we really
need supplements anyway. After all, if you follow a healthy lifestyle, I’ll
wager you probably eat plenty of plants, prioritize sleep, hydrate with
filtered water (or, dare I say, at the risk of revealing my tinfoil hat, structured
water), and expose yourself to sunlight as much as possible.
In other words, you are, like me, what I would call a “healthy, woo-woo
geek.” You are an intelligent, well-informed person, you embrace your softer-
side spirituality, and you pride yourself on your passion for health, nutrition,
science, and fitness. Why would you need to take supplements for health,
fitness, and longevity? Don’t nutrient-dense food, good water, and clean
living provide enough vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants?
I get it. There is a dizzying array of supplements to choose from, and the
expense can add up fast. No one—including me—wants to spend their
precious time counting and swallowing pills. Supplements can also be
dangerous. I have dedicated entire podcasts to exposing the deceptive
tactics that many supplement companies employ and have explored the
host of unhealthy fillers that many supplements contain.
So why even consider supplementation? Let’s begin with this: our modern,
postindustrial, polluted, toxin-laden lifestyle demands more nutrients than
food can provide.
That’s right. The chronic stressors of modern life—ranging from exposure to
heavy metals and synthetic chemicals to sensory overload—have been
proven to increase the body’s requirements for vitamins, minerals, and
antioxidants, which are needed to shuttle toxins through detox pathways
and prevent the formation of DNA-damaging free radicals. This means that
even if you are eating clean, nutrient-dense food, you are likely not getting
all the nutrients you need. Five factors contribute to the disconnect between
the nutrients in our food and the nutrients we need:
--- END PAGE 257 ---

--- PAGE 258 ---
1. Nutrient-depleted soil: Due to modern farming techniques and fertilizers,
most soil today is relatively depleted of vitamins, minerals, and
antioxidants. You may think that eating organic is the ultimate solution.
While some research suggests that organically grown food contains more
nutrients than nonorganic food, other research has concluded that there
is no significant difference in nutritional content between the two. In
addition, for most of human history (and prehistory), our ancestors ate
now-nearly-extinct cellular (dense-cell-rich) carbohydrates in the form of
foods like wild tubers, which provided essential prebiotics so that
beneficial bacteria could flourish (in contrast to the refined acellular
grains and white rice that compose most modern carbohydrates). Cellular
carbohydrates such as root tubers, fruits, leaves, and stems store
carbohydrates in fiber-rich living cells that can remain intact during
cooking. In contrast, processed and refined carbohydrates such as flour,
sugar, and grains are “acellular” carbohydrates because they lack intact
cells. These modern carbohydrates not only create a scenario of nutrient
deficiencies but also cause a void in cell-rich carbohydrates, which can
lead to significant gut fermentation, blood sugar swings, and glycemic
variability. A glance at a coffee shop display case or hotel breakfast bar
that features bagels, muffins, and sugary cereals explains why many
people need a snack a couple hours after breakfast to make it through
the inevitable midmorning blood sugar crash. Blood sugar imbalances
lead to chronic inflammation and may be responsible for up to 80
percent of modern diseases, including Alzheimer’s. This is a roller coaster
you definitely don’t want to be on.
Similarly, the meat, eggs, and dairy products commonly found in grocery
stores deliver fewer anti-inflammatory nutrients, such as omega-3 fatty
acids, than those from wild or pastured animals. Most people eating a
Western diet also consume an imbalanced ratio of omega-6 to omega-3
fatty acids, further exacerbating chronic inflammation.2.

Age-related declines in nutrient absorption: Your ability to absorb
nutrients from food decreases as you age. While growing children
absolutely should be taking a multivitamin to support healthy tissue and
bone formation, supplementation is equally important for older
generations. Many medications used to treat age-related diseases, such
as acid reflux and hypertension, also interfere with proper nutrient
absorption, further increasing the need for supplements. Then there is
--- END PAGE 258 ---

--- PAGE 259 ---
precious vitamin D. While there’s no consensus on what constitutes
sufficient vitamin D levels, it is safe to say that many Americans,
especially aging Americans, who tend to spend more time indoors, do
not get enough vitamin D. Even if we do our best to get sun exposure—
whether it’s taking a morning walk or eating lunch outside—it is rare to
get as much sunlight and vitamin D as our outdoor-dwelling ancestors
did.3.

Poor food-handling practices: Modern harvesting, shipping, processing,
and storage techniques degrade the nutrient content of food. Plants
grown with modern fertilizer may contain only 25 percent of the
micronutrients of plants grown using more traditional farming methods,
and nutrient content declines as these foods are shipped and sit on store
shelves. It makes sense that a freshly picked apple is more nutritious than
an apple bought in the winter at the supermarket, which was likely
treated with 1-methylcyclopropene and could be up to ten months old
(according to the FDA). And the preservatives used to maintain freshness
could both impede the bioavailability of the food’s nutrients and require
your body to use more nutrients to process these synthetic additives.4.

Pesticides, herbicides, and pollutants: Our bodies are exposed to all
kinds of toxins these days: pesticides, herbicides, and other chemicals in
the modern food supply; polluted water; environmental contaminants
from things like degraded plastic; and airborne pollutants like carbon
monoxide, lead, and mercury. These synergistic factors vastly increase
your need for extra vitamins, minerals, and nutrients, which combat the
formation of free radicals and the toxins’ attack on your metabolism and
immune system.5. 
Exercise: Because athletes and active individuals use more oxygen and
energy than the average person, they need far more nutrients.
Consuming only the recommended amounts of nutrients can actually
limit your athletic performance. So, if you engage in CrossFit WODs,
Ironman triathlons, obstacle races, or heavy weightlifting, you need to
take supplements to meet your nutritional requirements.
You might be thinking that instead of taking supplements, you could simply
ignore calories and eat more food to obtain nutrients. But there are
scientifically demonstrated benefits to caloric restriction, including
longevity. This is another reason supplements are crucial: they are a helpful
--- END PAGE 259 ---

--- PAGE 260 ---
boost for those of us who want to consume enough nutrients to function
well but also want to live longer using strategies such as intermittent fasting,
alternate-day fasting, and caloric restriction.
The assumption that previous generations didn’t take supplements is not
true. Ancient supplements include root, stem, and leaf teas, medicinal
powders ground by mortar and pestle, and highly concentrated oil extracts.
Just because these dietary supplements didn’t look like capsules or
oversized tubs of powders doesn’t mean they weren’t supplements. In
addition, when harvesting wild plants, eating meat, and spending plenty
more time in nature, our ancestors certainly consumed more dirt than we do
now, and this soil contained a wide range of beneficial probiotics. (Some
supplement manufacturers now offer products that are simply soil-derived
probiotics!) Perhaps even more compelling is the fact that animals, ranging
from insects to chimps, self-medicate and supplement by consuming
specific compounds. For example, when some caterpillars get infected by
parasitic flies, they eat poisonous plants to kill the invasive larvae. Ants fight
off microbes and bacteria by adding spruce resin to their nests. Several
animal species consume mud to counteract stomach upset, and animals of
all kinds use plant medicine as their own rough approximation of
supplements.
Ultimately, supplementing with vitamins, minerals, and even nootropics and
psychedelics is a natural, time-honored way to enhance the body and brain.
While many would argue that your brain should work fine on its own in our
modern era, operating with flawless precision in the presence of clean food,
pure water, sunshine, and fresh air, I beg to differ and have benefited highly
from a bit of ancestral wisdom combined with better living through science.
THE LAST WORD
When it comes to using chemistry, modern science, and ancestral wisdom
to make your brain work better, you have plenty of options. While I urge
you to use caution with smart drugs, I also encourage you to consider the
use of both natural and synthetic nootropics to enhance productivity and
--- END PAGE 260 ---

--- PAGE 261 ---
cognitive performance, and to tap into the power of psychedelics for
personal breakthroughs, creativity, and connectivity. While there’s no
substitute for quality sleep, brain-supporting food, and mitigation of
environmental toxins and pollutants, experimenting with the stacks and
supportive neurovitamins and neurominerals in this chapter can be a
mind-altering and brain-bettering experience, particularly if you feel as
though your brain could use a boost.
Are you feeling a bit of paralysis by analysis with all these mind-
altering tactics? Does it seem like there are too many choices? Fear not:
below, I have laid out an example of how I personally weave all these
compounds together into a week.
While you may not find yourself mixing a magic mushroom homebrew
in your kitchen anytime soon, a bit of better living through science via a
few choice herbs and nootropics may be exactly what you need to upgrade
your productivity, creativity, and overall cognitive performance. You are
now equipped with every shred of knowledge necessary to do so, whether
you choose a risky smart drug approach, a natural nootropic approach, a
synthetic nootropic approach, a psychedelic approach, or a blend of all
four.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/5.
Every day
I have a cup of black coffee or mushroom or adaptogenic tea every
morning. If I consume any extra coffee in the afternoon, I add tulsi, reishi,
astragalus, or L-theanine to it. If I am using coffee to help me plow
--- END PAGE 261 ---

--- PAGE 262 ---
through a demanding day or a period of sleep deprivation, I occasionally
combine it with nicotine. On my hardest workout days of the week, I
usually throw back a can of Update or New Brew prior.
Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday
I take Qualia, Wukiyo, Notable, or Nootopia on busier days when intense
work demands arise, especially if I need enhanced creativity or faster word
recall or brain processing speed (for example, if I am being interviewed for
a podcast or speaking onstage). You don’t have to own and use all the
aforementioned brands, but I happen to because I’m a health podcaster
with a garage full of supplements. If I have been traveling or am jet-lagged,
I include a dose of methylene blue to mitigate neuroinflammation, and if
sleep-deprived, NAD and creatine.
Thursday
Thursdays tend to be less busy. I take TianChi if I need to gently boost
blood flow and want to keep neural inflammation at bay. If I am doing
--- END PAGE 262 ---

--- PAGE 263 ---
more intense studying, reading, or memorizing, I’ll pop a Beekeeper’s
Brain Fuel or add a touch of lion’s mane to the mix.
Friday
This is often a creative-writing, problem-solving, and brainstorming day. I
often microdose with psilocybin or LSD in the morning to enhance the
coordination between my left and right brain hemispheres.
Saturday
This is my off-day. I try to consume no brain-boosters aside from a piping-
hot cup of coffee. You gotta take a break sometimes, right?
--- END PAGE 263 ---

--- PAGE 264 ---
Sunday
I devote Sundays to spiritual disciplines, personal exploration, a hefty
dose of neurogenesis, and the occasional massage. On these days, I use a
more potent neuron-sprouting and ego-dissolving mix: a microdose of
psilocybin blended with lion’s mane extract and niacin and, for a massage,
a microdose of ketamine.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Never tried a nootropic before? This is your chance. C’mon. You know
you’re itching to. Go out this week and hunt down one of the nutrients,
nootropics, or smart drugs from this chapter and use it responsibly on a
cognitively demanding day.
In chapter 19, I will revisit the notion of stacking supplements, but
with a focus on longevity, and these overlap with many of the stacks in this
chapter. You will find that when you arm your pantry with both brain-
boosting and antiaging compounds, the effects of both seem to be
magnified. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 264 ---

--- PAGE 265 ---
06
UPGRADE YOUR HEAD
BRAIN BIOHACKING GEAR, GAMES,
AND TOOLS
Perched atop my indoor bicycle trainer and hammering away in preparation for
the South Beach Triathlon in Miami, I reached toward my ears and switched on
--- END PAGE 265 ---

--- PAGE 266 ---
the high-tech Beats-by-Dre-esque headphones wrapped around my skull. Within
seconds, invisible pins and needles dug into the top of my head, and for the next
twenty minutes, the pinpricks increased in intensity. I tried to focus on pedaling
harder while ignoring the perception that tiny aliens with acupuncture needles
were attacking my cranium.
The headphones were not ordinary headphones but rather a special device
designed for transcranial direct-current stimulation, or tDCS, of the
nervous system. The result? Reduced perception of pain, increased skill
acquisition and hand-eye coordination, and the ability to blast through a
normally soul-crushing workout with relative ease.
Perhaps I am a masochist who has spent far too much time running
through forests wielding my obstacle-racing spear, but, as a nerd at heart, I
am enchanted with the concept of using electricity, sound waves, magnets,
and a host of other biohacks to enhance my physical and mental
performance. From shocking my gonads into better orgasms to putting
magnets on my collarbone (and, admittedly, my nether regions) for better
sleep and sex to blasting my body with healing acoustics, if it is legal and
safe, I have probably messed around with it—and, yeah, that includes
running through electroshock cables in Tough Mudder races, covered in
mud and with a dumb grin on my face.
So, when I saw a New Yorker article entitled “For the Golden State
Warriors, Brain Zapping Could Provide an Edge,” I immediately perked up.
Turns out an NBA professional basketball championship team uses tDCS
to shock their heads before practice and games.
The headphones-like device the Warriors used was called the Halo
Sport, and it was designed by Dr. Daniel Chao, who had previously worked
at a company that used brain stimulation to treat epilepsy. The original
forms of tDCS involved attaching a couple of electrodes to a battery,
sticking them to the user’s head, and sending a tiny current—five hundred
to one thousand times lower than that used in electroshock therapy—
--- END PAGE 266 ---

--- PAGE 267 ---
through the brain. The current alters the excitability of neurons, causing
them to fire just a bit more quickly and readily, which makes skill-
acquisition training more effective.
However, the Halo was an upgrade from just a couple of electrodes and
a battery. It was a fancy set of headphones that had electrodes strategically
placed across the top, precisely positioned to send a current through an
area of your brain called the motor cortex, the control center that sends
commands to your muscles. The idea was that you put on the headphones
for twenty minutes in the early stages of your workout or during your
warm-up (or even before engaging in a left hand–right hand coordination
activity, like playing a video game or musical instrument) and activate the
stimulation with the accompanying smartphone app. As you train, your
brain delivers stronger, more synchronous signals to your muscles,
allowing you to more quickly acquire a skill.
When I read the New Yorker article on the Golden State Warriors, I was
already familiar with the concept of electric brain stimulation. I had heard
the popular “9-Volt Nirvana” Radiolab podcast episode in which Sally
Adee, an editor at New Scientist, revealed that she discovered how to
accelerate learning with tDCS at a Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency conference. In the episode, Sally found herself wielding an M4
assault rifle with a battery wired to her temple and discovering some
pretty shocking (pun intended) improvements in her sniper skills.
Incidentally, although the Reddit forum on building your own tDCS unit
already existed, it exploded after the episode aired.
Back in 2013, I wrote an article about what was then a groundbreaking
study in which Brazilian sports scientists used tDCS to apply a tiny
electrical current to cyclists’ motor cortexes. The results were pretty darn
impressive. After twenty minutes of real or placebo brain stimulation, the
cyclists completed an all-out ride to exhaustion. Sure enough, the cyclists
who underwent electrical stimulation experienced significantly lower
--- END PAGE 267 ---

--- PAGE 268 ---
heart rates, lower perceived exertion, and a 4 percent higher power output
(which may sound small, but it is a huge improvement for a cyclist).
Even if you are not a professional athlete, you can now use tDCS and
other brain-upgrading technology in the comfort of your home. Sadly, the
Halo Sport has gone defunct and is no longer available for purchase, but
other at-home tDCS devices exist, such as the LIFTiD, Focus V3,
NeuroMyst, and Brain Premier. Many of the other tools in this chapter,
while not mainstream yet, also allow you to harness a bit of better living
through science to increase blood flow to your brain, improve cognitive
performance and skill acquisition, focus better during a workout, increase
awareness, and reduce stress.
6 TOOLS FOR BRAIN
OPTIMIZATION
I use six tools that I have found to be the best of the best for catapulting
the brain to the next level. Here they are, in no particular order.
1. Pulsed Electromagnetic Field Therapy
At my bedside when I travel is a tiny handheld unit called a FlexPulse,
which I consider to be a portable “DJ for the brain.” By adjusting the
settings, I can use a 3 Hz frequency to lull my brain into a relaxed delta
brain wave state, a 10 Hz frequency to generate focus-enhancing alpha
brain waves, or a 23 Hz frequency to produce high-alert beta brain waves—
or even a 100 Hz frequency for muscle repair (I’ll talk about this more in
chapter 12). The FlexPulse generates these frequencies in what is called a
pulsed electromagnetic field, or PEMF. I have found that by placing the
square pad of the unit directly on the hard occipital bone on the back of
--- END PAGE 268 ---

--- PAGE 269 ---
my head and securing it with a wraparound sleep mask (often combined
with the cranial electrotherapy stimulation described later in this
chapter), I can knock myself out in no time for a perfect night’s sleep or a
quick nap.
PEMF therapy is not to be confused with the damaging EMFs
(electromagnetic fields) you’ve no doubt heard about. Harmful EMFs and
the therapeutic EMFs that PEMF devices generate have very different
effects. All EMFs interact with tissue and biological systems, but while
therapeutic EMFs support cellular communication and health, harmful
EMFs negatively impact your body’s functions.
The main distinctions between harmful and therapeutic EMFs involve
characteristics of the waves themselves: wavelength, exposure time, and
frequency. On the electromagnetic spectrum, PEMF devices produce long
wavelengths and extremely low to very low frequencies. On the other
hand, harmful EMFs have short wavelengths and high frequencies. For
example, a 1 Hz PEMF frequency corresponds to a wavelength of about
100 million meters, which is more than 62,000 miles. (The earth’s
circumference is just 24,901 miles!) Alternatively, a harmful frequency of
about 100 million Hz (which can be produced by your average microwave)
has a wavelength of just one meter (about three feet).
--- END PAGE 269 ---

--- PAGE 270 ---
PEMF therapy works by training your brain to produce particular
electrical wavelengths. The brain produces different electrical wavelengths
throughout the day and night, including alpha, beta, delta, and theta brain
waves. For example, when you are awake during the day and working,
studying, exercising, or engaged in any other activity that requires focus,
concentration, or alertness, you predominantly produce alpha and beta
brain waves. During periods of sleep and some forms of meditation or
relaxation, the brain shifts into higher delta and theta brain wave
production.
When presented with a rhythmic stimulus, such as PEMF, your brain
responds by synchronizing your brain’s electrical activity to the rhythm, a
process known as entrainment. Entrainment has the greatest probability
of occurring if the PEMF is similar to frequencies found in nature.
You are probably familiar with how compasses work: the earth
produces an electromagnetic field that causes a compass needle to point
toward magnetic north. But the earth also produces what are known as
Schumann resonances, a set of low electromagnetic frequencies. The most
well-known of these is the 7.83 Hz frequency, which is responsible for the
--- END PAGE 270 ---

--- PAGE 271 ---
benefits of grounding or earthing (a massive sleep- and recovery-boosting
tactic I’ll talk more about in chapters 7 and 12) and can be used to mitigate
many of the damaging effects of EMF.
You can control which wavelengths your brain produces by setting
PEMF devices to those natural wavelength frequencies. For example, you
can set the FlexPulse to alpha mode prior to focused activities. Or you can
use a mat like the BodyBalance under your top sheet to expose your body
to a mix of nighttime relaxation frequencies and even enhance the efficacy
of nootropics and smart drugs. When used for cognitive performance,
PEMF therapy has been shown to improve neuroplasticity and
communication between brain regions. Research also suggests that high-
intensity PEMF exposure can improve blood flow to the cerebral cortex,
resulting in greater nutrient uptake by the brain.
While a smaller device like the FlexPulse is a perfect travel companion
or introduction to the therapeutic applications of PEMF, the most
powerful PEMF device is a large unit—about the size of a massage table—
from Pulse Centers called the Pulse XL Pro. Both Tony Robbins and I are
huge fans of this massive full-body setup, which you can use for everything
from healing muscle sprains and reducing headaches to improving sleep
onset (also known as a decrease in sleep latency, or an ability to fall asleep
faster). Admittedly, it is an expensive option, but because of the intensity
of the frequencies used, the device delivers potent benefits that work deep
within your cells. Lower-priced mats made by companies such as
HigherDose and 10X also deliver low-intensity PEMF frequencies for a
full-body effect that doesn’t drain your wallet.
At the tippy top of the list of interesting PEMF devices is the
BioCharger, which holds a hallowed place in my basement “Zen Den.”
Picture it as a personal energy-optimization station, stacking a medley of
innovative technologies to influence cellular function and enhance overall
well-being. It incorporates four technologies: pulsed electromagnetic
--- END PAGE 271 ---

--- PAGE 272 ---
fields (PEMF), red-light therapy, frequency therapy, and a form of sound
therapy called voltage harmonic electromagnetic fields (VHEM). Other
good PEMF options include 10X, Haelo, Celler8, Bubble+, EarthPulse, and
IcesM1.
How to Exercise Your Cells with PEMF
To understand how PEMF therapy works, you must know why the cells in
both your brain and your body require electricity. In his work with high-
voltage discharges at the turn of the last century, Nikola Tesla, the inventor
of alternating current, concluded that our bodies’ tissues operate as energy-
storing electrical condensers and that quite a lot of electrical energy can
pass through them, surprisingly, without harm.
Many years later, beginning in the 1930s, Harvard physiology professor
Harold Saxton Burr wrote ninety-three papers on his research showing that
measurable electrical energy in organs is directly related to health. If the
electrical energy was depleted or the charge across a cell membrane was
too high or too low, tissue dysfunction followed, but if the electrical balance
was restored, so was health.
Then, in his excellent book Healing Is Voltage (2010), Jerry Tennant wrote
that cells are designed to operate at an electrical potential (charge
separation) across the cell membrane of -20 to -25 millivolts. When cells’
voltage drops below that level, the result is chronic pain and disease. In
--- END PAGE 272 ---

--- PAGE 273 ---
other words, doctors need to start thinking like electricians, not just
physicians. Dr. Tennant also describes how our acid-alkaline balance (pH) is
a measure of voltage, too. A normal human cell contains ample amounts of
oxygen and operates at a pH of 7.35 to 7.45, which is the exact equivalent of
-20 to -25 millivolts. (pH is linked to voltage because pH technically reflects
the number of charged hydrogen ions [H+] per liter of solution.)
Today, the growing use of therapeutic PEMF devices is the result of the
century-long evolution of research on using electrical current to affect self-
healing and self-regulating cellular processes. While a direct-current
stimulator, such as a TENS unit or EMS device, uses electrodes that must
make contact with the skin to interface with your nervous system and cells,
a magnetic field generator can simply induce energy in a conductor (like
your body’s tissues) and does not require contact with the skin because no
electricity actually touches you.
The greater the intensity of the pulse from a PEMF device, the more energy
is delivered, and the greater the subsequent energy produced within your
cells. It takes a fast-rising pulse with sufficient energy to create charge and
voltage of sufficient depth in your body. A more expensive PEMF unit, such
as Pulse Center’s Pulse XL Pro, creates extremely high intensities, allowing
for a depth of penetration far beyond other PEMF devices. These higher
intensities of PEMF have been shown to induce significant increases in blood
flow (sixty minutes of PEMF exposure results in about 20 percent greater
blood flow). Mitochondrial respiration rate is also higher in cells exposed to
PEMF, meaning these mitochondria produce energy faster. PEMF is most
effective when the demand for ATP (cellular energy) is highest, when ADP
levels are low and nutrients are not readily available—in other words, when
you are hungry and exhausted. And the effects of PEMF pulsing on muscle
mitochondrial respiration is still present as much as two weeks after
exposure! PEMF also increases the number of mitochondria, similar to the
increases caused by high-intensity interval training.
PEMF therapy affects the immune system as well. Macrophages are some of
the first responders of the immune system, protecting us from infections,
bacteria, viruses, damaged-cell debris, and injury. One of the ways they
respond is to engulf and devour offenders by means of a complex process
called phagocytosis, which is similar to what happens during digestion in the
acid environment of the stomach. In one study, macrophages exposed to
PEMF demonstrated a 56.2 percent increase in phagocytosis, devouring
--- END PAGE 273 ---

--- PAGE 274 ---
particles significantly faster and maintaining this advantage over unexposed
macrophages for many hours after a single exposure.
Another study examined the effect of PEMF on the production of
inflammatory markers associated with chronic disease and cancer, including
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B
(NFkB), and the expression of the A20 (tumor necrosis factor-alpha-induced
protein 3) in inflamed cells. Cells were exposed to PEMF at different
frequencies to find out if any frequencies would affect the inflammatory
response pathway. The study demonstrated that cells continuously exposed
to PEMF at 5 Hz exhibited significant effects on the downregulation of TNF-
alpha and NFkB and showed a trend in the downregulation of A20. This
means PEMF could be beneficial in modulating the immune response in the
presence of infection.
When a cell’s voltage is low, oxygen departs the cell, which lowers ATP
production. PEMF increases circulation, thus providing more oxygen to the
cell. PEMF also increases cell voltage, which raises pH and enables more
oxygen to be dissolved within the cell for mitochondrial respiration. In this
way, PEMF increases mitochondrial respiratory activity, resulting in more-
efficient production of ATP by the cell’s mitochondria. PEMF also increases
the number of mitochondria, allowing for even more energy production in
the cell. The increased energy output from a greater number of more
efficient mitochondria enables each cell to accelerate recovery and perform
its normal functions better. This leads to faster recovery, better resilience,
and enhanced performance.
It’s also important to note that when you have low cellular voltage, you have
low pH, and low pH can create an acidic environment in which cancer can
thrive. By using PEMF to create a more oxygenated environment, you can
likely lower your cancer risk. (You can read more about this phenomenon in
Dr. Thomas Seyfried’s book Cancer as a Metabolic Disease: On the Origin,
Management, and Prevention of Cancer.)
I find it fascinating that early in the last century there was a huge debate
about whether humans are electrical or chemical animals. With the
discovery of antibiotics, a large part of the medical profession decided that
we are chemical, which has led to our current state of medicine in which
chemicals are the primary modalities used for treatment. But now, with the
rise of chronic illnesses and an increasing understanding of the ways the
--- END PAGE 274 ---

--- PAGE 275 ---
human body is very much like a battery, smart functional-medicine
practitioners are beginning to incorporate electrical components such as
PEMF into treatment plans.
Finally, a word of warning: very high intensity PEMF such as that produced
by the Pulse Centers unit can kill bacteria, yeast, and fungus, and as a result,
in some people it can cause a release of endotoxins. That can create an
uncomfortable Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, resulting in temporary nausea,
headaches, and other flu-like symptoms. So it’s best to ease yourself into
any high-intensity use of PEMF if you have an infection or rampant
inflammation.
2. Neurofeedback
I visited the Peak Brain Institute in Los Angeles for an advanced brain scan
and brain-mapping system called quantitative electroencephalography, or
QEEG, and was shocked at what they discovered in my brain. Yes, this was
in addition to the QEEG scan at Jyzen with Dr. Beth McDougall, which you
may recall from chapter 4 revealed electrical footprints of mold and
mycotoxins in my brain.
At Peak Brain, Dr. Andrew Hill, a UCLA-trained cognitive
neuroscientist and lecturer, oversaw my QEEG and discovered what he
described as severe patterns of brain wave abnormalities and imbalances,
including excess stressful beta waves, excess theta waves, and excess delta
waves, with a significant lack of focus-enhancing alpha waves. What does
that mean? It suggests that I have a history of concussions and traumatic
brain injury (caused by everything from football to mountain biking to
kickboxing), as well as accumulated deficits of attention, increased
distractibility, limited sleep potential, and suboptimal cognitive
performance, all resulting from travel, exposure to toxins, excessive
multitasking, and other lifestyle factors that plague hard-charging high
achievers who perhaps too often put their noggin on the line.
--- END PAGE 275 ---

--- PAGE 276 ---
Two months after the scan, I hopped on a plane back to LA and again
ventured into the Peak Brain Institute for three days of intensive training.
When I returned to Spokane, I had a briefcase packed with a laptop,
electrodes, conducting gel, and all the other neurofeedback gear necessary
to fix my brain. For the next three months, I trained for thirty minutes
every other day using a style of neurofeedback I can best describe as
meditation on steroids. My protocol involved flying a spaceship on the
laptop with my mind. Each time my brain subconsciously shifted into
unfavorable brain wave patterns, the spaceship would stop flying and the
music generated by the neurofeedback software would fade away, much
like a cognitive slap on the wrist.
Neurofeedback training is a noninvasive form of central nervous
system biofeedback. It involves placing electrodes on the scalp and works
by encouraging certain brain regions, such as the frontal, parietal,
temporal, and occipital lobes (the cortical brain regions), to raise or lower
the amplitude and ratios of brain waves. The electrodes produce a signal
that is picked up by an EEG amplifier. These signals are fed into software,
such as the spaceship-flying software, that gives the user some form of
visual or auditory feedback or reward, like amplified music, more smoke
exhaustion behind the spaceship, or progression to a new level, when the
brain produces the desired changes in brain wave amplitude or frequency.
Which brain waves are affected depends on the neurofeedback
protocol you use. Some protocols affect alpha waves, while others affect
beta, alpha/theta, theta, gamma, or delta waves. Under my protocol, every
time I strayed into excess beta brain wave production, the spaceship
slowed down or the music faded away, until my brain learned to avoid that
particular pattern. So unlike peripheral biofeedback, such as practicing a
handstand, neurofeedback is a largely involuntary process in which you
shape the brain by giving it feedback only when it performs certain
actions, like flying a spaceship.
--- END PAGE 276 ---

--- PAGE 277 ---
Professional clinicians report that 90 percent of users notice
significant positive results from neurofeedback training, which can be
used for everything from reducing anxiety and stress to inducing faster
sleep onset to resetting your marijuana or alcohol tolerance. (I know you
are curious, so the answer is yes, my neurofeedback transformed me into a
cheap one-drink date.)
This type of protocol is slightly risky; it’s not something for which you
can download a free app on your phone. Every brain is different, so the
single most crucial aspect of neurofeedback training is selecting the
proper protocol. While the initial QEEG scan provides vital information
about your brain, the training plan needs to be adaptive and iterative,
based on how you personally respond to the training. This is why it is
important to have a neurofeedback practitioner oversee the entire testing
and training process. Heck, when I did my three months of training with
the Peak Brain Institute, Dr. Hill and I were text and email buddies nearly
every day, and he now has a dedicated Slack channel with overseas
assistants who can handle off-hours questions.
Two of the longest, most immersive neurofeedback protocols are
Biocybernaut (biocybernaut.com) and 40 Years of Zen
(40yearsofzen.com). Practitioners claim that these protocols are the
equivalent of several years of practicing Zen or meditation. During these
programs, you spend a full week immersed in a combination of
neurofeedback and brain wave entrainment. They are not for the faint of
heart and are guaranteed to lighten your wallet. But they can permanently
improve alpha brain wave production, thus enhancing creativity and focus
for the rest of your life. The website EEGInfo.com has a searchable
directory to help you find a certified neurofeedback practitioner in your
area.
Many brain biohackers immerse themselves in these more intensive
programs, and they are good options if you have the time and money to
--- END PAGE 277 ---

--- PAGE 278 ---
dedicate to them. While working with Peak Brain, I preferred a handful of
thirty-minute sessions each week in my home, which seemed far more
sustainable, similar to engaging in short meditation sessions every day
instead of doing one intensive ten-day Vipassana meditation course each
year.
Since then, I’ve experimented with at-home neurofeedback wearables.
For example, the Muse is a headband that uses EEG and real-time
feedback to guide you into a state of mindfulness. It delivers auditory cues,
such as nature sounds or birdsong, while tracking brain wave activity, then
shifts you toward calmer, more focused brain wave patterns associated
with meditation and mindfulness. As a small portable headband, the Muse
is handy, but a more powerful option is the Sens.ai, which is a helmet that
delivers the closest experience to clinical-grade EEG that you can get in
your own home. It’s a bit difficult to learn how to establish electrical
conductivity between the helmet and your head, but once you figure it out,
you can do your own EEG analysis, then get a multi-week journey tailored
specifically to you.
As a word of caution, neurofeedback can produce side effects, such as
panic attacks, nausea, fatigue, sleep disturbances, and irritability. But if
you follow the correct protocol with the correct electrode placements,
most side effects are minor and short-lived, and they can be quite
informative to a neurofeedback practitioner. If you experience adverse
effects, the protocol can be adjusted to steer the brain in a different
direction. But if you are training yourself with no supervision and no sense
of what is actually happening in your brain, you can easily cause adverse
effects, and if you continue engaging in unsupervised neurofeedback,
these adverse effects can become permanent. So proceed with caution and
the understanding that neurofeedback is indeed a powerful brain-
enhancing strategy—when done properly.
--- END PAGE 278 ---

--- PAGE 279 ---
It’s also important to understand that with neurofeedback, there are a
wide variety of methods that act in different ways to help your brain
function better, including the following:
• Z-score training
• LENS (low energy neurofeedback system)
• Low-frequency training
• Loretta training
• pROSHI
• NeurOptimal training
• CES (cranial electrotherapy stimulation)
These forms of neurofeedback differ in subtle but important ways, and
the average neurofeedback clinician spends many hours in training, often
to learn just one method. This training includes how to properly position
electrodes, which frequencies affect specific symptoms, and which
protocols enhance certain areas, such as increasing memory, word recall,
or athletic performance. Because of this, it’s important not to “cowboy”
neurofeedback on yourself with some random device you buy on the
internet but to instead ensure that you work closely with a practitioner
who is well versed in the protocol you’ve chosen for your specific needs.
3. Photobiomodulation
Scattered across the internet are several photos of me wearing a giant
laser-light device on my head lighting up my skull like a Christmas tree,
along with a nasal light probe shoved up my left nostril. The device, called
a Vielight, operates on the principle of photobiomodulation, or PBM. I
consider it to be the equivalent of a strong cup of coffee, most notably for
the head.
--- END PAGE 279 ---

--- PAGE 280 ---
PBM can not only regulate or even reset your body’s circadian rhythm,
but also shut down inflammation in your brain and produce significant
amounts of nitric oxide in neural tissue (NO acts like Viagra for your
brain, dilating blood vessels to increase blood flow), boost oxygenation,
and enhance memory function and cognition with a form of light called
near-infrared light. In the past, you could only find PBM devices in a
hospital or expensive clinical setting, but you can now purchase headset
devices and have them delivered to your home.
I consider the Vielight products to be the crème de la crème of PBM
devices, specifically for brain stimulation and general wellness. These
devices use transcranial intranasal light exposure and include a light-
producing headset that you place over your skull and a small probe that
you insert into your nostril, along with add-ons for your vagus nerve on
--- END PAGE 280 ---

--- PAGE 281 ---
the sides of your neck and the vagus nerve on your gut. The devices pulse
at Hz frequencies that have been shown in controlled studies to provide
an acute boost in cognitive performance that lasts several hours. These
same PBM frequencies may also reduce the risk of Alzheimer’s and
dementia or help with recovering from a concussion. Vielight even has a
pro unit that you can self-program with any frequencies you desire. I own
one and have blasted off in sixty seconds flat to a 100 Hz frequency brain
stimulation that I’d normally achieve only through hours upon hours of
meditation and breathwork.
Via infrared light, the headset and probe stimulate blood capillaries in
the nasal cavity, causing nitric oxide production and increased
mitochondrial activity in neural tissue. Much of the nitric oxide produced
not only is felt in your head but also crosses your blood-brain barrier into
the rest of your body. This means you can use PBM to beat a hangover,
assist with sleep regulation, boost blood flow before a workout, quell brain
inflammation, and improve focus. Most clinical literature indicates that
light in the low-to-mid-800 nm to mid-600 nm range is the most
beneficial, which is the range the Vielight devices use.
A host of new and surprisingly affordable PBM helmets, including the
Neuronic and MitoRed models that I own, are hitting the market. These
look like bicycle helmets but have tiny red lights inside and are controlled
with a dashboard that can be set on functions such as clearing your head
or getting more energy or sleep. The helmets are effective and at a good
price range but don’t include the intranasal features of the Vielight
devices. However, the Neuronic does use 1070 nm LEDs (light-emitting
diodes), which the latest research shows are unique in that they penetrate
farther into the skull and potentially target even more mitochondria.
As with methylene blue, more is not better when it comes to PBM. You
do not want to overstimulate the mitochondria in your brain, as this can
result in harmful oxidation. I recommend using red-light therapy on your
--- END PAGE 281 ---

--- PAGE 282 ---
head no more than once every twenty-four hours. Most units are
preprogrammed for anywhere from a five-minute to a twenty-five-minute
treatment, after which they automatically turn off, so there is no risk that
you will melt your brain.
4. Cranial Electrotherapy Stimulation
The original brain-biohacking wearable was an electric ray, also known as a
torpedo fish. Yep, you read that right. In AD 46, the personal physician to
the Roman emperor Claudius applied a live electric ray to the emperor’s
forehead to successfully relieve his migraines. Don’t believe me? Check
out the article I wrote entitled “Thousands of Years Before Modern
Electricity, Ancient Romans Used Electrotherapy to Effectively Treat
Neurological Conditions,” which you’ll find on BoundlessBook.com/6.
The electrotherapy was provided by the twitching underbelly of the
enraged fish. It filled the patient’s nose with its fishy scent and delivered
an initially painful and then numbing electric shock (roughly the same
pleasant voltage as a hair dryer dropped into a bathtub). “These are still
the early days of wearable neurostimulation,” an ancient tech blogger
would have reported. “But on the bright side, the device, while possessing
eyes and teeth, is at least conveniently wireless.” Heh.
Today, we know that electrically stimulating the trigeminal nerve,
which runs in part beneath the forehead, does suppress migraines. Indeed,
the FDA approved the first wearable neurostimulation device to treat
migraines in 2012, and the device’s primary electrode is placed on the
forehead. There are now several available devices that are far more
comfortable than an electric ray. The type of brain stimulation they use is
called cranial electrotherapy stimulation (CES), also known by the far less
marketable term electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). They cause the body to
--- END PAGE 282 ---

--- PAGE 283 ---
release large amounts of dopamine and serotonin, resulting in a state of
deep relaxation, no drugs required.
CES first came into use in 1938. The original CES user experience was
significantly worse than having an electric ray placed on your head, as Jack
Nicholson vividly demonstrated in the 1975 film One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s
Nest. That film effectively branded CES, and neurostimulation in general,
for the next thirty years as something barbaric, despite the fact that
anesthesia was widely used for CES procedures. In fact, since the 1970s,
CES patients have quietly slept through their shock therapy and have
woken up feeling better. But you wouldn’t know that from the movie.
The 1970s also saw the rise of psychiatric medications, which provided
a far superior user experience to CES—at least initially. This innovation
inspired a small group of electrical engineers to partner with medical
researchers to develop more discreet, noninvasive neurostimulation
devices that delivered small, comfortable doses of electricity on a daily
basis, as opposed to the infrequent, seizure-inducing doses of previous
forms of CES. The idea was to achieve a sort of “user-experience parity”
between a daily antidepressant pill and a low daily dose of electricity. By
the mid-1970s, several well-controlled published studies had validated
small-dose, alternating-current electrotherapy for the treatment of
depression, anxiety, and insomnia. A handful of devices emerged from
these studies as something that doctors were willing to prescribe, and in
1976, the FDA ushered cranial electrotherapy stimulation devices into the
modern era of federal regulation.
These early devices were often the size of small typewriters and were
not well suited for home use, and none was successfully commercialized
for the mass market. But by the 1980s, electrical engineers had developed
a small, portable CES device that deployed two simple electrodes worn
beneath a headband. Not only was the device easy and comfortable to use,
but it generated multiple frequencies that allowed its alternating current
--- END PAGE 283 ---

--- PAGE 284 ---
to reach deep within the brain. The stimulation effectively dampened the
brain’s default mode network, a central region of the brain that is
hyperactive during periods of stress.
CES has advanced far beyond early forms of therapy, and these devices
are now available to anyone, even without a physician’s prescription. The
CES device I use is called a Circadia, and it works like gangbusters if I am
agitated, frustrated, moody, or overwhelmed; if I’m having difficulty
relaxing and quieting my mind; or if I have a headache, insomnia,
jitteriness, or a tight jaw. A similar device is DAVID Delight Pro by Mind
Alive, which features audiovisual entrainment (see below) in addition to
CES. To settle the brain or get a slight pick-me-up without the use of an
electric ray, using a CES device is a handy strategy.
5. Brain Wave Entrainment
As you learned earlier in this chapter, brain wave entrainment involves
using external stimuli to synchronize your brain’s electrical activity. It is
based on the fact that the brain tends to change its dominant electrical
frequency to that of whatever dominant external stimulus it is exposed to.
This allows you to enter different states of consciousness, such as deep
relaxation or expanded awareness.
Audio and visual brain wave entrainment techniques are less targeted
than neurofeedback but easier to use. During a brain wave entrainment
session, you temporarily increase communication between your brain’s
right and left hemispheres, a process called hemispheric synchronization,
which is similar to what you would achieve with a microdose of LSD or
when learning a new skill.
Most brain wave entrainment devices use either an app or software
that connects to the headphones, either through Bluetooth or through a
wire connected to a smartphone or computer. There are also handheld
--- END PAGE 284 ---

--- PAGE 285 ---
devices that connect to headphones and eyewear. For example, brain wave
entrainment apps use audio signals like binaural beats, and monaural
tones are ideally used with headphones so that both ears receive the signal
simultaneously. Others rely on isochronic tones, which are single tones
that sound repeatedly, and do not require headphones. One of the most
popular apps is Holosync, which entrains your brain into a delta brain
wave state to reduce stress.
Other devices use artificial intelligence algorithms to create
soundtracks that elicit focus, creativity, or relaxation by triggering specific
brain wave responses; Brain.fm is one of the most popular. For sleep and
relaxation, which is primarily what I use sounds for, I am partial to
binaural beats combined with artificial intelligence. For that, I used to use
the white noise and binaural beats app SleepStream or the AI-driven
sound creator Brain.fm, but these days I usually opt for NuCalm, which
has specially engineered tracks ranging from a twenty-minute power nap
to ten hours of deep sleep. I often play these through noise-blocking
headphones on planes or through SleepPhone soft headphones for
bedtime. That may sound like a potent combination (and I’ll describe it in
more detail in chapter 7), but my head hasn’t exploded yet.
Another effective approach is the use of audiovisual machines. These
small, phone-sized devices use pulses of auditory and visual stimuli to
alter brain waves. One of the better units is the DAVID Delight mentioned
earlier, which also contains a built-in CES feature. I own one of these and
have found it useful when I’m on an airplane or in another stressful
environment and I want to block out all stimuli; when I don’t have the
time or ability to take a nap; and when I want to use a bit of better living
through science to enhance focus or meditation. I consider it, from a
sensory standpoint, to be the technological equivalent of a float tank.
Next, there are entrainment-based headbands that can be used for
sleep, meditation, or relaxation. These headbands are made of soft,
--- END PAGE 285 ---

--- PAGE 286 ---
comfortable fabric that wraps around your head and contains sensors that
detect and react to your sleep patterns. For example, when the sensors
detect deep, delta slow-wave sleep, the speakers inside the headband play
audio tones that increase the brain’s production of delta brain waves.
Currently, these headbands include the Dreem, Sleep Shepherd, and
Philips SmartSleep. These devices also connect to apps that track your
sleep data, send you tips for improving your sleep, and even gently wake
you in the morning during your lightest sleep stage and in the time range
you select. The bad part? Several of my colleagues and I have tested the
electromagnetic fields coming from these devices, and they all—at least at
this point, in terms of the limitations of the technology—produce very
high amounts of dirty electricity (explained in detail in chapter 20)
directly next to your head when they are communicating with a
smartphone: the equivalent of holding a phone next to your head during
the entire night. So be sure you are not wearing the device on your head
when you sync it to a phone.
Finally, my personal favorites are light-sound stimulation machines
that can blast me into a state of hypnosis or a sensory adventure similar to
that of a magic mushroom journey—with none of the side effects or
hangovers. The two best are the BrainTap and the NeuroVizr. The
BrainTap is a pair of light-producing glasses connected to over-ear
headphones that utilizes a combination of LEDs and rhythmic auditory
stimulation to create an immersive experience via stimulation of the
photoreceptors in your eyes and ears, paired with hundreds of training
sessions for everything from turning your body into its own pain-killing
chemical machine to inducing deep sleep to guided breathwork sessions
(with a few from yours truly). The NeuroVizr is similar but is a bit shorter
and more intense. The best way I can describe my first NeuroVizr session
is that it was as though I’d been blasted off into carefree outer space for
what felt like hours and turned out to be just eleven minutes. It comes
--- END PAGE 286 ---

--- PAGE 287 ---
with your own personal brain coach to assist you in achieving and
maintaining states of focus, relaxation, and mental clarity, depending on
what you select in the paired app.
6. N-Back Training
If you see me, eyebrows furrowed and fumbling with my phone, waiting to
board a flight, standing in line at the DMV, or waiting for a chiropractic
adjustment, it is highly likely that I am using an n-back training app.
Available in free or inexpensive phone apps and computer software, n-
back training involves increasingly difficult levels requiring recall of
certain letters and numbers—and sometimes sounds. A University of
Switzerland study and a German study demonstrated that just a few weeks
of n-back training can increase executive function (the mental processes
that enable you to plan, focus, recall instructions, and successfully
multitask), along with the abilities to practice mental discipline,
concentrate intently on one task while ignoring all else, mentally
compartmentalize activities, direct attention with extreme specificity, and
apply all creative energy toward one task until it’s completed. In other
words, n-back training induces the exact opposite of ADHD symptoms.
Considering their ease of use and affordability, I think everybody should
have one of these apps on their computer, phone, or e-reader. In fact, if
you want to introduce a child in your life to technology that can upgrade
the brain, n-back training is a good choice.
THE LAST WORD
Perhaps you are thinking, “Couldn’t I just do a crossword puzzle, play
sudoku, or read a riddle book?” Sure. But while these brain exercises do
--- END PAGE 287 ---

--- PAGE 288 ---
help age-proof your brain and keep it functioning at peak capacity, none
are as powerful as the methods described in this chapter. Should you want
to go the simple route anyway, just know that to qualify as an effective
brain exercise, an activity must present your brain with novelty, variety,
and challenge.
In addition to crossword puzzles, brain aerobic books, new board
games, and new mind-challenging sports such as ping-pong (did you know
table tennis players are the smartest athletes on the planet, and, along the
same lines, top chess players achieve longevity benefits similar to elite
athletes’?), brain training can include structured apps like Fit Brains or the
Lumosity or Brainscape apps, which allow you to create your own
flashcards and learning activities. To stay on the cutting edge of brain-
hacking gear, I also recommend you check out Quantified Self
(quantifiedself.com), an online community of people tracking their own
N=1 experiments.
Should all this information be slightly overwhelming, I have included
in this summary a practical sample week of brain training with the devices
you have just discovered.
Monday Through Friday
If you work at a desk, try donning a PBM or PEMF device set in alpha
mode for the first twenty to twenty-five minutes of your workday. It’ll feel
like a cup of coffee and a carwash for your brain. To boost the cognition-
enhancing effects, pipe Brain.fm focus tracks through your speakers or
headphones.
Duck away for a quick nap or recharge session using a light-sound
machine like the BrainTap or a CES device like the Circadia, or simply grab
the same PBM or PEMF device and switch it to a more relaxing mode.
--- END PAGE 288 ---

--- PAGE 289 ---
Every Night
Use SleepStream, Brain.fm, or NuCalm to lull you into relaxing delta brain
waves for a night of sleep.
To boost the brain-relaxing effect, use a PBM device set to sleep mode.
Just remember: more PBM is not better, so if you opt to stimulate your
brain twice a day with red light, shorten your morning and evening
sessions to just ten to twelve minutes each.
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday
Upregulate focus and downregulate distractibility with a custom
neurofeedback session from the Muse or Sens.ai.
--- END PAGE 289 ---

--- PAGE 290 ---
Saturday or Sunday
Play a round of n-back training. Keep an n-back app handy so you can toy
around with it while you are waiting to board a flight, are stuck in line, or
have a long ride in the back of a taxi or rideshare. You may also want to lie
back, take one of the nootropics from chapter 5, and immerse yourself in a
light-sound stimulated breathwork session.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Pick one of the following tasks for this week:
• Download an n-back training app and commit to practicing for just five
minutes per day for seven days in a row.
• Download Sleepstream, Brain.fm, NuCalm, or all three, and try a
power nap.
• Order one of the pieces of headgear described in this chapter. Most
have money-back guarantees, so it doesn’t hurt to at least try PEMF,
PBM, or neurofeedback, for example, to see how it works for you.
• Choose one activity that makes smoke come out of your ears, like
learning a new song on an instrument (or learning a new instrument!),
playing ping-pong or tennis, doing a crossword puzzle, or reading a
book about a complex topic.
--- END PAGE 290 ---

--- PAGE 291 ---
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/6. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 291 ---

--- PAGE 292 ---
07
SLEEP
HOW TO FIX JET LAG, NAP LIKE A
CHAMP, AND TRACK SLEEP CYCLES
Within five minutes of crashing into my dual-gel-layer mattress, I place a small
vibrating device on my ankle that produces a haptic sensation to lull my brain
into relaxation and will turn back on again if I wake up in the wee hours. Pumped
into both ears via soft sleeping headphones are “sleep beats” that ease me into
a delta brain wave state, along with AI-generated sleep sounds that “confuse”
--- END PAGE 292 ---

--- PAGE 293 ---
my brain into being tired. Then I do the quick one-tap hack on my phone to
disable Wi-Fi and Bluetooth and suck all the blue light out of the screen.
As I proceed to my bedtime reading while propped up on a pillow encased
in grounding, anti-inflammatory fabric, a red-light helmet pulses my brain
with a relaxing 10 Hz signal to shift me from stress to relaxation. My book
is lit by an inexpensive red-light headlamp, the only source of light in a
room equipped with blackout curtains on all the windows. Under my top
sheet, a long blue mat delivers a sleep-inducing (PEMF) signal that
generates delta waves that will continue to run throughout the night. On
my bedside table, a nebulizing oil diffuser mists a lavender-rose-bergamot
blend into the air, enveloping me in a sleep-inducing aroma. Surging under
my body is 65-degree air circulated by a miniature box next to my bed.
Next, I touch a remote control, and a silver fabric curtain drops down
around the bed, cutting off all cell phone towers, radio waves, and
electromagnetic fields. I remove my headlamp and, to enter a state of
calm, replace it with a luscious, silky wraparound sleep mask, which my
wife has affectionately dubbed my “sleep princess mask.”
Perhaps she is right. Maybe I am a sleep princess. But I will own it
because I consider the emphasis I place on sleep quantity and quality to be
crucial to much of my career, relationship, and athletic success. Sleep, as
you’ll learn in this chapter, is critical for cognitive function, focus, and
self-control, and poor or insufficient sleep can cause everything from poor
blood sugar control to inflammation to food cravings, poor recovery, and
even depression.
While my pre-sleep routine may seem like a laborious flurry of effort, it
is actually a series of fully automated habits that takes me less than five
minutes to complete, similar to brushing my teeth. Sure, my sleep hygiene
protocol has plenty of components, but I am a relentless self-
experimenter and an immersive journalist whose job involves testing what
does and doesn’t work for enhancing relaxation and deep sleep, and I
--- END PAGE 293 ---

--- PAGE 294 ---
don’t expect everyone to go to such extremes. But small adjustments—
such as optimizing your bedroom’s nightly temperature or changing your
brain wave frequencies with simple technology—can add up quickly and
improve your health and productivity.
Fact is, since cracking the code on sleep with even the simplest
methods in this chapter, my sleep quality has been shockingly good,
whether I am curled up on an airplane, passed out on the floor of my
office, or slumbering in an Airbnb or (my favorite) in my cozy bedroom at
home. In this chapter, you are going to discover all these tactics—the
tried-and-true, in-the-trenches techniques for enhancing sleep.
SLEEP 101
Nearly every human on this planet functions best by sleeping seven to
nine hours a night. Granted, I’m a rule breaker since I sleep only about six
to seven hours at night and then take a twenty-to-sixty-minute nap during
the day (this is called polyphasic sleeping, and you’ll learn more about it
and other advanced sleep hacks later). But the general idea is that roughly
one-third of every twenty-four-hour cycle should be devoted to sleep, and
often more than that in a growing child or heavily training athlete.
That may seem like a lot of sleep to you, but sleep is pretty darn
important. If someone says they need less sleep than the average person,
99.5 percent of the time they’re incorrect. Granted, not everyone responds
to sleep loss the same way. Studies on twins have uncovered surprising
genetic variations that may protect some people from sleep deprivation.
For example, the p.Tyr362His variant of the BHLHE41 gene allows some
people to maintain normal alertness and show limited signs of
inflammation on less sleep. A mutation in the DEC2 gene allows others to
remain healthy with an 11:00 p.m. to midnight bedtime and a 5:00 a.m.
wake time. While an overachiever’s dream might be to have some kind of
--- END PAGE 294 ---

--- PAGE 295 ---
gene mutation that allows normal function with just four to six hours of
sleep a night, the fact is that these genes are rare: they occur in about 0.5
percent of the population.
Even celebrities and athletes who don’t sleep much—the “sleepless
elite” like Barack Obama, Dean Karnazes, Martha Stewart, and Donald
Trump, all of whom claim to sleep only four or five hours per night—are
probably sacrificing something in other parts of their lives to get such
small amounts of shut-eye. Somewhere in their work, creativity or
memory is suffering. Somewhere in their body, inflammation is running
rampant. Somewhere in a muscle or brain cell, regeneration is not
occurring. This is the kind of biological damage you invite when you don’t
sleep enough, especially when you combine lack of sleep with intense
physical or mental activity. In fact, if you don’t sleep in a twenty-four-hour
period, you will die sooner.
Okay, that may be a slight exaggeration. After all, nearly everyone has
pulled an all-nighter at least once. While it can be an unpleasant
experience, you can almost entirely recover from the damages of a lost
night of sleep with a single night of eight or nine hours’ sleep. (The
strategies on the facing page will help.)
In Case You’re Wondering
The introduction to this chapter may already have you curious about my top
sleep tools. They are, in no particular order:
• A good, toxin-free mattress (my top three choices are Intellibed, Essentia,
and Samina)
• An electrical stimulation device like the Circadia, Pulsetto, or TruVaga
(great for relaxation via vagal nerve stimulation)
• Hapbee and Apollo wearables for relaxation
• The SleepStream, NuCalm, and Brain.fm apps as personal sleep-noise
“DJs”
--- END PAGE 295 ---

--- PAGE 296 ---
• A portable PEMF device (for travel) and a larger PEMF mat (for home)
• Lavender, rose, and bergamot essential oils with an optional essential oil
diffuser
• A Samina Sleep System, chiliPAD, or BedJet for bed cooling
• Blue-light-blocking glasses (Ra Optics is a good brand)
• Red incandescent light bulbs (for home) and a red-light headlamp (for
travel)
• A wraparound sleep mask and wraparound soft sleep headphones
• Blackout curtains
• A bed Faraday cage (admittedly a bit extreme, but useful if you are
electrohypersensitve or want to cut yourself off from all technology and
electrical signals; Shielded Healing is a good brand)
• The 1TapZap software or red-light iPhone trick and sleep shortcut I’ll
include a link to on the resources page for this chapter
Because I am an immersive journalist and biohacker, my methods and tools
can change from month to month, but at the time of this writing, those are
my biggest wins for sleep. You’ll find links to all the sleep-enhancing tools
mentioned in this chapter, along with constant updates to my relaxation,
napping, and sleep routines, at BoundlessBook.com/7.
--- END PAGE 296 ---

--- PAGE 297 ---
How to Mitigate the Damage of a Night of
Lost Sleep1. 
Stay Hydrated.
Your cells require both water and minerals to maintain the aqueous matrix in
which they reside. In times of stress, such as after a night of poor or lost
sleep, optimizing your cells’ environment becomes even more important.
--- END PAGE 297 ---

--- PAGE 298 ---
When fighting through sleep loss, go out of your way to consume good
clean water with electrolyte powder and trace liquid minerals and add a
quality salt to your food. This will also help control the raging appetite that
sleep deprivation notoriously causes.2.

Caffeinate Smart.
Don’t overconsume coffee. Despite the exhaustion you may feel from sleep
deprivation, consuming too much caffeine may reduce the quality of the
next night’s sleep. This will make you even more tired the next day so that
you have to drink even more coffee, and the cycle will continue.
One or two 8-ounce cups of coffee during the day will keep your eyes open
without derailing your next night of sleep, although amounts will vary
whether you’re a fast versus a slow caffeine oxidizer, which can be
ascertained from a simple salivary DNA test. Pass on the energy drinks and
quad-shot caramel frappés, and prepare your caffeine wisely. Extra sugar
means an extra-hard crash.3. 
Move It.
The best way to reset your internal clock is to get outside, catch some rays,
and do some light aerobic exercise, whether it’s yoga or a quick walk. The
movement, light, and vitamin D will realign your circadian rhythm and
eliminate some of your sleep-deprived anxiety. Research shows that the two
--- END PAGE 298 ---

--- PAGE 299 ---
best forms of exercise if you’re sleep-deprived are light aerobic cardio (for
example, walking on a treadmill desk during phone calls) and brief five-to-
ten minute bursts of high-intensity cardio spread throughout the day. I try to
throw a couple cold showers or cold plunges into that scenario.4.

Eat Right.
Your sleep cycle regulates your appetite. When you are sleep-deprived, your
hunger hormone (ghrelin) levels will be high and your satiated hormone
(leptin) levels will be low. Don’t opt for refined carbs and fats, which would
make you more tired. Your goal is to achieve a slow, steady burn of energy.
You can get this from foods that are high in protein, low in fat, and low on
the glycemic index, and also from satiating supplements like essential amino
acids or drinkable ketones. Protein intake also increases the production of
orexin, a hormone that keeps you awake and alert. The two best
supplements I’ve used for combating the effects of sleep deprivation are
NAD and creatine, because NAD can simulate the cellular repair and
recovery that should have occurred while sleeping and creatine can
replenish ATP levels. Your creatine dosage for this goal should be higher
than the normal recommendation of 5 g per day. For example, on a sleep-
deprived day, 5 g dosed two or three times throughout the day is a good
strategy for optimized mental function.5. 
Buffer Immunity.
When you are sleep-deprived, your immune system function declines and
levels of pro-inflammatory compounds increase. So you can, for example,
take 1,000 mg of activated charcoal to flush circulating toxins out of your
system and place four or five drops of oregano oil under your tongue to
--- END PAGE 299 ---

--- PAGE 300 ---
protect yourself against foodborne and airborne bacteria. To reduce
inflammation and boost your immune system, you can also consume the oral
peptide BPC-157, a done-for-you turmeric-based anti-inflammatory blend
like Kion Flex, or a polyphenol-rich greens and/or red powder blend.6. 
Nap Right.
While there are dangers that accompany regular polyphasic sleep (sleep in
multiple shorter episodes rather than in one large chunk), this strategy can
help you get through a brief period of sleep deprivation. The next time
you’re facing a long week of studying or you have an impending deadline to
meet, try implementing a polyphasic sleep routine. It repairs your body
about as much as possible without the proper seven to nine hours of shut-
eye that most people need. Get at least three hours of sleep per night, then
take three twenty-minute naps throughout the day. This will remediate your
lost night of sleep without destroying the next one. Incidentally, this is my
personal approach every day. I sleep only six to seven hours a night so that
I’m able to have a long, luxurious, uninterrupted morning routine that
typically begins at around 4:30 to 5 a.m. after a 9:30 p.m. bedtime, and then
I catch up on extra rest with a twenty-to-sixty-minute post-lunch siesta,
meditation session, or yoga nidra non-sleep deep rest (NSDR) protocol.
If you really want to upgrade your nap, I recommend a few key tools: the
NuCalm, Brain.FM, and/or Sleepstream app, the Apollo vibrating band, the
Hapbee magnetic relaxation device, a good sleep mask, some noise-
blocking headphones, and an adaptogenic herb such as reishi, tulsi,
astragalus, or ashwagandha. I cannot recommend highly enough the
NuCalm device, which combines specially programmed sounds that slip you
in and out of conscious and subconscious states with a frequency bracelet
and vagal nerve stimulator. Initial studies of this device indicate that the
PowerNap function can simulate a full ninety-minute sleep cycle in just
--- END PAGE 300 ---

--- PAGE 301 ---
twenty minutes! Visit BoundlessBook.com/7 for a link to a fascinating
interview I recorded with the inventor of the device.
But cumulative sleep loss is a different story. In one study, researchers
constructed a cruel contraption that woke up rats as soon as they fell
asleep. Using this contraption, it took an average of three weeks to kill a
rat via sleep deprivation. Research also suggests that because sleep
deprivation raises cortisol levels and inhibits neurogenesis, it eventually
leads to brain damage.
For ethical reasons, researchers cannot reproduce these studies in
humans. But by looking at human sleep disorders, you can get a clear idea
of what happens when people don’t sleep enough. For example, in people
with fatal familial insomnia, progressively worsening insomnia caused by a
genetic mutation, death occurs within a few months. The autoimmune
disease Morvan’s syndrome destroys the brain’s potassium channels,
leading to severe insomnia and, ultimately, death.
Sleep disorders also cause high blood pressure and heart disease and
add $16 billion to national healthcare costs per year. That doesn’t even
include the cost of accidents and lost productivity at work, which in the
US alone amounts to $150 billion per year. Remember the nuclear
meltdown at Three Mile Island? The explosion and nuclear fallout at
Chernobyl? The gas leak at Bhopal? The Zeebrugge ferry accident? The
Exxon Valdez oil spill? These and many other industrial disasters have
been directly linked to sleep deprivation.
Why is sleep deprivation fatal? There are two main reasons. The first is
that while you sleep, your brain reorganizes neural networks and cleans up
cellular garbage, such as metabolic by-products. Throughout the day, even
on the most boring day possible, you are consciously or subconsciously
learning new things, memorizing facts or task processes, acquiring skills,
--- END PAGE 301 ---

--- PAGE 302 ---
and building memories through creative associations. By the end of each
day, your brain is full of discrete pieces of information that have to be
integrated with all the other information you have stored over your
lifetime.
If this reorganization doesn’t occur, your mind becomes a chaotic
storehouse for cellular garbage and you run out of space for new
memories. This affects nearly every function of your body that is governed
by your central nervous system and causes the following:
• Poor heat regulation
• A decline in immune function
• Increased levels of cortisol, catecholamines, interleukin, C-reactive
protein, and other stress and inflammatory hormones
• Imbalances in appetite- and blood-sugar-regulating hormones
This is why sleep deprivation makes it so freakin’ hard to eat and
exercise right, much less make it through a day of mentally demanding
work. Your body is chock-full of inflammation, hormone imbalances, and
blood sugar dysregulation and is operating well below peak capacity. To
make matters worse, sleep deprivation also makes you downright weak
and ugly. Skeletal muscle protein synthesis and a proanabolic state
plummets with one night of sleep deprivation, and in ratings of physical
attractiveness and social appeal, people who had as little as two days of
sleep restriction ranked far lower. Fact is, many people live much of their
adult lives in this state, thinking it is completely normal to feel weak, look
haggard, and operate like a walking zombie.
It is important to understand that the fix is not an easy day or a period
of putting your feet up. Unlike rest or conservation of energy, neural
repair requires your brain to be entirely shut off from input. This means
you must be asleep for your neurons to recover.
--- END PAGE 302 ---

--- PAGE 303 ---
The second reason you will die if you don’t sleep is that sleep is the
primary anabolic state of the human body. As you sleep, your body
produces necessary growth hormone and testosterone, important muscle-
repairing hormones that also enhance neural growth. The researchers
from one study stated that these hormonal surges play a “crucial role in
consolidating and enhancing waking experience.” This is why you feel so
damn good after a solid night of sleep. It is also why your body can take
two to three times longer to repair and recover from physical exercise
when you are sleep-deprived.
Sleep enhances not only neural and muscular repair but also adrenal
gland function, liver detoxification, and immune system function. In fact,
one of the leading causes of death in those sleep-deprived rats I
mentioned earlier was bacterial infections resulting from a decline in
immune function. New research shows that severe sleep loss jolts the
immune system into a state of imbalanced hyperactivity, the same type of
immediate response shown during exposure to stress. This is why I shake
my head and feel sorry for people who brag about how little they sleep.
They are shrinking their brains, shrinking their muscles, and making
themselves sick.
Does Self-Quantification Suck the
Enjoyment out of Sleep and Exercise?
You may be wondering if an apparent obsession with self-quantification and
biohacking is healthy. Should you quantify metrics such as exercise and
sleep, or are there proven drawbacks? Are there hidden costs?
Turns out an article in the Journal of Consumer Research looked into this
and reported on the results of six experiments on devices that measured
activities such as walking or reading.
--- END PAGE 303 ---

--- PAGE 304 ---
For example, in one experiment, researchers had 105 students color in
shapes for a few minutes, then rate how much they enjoyed it. Those who
got numerical feedback on their coloring (such as “You have colored one
shape”) colored more shapes but reported that they enjoyed it less.
In two other experiments, researchers gave one hundred people pedometers
(step-counting devices) to wear throughout the day. Just like the coloring
students, the people wearing the pedometers walked more than the people
without pedometers but also reported enjoying the activity less, even when
they didn’t have access to the device’s feedback and metrics. So it seems
the mere act of wearing a device during an activity may take some of the
enjoyment out of it.
In another experiment, three hundred students who read for a brief period
of time while having their reading metrics recorded did, as you’d probably
guess, read more than a control group, but the measured group enjoyed the
reading less, especially when they could see how many pages they had read
(ahem: Kindle, anyone?).
The article in the Journal of Consumer Research hypothesized that this
phenomenon occurs because measuring an activity can undermine intrinsic
motivation to complete the activity. By drawing attention to the output
rather than the process, constant measurement and quantification can make
enjoyable activities feel more like work, thus reducing their enjoyment. The
consequence can be decreased engagement in the activity and decreased
subjective well-being.
In summary: measuring something like exercise may make you exercise more
but enjoy the exercise less.
The same could potentially be said of sleep. Sure, you might quantify a good
night of sleep, but did you wake up wondering about your sleep metrics
rather than being grateful that you feel like a million bucks?
I’m not about to stop quantifying. But based on these findings, I’ve
implemented some rules to keep quantification from ruining my enjoyment:1. 
I track, but I don’t obsess. I wear a self-quantification ring and a
continuous blood glucose monitor (CGM) nearly every day, but I don’t
obsess over the results or run statistical evaluations on them daily.
Instead, at the end of the day, I take a quick glance at a few key metrics.
Did I do a good job of not sitting for unbroken periods longer than an
--- END PAGE 304 ---

--- PAGE 305 ---
hour? Did I reach my daily goal of fifteen thousand steps? Was my heart
rate or body temperature higher than usual, indicating excessive stress or
overtraining? Did my blood glucose repeatedly spike? Then I move on,
always reminding myself that it’s important to spend my time
experiencing life, not analyzing it or staring at a screen that tells me how
my life is going.2.

I’m careful with electrical pollution. As I discuss in my podcast episode
“Is Bluetooth Radiation Dangerous?” I am careful not to put devices on
my body that constantly emit a Wi-Fi or Bluetooth signal. I simply haven’t
seen enough research to feel confident that this type of constant
exposure is safe or healthy long term.3.

I listen to my body. If a self-quantification device tells you that you
exceeded your daily activity goals, you might be tempted to have a slice
of cheesecake after dinner, even if you’re not hungry. Or, if your device
tells you that you got forty-five minutes less sleep than you normally do,
you might be tempted to be tired or grumpy that day, even if you’re
really not that tired. So every morning, I’m careful to take some quiet
time to listen to my body and feel out what my energy levels really are,
and when I have a day full of activity, I’m careful not to stuff my face as
some kind of reward or refueling effort and instead eat mindfully, asking
myself whether I am actually hungry or I’m having a knee-jerk reaction to
technology. It’s important to simultaneously realize the predictive power
of wearables, since multiple studies have shown that changes in body
temperature, heart rate, breathing rate, heart rate variability, and sleep
efficiency can detect the onset of injury and illness (including viral
infections like COVID) two to three days before any noticeable symptoms
such as a sore throat or muscle strain occur!4. 
I recognize the value of intrinsic motivation. Extrinsic motivation comes
from knowing your ring or bracelet is tracking what you’re doing;
somebody on social media is watching you; or there is some kind of
event you’ve signed up for, like a triathlon, where people will see you try
to achieve your goals. There’s nothing wrong with that. But you need to
recognize the value of intrinsic motivation, too. Intrinsic motivation arises
from the experience of simply enjoying something—you get some kind of
joy, some kind of satisfaction, some feeling of competence from the
activity. You’re establishing a deeper connection with yourself, whether
you’re exercising or sleeping. So sometimes it is important to stop, not
--- END PAGE 305 ---

--- PAGE 306 ---
necessarily to remove your self-quantification device, but to ask yourself
whether you’d be enjoying and doing what it is you’re doing if it wasn’t
being quantified—focusing on not just the destination (like the
achievement of fifteen thousand steps) but the journey (the sun on your
face and wind on your skin as you take those steps).
Okay, I’ll step off my soapbox now. Don’t worry about self-quantification
ruining your life, but be careful with exposure to technology, obsessing too
much, and forgetting to occasionally unplug, listen to your body, and follow
your intrinsic motivation. And if you find that exercise is no longer enjoyable
or your sleep is becoming disrupted, try removing your device for a few
days and see whether that changes things!
YOUR CIRCADIAN RHYTHM
DECODED
Before diving into the tactics that will prevent sleep-related health
damage, it is important to understand the basics of circadian rhythm.
Everything in the rest of this chapter will make more sense if you know
what a twenty-four-hour cycle of sleeping and waking looks like, as well as
how your body responds to factors like sunrise, meal timing, workout
timing, sex, and sunset. As you read through this section, you will discover
many of my practical tips, so don’t skip it because you don’t like science. I
promise to make it easy to understand!
Around 6:00 a.m., cortisol levels rise and, to wake you up, stimulate
certain activities, such as increasing the heart rate and glucose uptake by
the brain. At the same time, your body releases the hormone vasoactive
intestinal polypeptide, fittingly called VIP (the same peptide I described in
chapters 4 and 5 as being helpful for the blood-brain barrier and for
healing from mold and mycotoxin exposure). VIP stimulates actions
associated with waking activity, such as vasodilation, increased
--- END PAGE 306 ---

--- PAGE 307 ---
contractility (strength of contraction) in your heart, and liver
glycogenolysis (the breakdown of liver glycogen stores to elevate your
blood sugar). All these activities result in more blood, nutrients, and
oxygen being delivered to your brain, muscles, and other tissues.
VIP relaxes the smooth muscles of your trachea, stomach, and
gallbladder, allowing for a glorious bowel movement within two hours of
waking. I have also found that with a serving of the Ayurvedic herbal
formula triphala, kiwi extract powder, or a botanical herbal tablet like
BM2HX Botanical Cleansing Complex at night paired with 400 mg of
magnesium, along with a piping-hot cup of black coffee or tea in the
morning, I can poop at around 8:30 every morning, two hours after I wake.
If I have constipation, which often happens while traveling, a 10 to 15 mg
nicotine patch placed over the ileocecal sphincter (lower right side of the
abdomen) can also enhance gastric motility and the onset of a good poop.
VIP also promotes the secretion of ghrelin, the hormone responsible for
making you hungry. If you have imbalances in ghrelin levels, which often
manifest as cravings throughout the day, it is crucial to eat a meal within
two hours of waking because a regularly timed breakfast helps reset your
hormonal cycle. In this case, skipping breakfast to fast may do more harm
than good (despite the benefits that accompany fasting and caloric
restriction, which will be explored in depth in chapter 19).
Within your eyes and skin are cells known as photoreceptors, a type of
light-sensitive neural cell. These photoreceptors turn light into electrical
signals that trigger waking activity and regulate your circadian rhythm. By
exposing yourself to sunlight in the morning, you can not only maximize
cortisol’s effects on your body but also stimulate your photoreceptors to
enhance both your daily energy levels and your nightly sleep. The blue
light that the sun produces in the morning interacts with your
photoreceptors to improve alertness and mood, jump-start your circadian
rhythm, and suppress levels of the hormone melatonin, which is
--- END PAGE 307 ---

--- PAGE 308 ---
responsible for making you feel tired. Morning sun exposure not only
shifts your circadian rhythm back, allowing you to fall asleep more easily
at your desired bedtime, but can even cause cortisol levels to decline
earlier in the evening so you don’t have excessively high cortisol levels
when you go to bed. To get these energy- and sleep-enhancing benefits, go
for a simple twenty-to-thirty-minute morning walk, hike, or bicycle ride,
or do a light yoga or breathwork session outdoors. In addition, as you will
learn in chapter 8, doing these activities in a fasted state first thing in the
morning will enhance your ability to burn fat for the rest of the day.
If you can’t get morning sun exposure, you can still maximize
cortisol’s effects with light to moderate amounts of coffee or green tea. A
morning cold plunge can also do the trick, as can a blue-light-producing
device such as the Auro or Re-Timer glasses or the Beacon40 or Ayo desk
lamp. If you opt for a blue-light-producing device, it is best to simulate
natural sunlight as closely as possible by including red-light exposure with
a tool such as a Joovv photobiomodulation panel, an infrared sauna, or an
incandescent red light bulb in your office or home. But nothing is quite as
effective as sunlight. This is why you may need little to no coffee in the
summer but are a complete bear if you don’t have your cup o’ joe in the
dark winter months. In an ideal scenario, while sipping my morning coffee,
I use some form of a blue light/red light combo for about twenty minutes,
then hit the bathroom and head outside for a movement session in the sun
or under bright lights in the gym.
From the time you wake up—which will vary significantly based on
your chronobiology (that is, the genetic preset for your sleep-wake cycles)
—until about 11:00 a.m., sex hormone levels peak (good to know if you
want to sneak in a quickie before heading to work!). If you are male, and
especially if you are under forty-five years old, you produce the most
testosterone when you enter the first rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
cycle each night and maintain a high production rate until you wake up.
--- END PAGE 308 ---

--- PAGE 309 ---
After you wake, testosterone levels decline over the course of the day, with
surges in secretion occurring about every ninety minutes. At the end of
the day, testosterone levels reach their lowest point, and the cycle begins
again when you enter your first REM cycle later that night. This is one
reason why I’m not a huge fan of testosterone injections for testosterone
replacement therapy and instead recommend a slow-release pellet or a
cream applied scrotally twice a day, since these methods more closely
mimic the natural diurnal variation in testosterone rather than creating a
couple of huge spikes each week.
Like men, women have daily circadian rhythms, but they also have
menstrual cycles that significantly impact their sleep and hormones. For
example, hormonal fluctuations associated with the menstrual cycle
increase slow-wave (deep) sleep and reduce REM sleep between ovulation
and menstruation. Research suggests that women experience a daily
testosterone cycle similar to that of men, although women’s testosterone
levels cycle at a lower level. Since testosterone is responsible for
stimulating sex drive, if your libido is flagging, morning sex may help reset
your circadian rhythm, especially if you have been having trouble sleeping
later at night. Having regular sex in the morning signals your body to
release more sex hormones at the ideal times of day, which is important
because there is a direct correlation between sleep abnormalities and
hormone imbalances.
Around 2:30 p.m., muscle coordination and reaction time peak, and
around 5:30 p.m., cardiovascular efficiency, body temperature, protein
synthesis, and recovery capacity peak, making these ideal times for intense
workouts. When I have the luxury of choosing when to work out, I do my
hard workouts in the late afternoon or early evening, finishing at least
three hours before bedtime. This is why I encourage folks to do a light
aerobic exercise session in the morning and save the hard interval or
weight training for later in the day. Not only will it help align your
--- END PAGE 309 ---

--- PAGE 310 ---
circadian rhythms properly (especially if the morning session is in
sunshine), but it will also enable you to perform at peak capacity during
your heavy training sessions, enhance your fat-burning rate in the next
morning’s light aerobic exercise (as long as that exercise is performed in a
fasted state), avoid excessively raising cortisol when cortisol is already
high, and, if you fast for one to two hours following your afternoon or
evening session, even equip you for a surge in growth hormone and
testosterone. In addition, if you eat the majority of your carbohydrates in
the evening (as I do), training hard late in the day ensures you are highly
sensitive to insulin and carbohydrates and far less likely to experience
excessive spikes in blood glucose or insulin while still allowing you to top
off your energy stores for the next day’s activities, and the surge in
serotonin that occurs after carbohydrate consumption will help you sleep
more soundly.
At sunset, your blood pressure and body temperature peak. While
these are normal aspects of your circadian rhythm, I recommend taking a
cold shower or cold soak to help your body naturally drop its temperature
after you fall asleep (a concept addressed at the end of this section).
From sunset to bedtime, which will also vary depending on your
chronobiology, the hormones leptin and adiponectin are released to burn
fat while you sleep. But high insulin levels, a sedentary afternoon, a high-
calorie evening meal, and frequent grazing throughout the day all suppress
the secretion of leptin and adiponectin, and even excessive nighttime light
exposure can suppress leptin release. To maximize the fat-burning effects
of these hormones, avoid high calorie intake in the afternoon and evening
or perform a hard workout in the afternoon, and limit your exposure to
backlit screens after sunset. If you do use screens, install software like Iris
on your computer, activate night mode, or even Google “red light iPhone
trick” to get less blue light on your phone, and install hardware like a
DriftTV box on your television to reduce blue light. To enhance
--- END PAGE 310 ---

--- PAGE 311 ---
adiponectin release, you can take 300 to 500 mg of magnesium before bed.
Incidentally, moderate amounts of coconut oil, MCT oil, nut butters,
seeds, nuts, and even fructose from raw honey do not significantly spike
insulin and may be consumed late in the evening. I have recipes for some
fantastic nighttime sleep gummies and evening snacks in Boundless
Cookbook and Boundless Kitchen.
Around 10:00 p.m., your body starts secreting the hormone melatonin.
Melatonin makes you feel tired by turning off waking brain activity to
allow for neural repair and by pulling oxygen and hormones away from the
rest of your body. But blue light from your TV, laptop, smartphone, e-
reader, and bright light bulbs can inhibit the production of melatonin, so it
is crucial to minimize your exposure to these light sources. You can also
use blue-light-blocking glasses, screen dimmers, sleep masks, blue-light-
free light bulbs, and blackout curtains to reduce the amount of blue light
you are exposed to. You can also use this principle in reverse: if you’re
--- END PAGE 311 ---

--- PAGE 312 ---
traveling and need to get up earlier than usual, or you’ve overdosed on
melatonin for a good night of sleep, you can hit your eyes with tons of blue
light in the morning to get rid of the melatonin faster.
The protein agouti also peaks around 10:00 p.m. Like ghrelin, agouti
can stimulate your appetite if leptin levels are suppressed. You can
probably see how easy it is to settle into a vicious cycle of poor sleep,
weight gain, and cravings: Late-night snacking causes blood glucose
fluctuations and elevates insulin levels. This, in turn, suppresses leptin
and reduces leptin sensitivity. Leptin levels are then too low to counteract
agouti, so you get hungry when you are supposed to be sleepy. Then you
eat, insulin levels spike again and suppress leptin, and agouti levels rise
even more, and the cycle continues to deteriorate. Sound familiar?
As noted earlier, the exact time you fall asleep will significantly vary
depending on your individual chronobiology, but no matter your
chronobiology, while you sleep, your glymphatic system becomes active.
Like the lymphatic system, the glymphatic system is a drainage network,
but it’s localized in your brain and spinal cord. Just as your muscles and
other tissues accumulate metabolic and inflammatory by-products from
normal daily function, your central nervous system can also accumulate
by-products and even toxins that, if not removed by the glymphatic
system, can result in a state of neurotoxicity. Glymphatic system activity
in the brain peaks during slow-wave NREM sleep. A PEMF machine set to
delta mode can help improve glymphatic function by allowing you to enter
deeper NREM states even faster. Research also suggests that consuming
omega-3 fatty acids can improve glymphatic drainage, and, surprisingly, so
can your sleeping position (lying on your right side appears to be best). I’ll
go into more detail about glymphatic drainage in chapter 17.
Around 11:00 p.m., gastrointestinal activity declines, so you don’t have
to poop until the morning. Around 12:00 a.m., leptin enters the
hypothalamus in the brain. This is critical from a metabolic standpoint
--- END PAGE 312 ---

--- PAGE 313 ---
because when leptin enters the hypothalamus, your fat reserves are
released. As you sleep, your core temperature falls, and your body has to
maintain a set point of warmth. Leptin in your hypothalamus stimulates
your mitochondria to produce heat. Just as cold thermogenesis activates
brown adipose tissue to burn fat, a good sleep cycle allows leptin to
properly enter your hypothalamus, which, in turn, allows your
mitochondria to burn fat.
Also around midnight, melatonin enters an area of the brain called the
suprachiasmatic nucleus and reduces your neuron-firing rate. This slows
down your brain, allowing your nervous system to recover and store the
day’s information. As melatonin peaks, prolactin is released. A deficiency
in prolactin, often found in postmenopausal women, can cause weight
gain, reduced brain activity, and high levels of inflammatory cytokines
associated with lack of recovery and chronic pain. On the other hand,
balanced prolactin levels increase the recycling of cells, the renewal of
cells, and the creation of new cells, and promote the release of growth
hormone. Research suggests that melatonin is responsible for stimulating
the release of prolactin, so the same blue-light-elimination strategies for
enhancing melatonin secretion will also allow prolactin levels to rise.
Between 2:00 and 6:00 a.m., your core body temperature falls,
allowing for neural repair, neural growth, reduced inflammation, and an
increase in T cells (the killer cells of your immune system). For your core
body temperature to drop, you need to have been asleep for about six
hours. So unless you are genetically programmed to be a night owl (more
on that later), if you go to sleep at, say, midnight, your body won’t be able
to repair itself as well. To support my body’s temperature fluctuations, I
sleep on a device called a chiliPAD (also known as an Ooler), which
circulates cool water at my chosen temperature of 55 degrees Fahrenheit
beneath my body during the night, and I keep my home at 63 to 65
degrees.
--- END PAGE 313 ---

--- PAGE 314 ---
This temperature drop signals your body to produce cortisol at around
6:00 a.m. Then you rinse, wash, and repeat the process of healing your
body and building new neurons. Pretty cool, huh? Are you convinced that
sleep is important?
WHAT’S YOUR CHRONOBIOLOGY?
My friend Dr. Michael Breus—the author of the book The Power of When
and a man who’s been dubbed, appropriately enough, “America’s Sleep
Doctor”—is famous for making quite popular the previously little-known
fact that not everyone operates at peak physical and cognitive capacity
with the recommended 10:00 p.m.–to–6:00 a.m. sleep routine.
Sure, I feel like a rock star when I am in bed at or slightly before 10:30
p.m. and wake up between 6:00 and 6:30 a.m., but that is because I am, in
the words of Dr. Breus, a “Bear” chronotype, along with about 50 percent
of the world’s population. What does this mean exactly?
Every person has an internal clock that impacts several aspects of his
or her physiology, such as sleeping, waking, cognition, and digestion. This
clock is called the primary circadian pacemaker, and it’s located in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of your brain. Sure, you can control when you
sleep, wake, and eat, but your internal clock has a built-in preset for these
things based on your genetics. This means that there is a perfect time for
everything from exercise to sex to creative work, and when you
synchronize your activities with your biological clock, your entire life
flows better.
Not every clock keeps the same time, which you probably know if you
have heard of “early birds” and “night owls.” Traditionally, psychologists
and sleep doctors determined chronotypes using a “morningness-
eveningness” questionnaire, but after more than a decade of working as a
sleep doctor and recognizing the high variability in ideal sleep-wake
--- END PAGE 314 ---

--- PAGE 315 ---
patterns among his patients, Dr. Breus developed a far more
comprehensive and accurate questionnaire (available at
ThePowerOfWhenQuiz.com) that sorts people into four chronotypes
named for animals: Dolphin, Lion, Bear, and Wolf.
From an evolutionary standpoint, this variation in chronotypes seems
to make sense: since our ancestors lived in groups, having a variety of
natural sleep and wake times meant that someone was awake to ensure
security for the group at all hours. It is also interesting to note the
chronotype distribution in the average population:•

Dolphins: 10 percent•

Lions: 15 to 20 percent•

Bears: 50 percent•

Wolves: 15 to 20 percent
The fact that more people are Bears explains current office and school
hours, along with somewhat regular breakfast, lunch, and dinner times
and the oft-recommended—in everything from Reader’s Digest to
Prevention to Men’s Health and Women’s Health magazines—“bed by ten, up
by six.” This can be pretty damn frustrating if you are not a Bear,
especially since you can’t change your chronotype. Your chronotype is
determined by your PER3 gene; a longer PER3 gene means you tend to be
an early riser, and a shorter one means you tend to be a late riser.
Ultimately, the classic advice that everyone should wake up early to be
successful is just not true, and neither is the recommendation that
everyone should go to bed before midnight (I have personally been at fault
for recommending just that to folks who are obvious Dolphins or Wolves).
Rather than forcing yourself to adhere to the recommended sleep, wake,
productivity, and creativity times dished out by books written for a broad,
general market, perhaps it is better to determine your unique chronotype
and design your schedule to take advantage of your natural rhythms.
--- END PAGE 315 ---

--- PAGE 316 ---
Should this seem like you will have a miserable life going to bed at 8:00
p.m. while your friends are just heading out to dinner, or sleeping in until
10:00 a.m. and getting fired from your job, please know that although your
chronotype is genetic, you can indeed make some shifts in your activities
to move it around just a bit. If you were born a Lion, for example, you will
never naturally be able to stay up as late as a born Wolf. But by adjusting
the timing of your meals, exercise, caffeine intake, and exposure to
artificial and natural light, you can make microadjustments to thrive in
any society. In addition, your chronotype changes through childhood,
adolescence, adulthood (twenty-one to sixty-five), and old age. (My
grandmother, who used to go to bed at 11:00 p.m. and rise at 7:00 a.m. to
serve me bagels with cream cheese, progressed to going to bed at 1:00 a.m.
and sleeping until 10:00 a.m.)
Finally, if you want to determine your ideal circadian rhythm activities
and chronobiology with an even more precise alternative to Dr. Breus’s
quiz, you may be interested in an app designed by Dr. Satchin Panda,
myCircadianClock. The free app is part of Dr. Panda’s project to use
smartphones to advance research on biological rhythms in the real world,
and it will help you track daily behaviors, such as eating, sleeping, moving,
and taking supplements and medications. Data that you share through the
app is used as part of a research study to help researchers understand how
the daily timing of behaviors influences health, and the app provides
personalized insights into your daily rhythms. Just don’t use it in bed
without donning your blue-light-blocking glasses.
The Ideal Routine for Every Type of Person
According to psychologist and sleep specialist Dr. Michael Breus, there are
four different chronotypes, which describe a person’s internal clock and
rhythm.
--- END PAGE 316 ---

--- PAGE 317 ---
DOLPHIN
Dolphins are light sleepers and are often diagnosed with insomnia.
6:30 a.m.
Wake up and exercise.
7:30 a.m.
Eat breakfast.
9:30 a.m.
Have coffee.
10 a.m.–12 p.m.
Brainstorm and work on creative projects.
12 p.m.
Eat lunch.
1–4 p.m.
Walk around the block if you’re feeling tired.
4–6 p.m.
Work on intellectually demanding tasks. Send professional emails.
6 p.m.
Meditate or do yoga.
6:30–8 p.m.
Eat dinner.
10:30–11:30 p.m.
Turn off all screens. Take a hot shower/bath. Read a novel.
11:30 p.m.
Go to sleep.
--- END PAGE 317 ---

--- PAGE 318 ---
LION
Lions tend to wake up early with lots of energy. By early evening, they’re
exhausted.
5:30 a.m.
Wake up and eat breakfast.
6–7 a.m.
Do planning and big-picture thinking. Meditate.
9–10 a.m.
Have coffee.
10 a.m.–12 p.m.
Hold meetings.
12 p.m.
Eat lunch.
1–5 p.m.
Brainstorm and journal.
5–6 p.m.
Exercise.
6–7 p.m.
Eat dinner.
10 p.m.
Turn off all screens.
10:30 p.m.
Go to sleep.
--- END PAGE 318 ---

--- PAGE 319 ---
BEAR
Bears’ internal clocks track the rise and fall of the sun. They need a full 8
hours of sleep a night.
7 a.m.
Wake up and do a few minutes of exercise.
7:30 a.m.
Eat breakfast.
9–10 a.m.
Plan your day.
10 a.m.
Have coffee.
10 a.m.–12 p.m.
Work on difficult tasks. Send professional emails.
12 p.m.
Take a walk, eat lunch, and take another walk.
2:30–2:50 p.m.
Nap or meditate.
3–6 p.m.
Make phone calls and send emails.
6–7 p.m.
Exercise.
7:30 p.m.
Eat dinner.
8–10 p.m.
Brainstorm.
--- END PAGE 319 ---

--- PAGE 320 ---
10 p.m.
Turn off all screens.
11 p.m.
Go to sleep.
WOLF
Wolves have a hard time waking up early and are most energetic in the
evenings.
7–7:30 a.m.
Wake up with two alarms. Jot down your thoughts.
7:30 a.m.
Eat breakfast.
8:30 a.m.
Do a few minutes of outdoor exercise.
9 a.m.
Plan your day.
11 a.m.–1 p.m.
Have coffee. Take care of busywork.
1 p.m.
Take a walk and eat lunch.
4–6 p.m.
Hold meetings and present your ideas to coworkers.
6–7 p.m.
Exercise.
8 p.m.
--- END PAGE 320 ---

--- PAGE 321 ---
Eat dinner.
11 p.m.
Turn off all screens. Meditate. Take a hot shower.
12 a.m.
Go to sleep.
THE STAGES OF SLEEP
In 1929, scientists invented the electroencephalogram (EEG), which
records brain activity. EEG recordings showed for the first time that sleep
is a dynamic behavior, one in which the brain is highly active at times and
not simply “turned off,” as was previously thought.
Over time, sleep studies using EEGs (and other instruments that
measure eye movements and muscle activity) revealed two main types of
sleep. They are defined by characteristic brain wave patterns in a sleeping
person’s brain and the presence or absence of eye movement. These two
main types of sleep are rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and non–rapid
eye movement (NREM) sleep.
REM sleep (also known as stage 4 sleep) is a unique phase of
mammalian sleep characterized by random movement of the eyes, low
muscle tone throughout the body, and vivid or lucid dreaming. This phase
is also known as “paradoxical sleep” and sometimes “desynchronized
sleep” because of its physiological similarities to a waking state, including
rapid, low-voltage, desynchronized brain waves—basically a combination
of alpha brain waves and beta brain waves.
--- END PAGE 321 ---

--- PAGE 322 ---
During a typical night of sleep, you experience four or five periods of
REM sleep, which are quite short at the beginning of the night and longer
toward the end. The first REM episode usually occurs about seventy
minutes after falling asleep, and the rest of the episodes are about ninety
minutes apart. REM sleep typically occupies 20 to 25 percent of total sleep
in adults, or one and a half to two hours of a full night’s sleep. If you’re
using a sleep-tracking device, that’s the percentage you should be shooting
for.
NREM sleep is best defined as any sleep not recognizable as REM
sleep. NREM consists of three stages: stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3, also
known as N1, N2, and N3. N1 and N2 are typically classified as light sleep,
and N3 is classified as deep sleep.
N1 (stage 1), often referred to as “drowsy” sleep, is the lightest sleep,
on the border between sleep and wakefulness. Your muscles are alert and
active, and your eyes slowly move back and forth and may open and close.
This is when your brain wave activity transitions from more
--- END PAGE 322 ---

--- PAGE 323 ---
unsynchronized beta and gamma waves with frequencies of 12 to 30 Hz
and 25 to 100 Hz, which are typical of the waking state, to slower, more
synchronized alpha waves at a frequency of 8 to 13 Hz and, finally, to 4 to 7
Hz theta waves.
Typically, you don’t dream in N1 sleep, but because your muscles are
still active, you may twitch or jerk during short microawakenings as
wakefulness gives way to slumber. During this time, which lasts about ten
minutes, you may hear sounds and conversations, but you are unwilling to
react or respond. This stage should ideally consume about 5 percent of
your time asleep.
During N2 (stage 2), muscle activity declines and your awareness of
your surroundings fades. Stage 2 brain waves are primarily theta waves,
but N2 sleep is distinguished by two traits: (1) sleep spindles, which are
short bursts of 12 to 14 Hz brain waves (known as sigma waves) lasting
about half a second each, and (2) K complexes, which are short, high-
voltage negative peaks followed by slower complexes called “positive
complexes,” and, finally, another negative K complex peak; each complex
lasts one or two minutes. These sleep spindles and K complexes suppress
your response to external stimuli, helping to protect your descent into
slumber and promote sleep-based memory consolidation and information
processing.
You spend more time in N2 than in any other sleep stage: ideally, you
should spend 45 to 50 percent of your time asleep in N2. The total of N1
(ideally 5 percent) plus N2 (ideally 45 to 50 percent) is what a sleep-
tracking device like the Oura ring quantifies as total light sleep and should
be around 50 to 55 percent on a sleep-quantification reading.
Finally, N3 (stage 3) is variously known as “deep sleep,” “delta sleep,”
or “slow-wave sleep.” It’s characterized by delta brain waves with a
frequency of around 0.5 to 4 Hz. During N3, your awareness of your
surroundings declines even more so that you’re unaware of sights, sounds,
--- END PAGE 323 ---

--- PAGE 324 ---
or any other external stimuli. Your breathing rate, heart rate, brain
temperature, blood pressure, and neural activity all reach their lowest
levels. You’re more likely to dream during this stage than in any other
NREM stage, and you may experience parasomnias like sleepwalking,
night terrors, and talking in your sleep. During N3, memory consolidation
and information processing also occur.
If someone tried to wake you up, they’d have more difficulty during
N3. If you did wake up, you’d likely feel very groggy, and it would take you
about thirty minutes to break away from sleep inertia and reach normal
levels of mental performance. Many new alarm clocks and self-
quantification devices sync to your phone or cause a vibration or alarm to
occur during the point in the morning when you are not in this stage of
sleep (I think that’s a handy feature).
N3 sleep should ideally make up 15 to 20 percent of your total sleep
time.
So let’s review what kind of percentages you should be looking for
when analyzing your sleep data:
• Awake time should be 1 to 5 percent
• REM sleep should be 20 to 25 percent
• Light sleep (N1 + N2) should be 50 to 55 percent
• Deep sleep should be 15 to 20 percent
To go through all the stages of sleep takes about ninety minutes, and
you should ideally go through four to five of these sleep cycles during any
twenty-four-hour period. A twenty-to-sixty-minute nap can actually quite
closely simulate a cycle similar to the ninety-minute cycles you go through
during a night of sleep.
I’m not even going to pretend that I track my sleep cycles every night.
I’m not that anal. (I don’t count my calories every day, either.) I did log my
sleep cycles for one month to determine the quality of my sleep, just as I
--- END PAGE 324 ---

--- PAGE 325 ---
counted my calories for one year to get an idea of how many calories are in
the foods I eat. But if you are anything like me, once you have an idea of
how your lifestyle choices affect your body, you can’t waste precious time
testing and tracking. Think of tracking as a temporary educational tool.
The tool that I have found to be most useful is an easy-to-use ring
called the Oura, which tracks sleep time, sleep stages, sleep onset latency,
nighttime sleep temperature, and a host of other sleep parameters. It can
even be placed in airplane mode before sleeping if you want to reduce
your Bluetooth exposure (which I recommend). You can find a few
podcasts and articles I’ve done on this device on BoundlessBook.com/7.
HOW MUCH SLEEP DO YOU
REALLY NEED?
Age, genetics, environment, and differences in daily physical and mental
strain can all cause significant variations in the ideal amount of sleep.
The National Sleep Foundation (NSF) has general guidelines based on
their relatively up-to-date research (see the table at right), but these
guidelines do not account for the significant chronobiological variations
that occur from person to person.
But you can at least get a basic idea of sleep needs from the NSF
guidelines. For most adults, not only is sleeping fewer than seven hours
per night associated with reduced alertness and increased risk of chronic
disease, but sleeping more than nine hours per night is also associated
with an increased risk of chronic disease and even a shorter lifespan!
That’s right: more sleep is not necessarily better.
However, physical activity significantly affects sleep requirements: the
more active you are, the more sleep you need. In my experiences with
triathletes, UFC fighters, and NBA players, athletes who must perform at
--- END PAGE 325 ---

--- PAGE 326 ---
elite levels need ten to twelve hours of sleep per twenty-four-hour period,
and the typical CrossFitter, marathoner, cyclist, or exercise fanatic needs
seven and a half to nine hours of sleep per twenty-four-hour period. Here
are some of the more interesting statistics on sleep in athletes and
exercise enthusiasts:
• Maximum bench press drops by twenty pounds after four days of sleep
restriction.
• With proper sleep, tennis players see a 42 percent increase in hitting
accuracy.
• Sleep loss causes an 11 percent reduction in time to exhaustion,
meaning you get tired faster when exercising.
• Perceived exertion increases 17 percent to 19 percent after thirty hours
of sleep deprivation.
There are other effects of sleep restriction on performance indicators.
The T cells of your immune system become hyperactive, and levels of
leukocytes, neutrophils, monocytes, natural killer cells, and pro-
inflammatory compounds increase. You become less sensitive to insulin,
which results in poor blood sugar regulation and weight gain. Levels of
cortisol, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine increase, resulting in
an overstimulated sympathetic nervous system, elevated heart rate, poor
recovery processes such as muscle protein synthesis and digestion, and
reduced amounts of IGF-1, growth hormone, and testosterone. You also
experience increased psychological stress and have an increased risk of
suffering from anxiety or depression.
If you are moderately or highly active or regularly compete at a high
level, it may take you around forty-five minutes to fall asleep, compared to
the fifteen to twenty minutes it takes the average well-rested person. You
may also have trouble getting enough sleep, even with naps, especially
when going through periods of heavy training and leading up to a
--- END PAGE 326 ---

--- PAGE 327 ---
competition. A study of 632 high-performance athletes showed that over
65 percent of them exhibited sleep alterations the day before a
competition, and other research suggests that the figure is as high as 80
percent.
Sleep restriction is a significant injury risk factor and is accompanied
by notable reductions in neuromuscular control and proprioception (your
coordination and awareness of your movements). The increase in
proinflammatory cytokines noted above is likely why sleep-deprived
athletes have high rates of upper respiratory tract infections. Long-term
sleep restriction causes a progressive reduction in maximum and
submaximum strength in a host of different exercises, and restricting
sleep can also reduce the respiratory rate and time to exhaustion in
maximum incremental exercise tests. In other words, the more active you
are, the more sleep deprivation is going to hurt you, because you will be
unable to perform at peak capacity and recover fully.
When I interviewed renowned sleep coach Nick Littlehales, who has
helped professional athletes, including the soccer stars of Manchester
United and Real Madrid, sleep better for more than thirty years, he
explained how he developed an unorthodox approach to help shift
workers, elite athletes, and hard-charging high achievers get enough sleep.
Rather than tracking the total number of hours slept per twenty-four-hour
period, Littlehales and his athletes focus on achieving a certain number of
ninety-minute sleep cycles.
In Littlehales’s system, which he details in Sleep: The Myth of 8 Hours,
the Power of Naps, and the New Plan to Recharge Your Body and Mind, each
ninety-minute block of sleep is equal to one sleep cycle. Two sleep cycles
require three hours of sleep, three cycles require four and a half hours, and
so on.
Even if you can’t get a strict seven to nine hours of sleep per night, you
should try to achieve thirty-five cycles per week (five cycles per night, on
--- END PAGE 327 ---

--- PAGE 328 ---
average), and try not to get any fewer than thirty cycles. I have found that
this approach comes in handy when I am traveling, working hard, or going
through a period in which I can get only, say, four to five hours of sleep per
night Monday through Friday. By tossing in a brief daily nap, meditation or
yoga nidra session (conveniently, as little as twenty minutes of daytime
napping or yoga nidra equates to a full ninety-minute sleep cycle), and
slightly longer nights of sleep on Saturday and Sunday, I can still achieve
at least thirty sleep cycles in a seven-day period.
Most people perform best on seven to nine hours of sleep per twenty-
four-hour period. If your schedule doesn’t allow that, shoot for thirty to
thirty-five sleep cycles per seven-day period. Incidentally, there is no rule
that you must sleep between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. I recommend taking
Dr. Michael Breus’s quizzes and checking out Dr. Satchin Panda’s circadian
research to identify the sleep-wake cycle that works best for you. No
matter what sleep-wake cycle you decide on, food, supplements, and
exercise can have a profound effect on your sleep. Even small adjustments
to these factors can help you fall asleep faster, get more restful sleep, and
weather the effects of poor sleep better.
Three Ayurvedic Tactics for Better Sleep
After reading the Ayurvedic medicine and lifestyle book Change Your
Schedule, Change Your Life, I began to incorporate three primary practices
from that book that drastically improved my sleep quality:
Go to bed at the same time each night, preferably before 10:30 p.m.
(although the best bedtime for you will depend on your
chronobiology).
Do some light exercise before breakfast.
--- END PAGE 328 ---

--- PAGE 329 ---
Avoid eating a mega-meal for dinner and instead make lunch the
largest meal of the day.
I suspect that these three ancestral Eastern medicine rules primarily apply to
the 50 percent of the population who fall into Dr. Breus’s “Bear” category
and may not apply to other chronotypes, but they have worked quite well
for me, and many Ayurvedic physicians frequently recommend them.
Sleep Needs by Age
Newborns (0–3 months) 14–17 hours
Infants (4–11 months) 12–15 hours
Toddlers (1–2 years) 11–14 hours
Preschoolers (3–5) 10–13 hours
School-age children (6–13) 9–11 hours
Teenagers (14–17) 8–10 hours
Younger adults (18–25) 7–9 hours
Adults (26–64) 7–9 hours
Older adults (65+) 7–8 hours
Source: “How Much Sleep Do We Really Need?,” National Sleep Foundation,
www.sleepfoundation.org/articles/how-much-sleep-do-we-really-need
--- END PAGE 329 ---

--- PAGE 330 ---
FOOD, SUPPLEMENTS, AND
EXERCISE
Over the past decade, I have had the privilege of interviewing some of the
world’s top sleep researchers, sleep doctors, and sleep experts on my
podcast. I have learned a host of practical, scientifically proven tips to
enhance sleep, especially when it comes to the nature and timing of your
exercise, food, and supplements. In this section, I will reveal my primary
tactics for hacking each of these aspects of your circadian rhythm.
Food
The following six guidelines can help you customize your diet for better
sleep.
1. SEEK OUT SLEEP-ENHANCING FOOD.
Research suggests that certain foods have a profound beneficial effect on
sleep. For example, fatty cold-water fish like salmon and mackerel contain
high amounts of vitamin D and omega-3 fatty acids, essential nutrients for
regulating serotonin and sleep. Consuming fruit can also improve the
quality of your sleep, likely because of the slow release of energy from
fructose and the satiating effect of water and fiber. I am personally a fan of
small, dark berries, “ugly” and slightly bitter or sour grapefruit or apples,
and wild fruits. These all tend to be higher in phytonutrients and fiber
than their domesticated counterparts (like the perfect, juicy apples and
pears at your local supermarket, which may be up to ten months old!).
One study demonstrated that consuming two kiwis an hour before bed for
four weeks significantly increases sleep quality and quantity. Other
--- END PAGE 330 ---

--- PAGE 331 ---
research suggests that tart cherries improve sleep because they raise
melatonin levels.
So, if you want to sleep better, a simple but potent dinner would be a
wild-caught salmon fillet topped with a tart cherry sauce or sliced kiwi,
along with roasted vegetables for satiating fiber and a bit of white rice to
boost serotonin secretion. For dessert, try a giant spoonful of coconut oil
topped with a dab of almond butter, a pinch of sea salt, and a drizzle of
raw honey. This combination will provide a slow release of energy as well
as minerals to regulate blood pressure and cortisol levels. You can also try
combining a serving of essential amino acids with a shot of ketones, which
works as an energy boost before a fasted workout or to satiate the appetite
with few calories prior to sleep. Another great sleep aid that is also
nourishing for the gut is Dr. William Davis’s gut-healing yogurt recipe,
which is featured in my book Boundless Kitchen and tastes great with a
small handful of frozen blueberries and dark chocolate mixed in.
Do You Need More Sleep as You Age?
There is some debate surrounding how sleep requirements change with age.
Some research suggests that adults over the age of fifty do not require as
much sleep as younger individuals. But other research suggests the
opposite, claiming that older adults need just as much sleep as they did
when they were younger and that they just have a reduced ability to get
that sleep. Indeed, the Sleep Foundation states that once you reach the age
of eighteen, your sleep needs stay pretty consistent for the rest of your life:
about seven and a half to nine hours per night (just remember that the
timing of these hours will depend upon your chronotype—see here).
Nine changes in sleep habits can occur as you age:
• Advanced sleep timing, in which you both go to bed and wake up earlier
• Longer sleep onset latency, which means it takes longer to fall asleep
• Overall shorter sleep duration
--- END PAGE 331 ---

--- PAGE 332 ---
• Increases in deep-sleep interruptions, such as frequent forays into light-
sleep stages
• More-fragile sleep, so that you are awakened more easily by noises and
lights
• Less slow-wave (deep) sleep
• Increases in lighter NREM sleep stages, which is less restorative than
deep NREM sleep
• Shorter and fewer sleep cycles
• More time spent awake throughout the night
Over the age of fifty-five, a propensity toward daytime napping increases,
and many older adults report daytime sleepiness so severe that it interrupts
their plans.
So how do you know if you are getting enough sleep in your later decades?
If you’re getting five to six hours of sleep and can function normally, with
few or no adverse effects on cognition and physical energy, then you are
probably getting enough sleep. It may simply be that your genes and
personal chronobiology allow you to get by on the sleep changes associated
with aging or that your level of physical activity is low enough that you don’t
have high sleep requirements. In addition, research suggests that when deep
slow-wave sleep is suppressed in a sleep lab, older adults do not exhibit a
significantly increased need for deep sleep, suggesting that the “pressure to
sleep” decreases with age. But if you feel tired and sleepy throughout the
day, then you likely need to take steps to improve your sleep quality and
quantity. The following are distilled, ready-to-implement tactics to help you
do just that.
Take melatonin: Melatonin is a hormone that’s responsible for making you
feel tired. When the sun starts to set, the falling light stimulates your optic
nerves to send a signal to your master body clock, the suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SCN). The SCN then sets off a chemical cascade that results in the
secretion of melatonin.
The problem is that melatonin production declines as you age, so
supplementing with melatonin is an effective way to combat age-related
sleep deprivation. Many melatonin supplements contain up to 5 mg, but you
only need 0.3 to 0.5 mg to enjoy the hormone’s sleep-inducing benefits.
--- END PAGE 332 ---

--- PAGE 333 ---
Reduce your exposure to artificial light: Before artificial light allowed people
to stay up working past sunset, the body clock followed the rising and
setting of the sun. The blue light emitted by the sun stimulates waking
activity, and as those wavelengths fall and red light wavelengths increase
closer to sunset, you respond by becoming more tired. But most artificial
light sources (like that $1,100 iPhone in your pocket) produce high amounts
of blue light and can disrupt this natural cycle. Blue-light exposure acts, in
part, by suppressing melatonin secretion, which is quite useful in the
morning but does you no favors in the evening. Fortunately, with tools such
as blue-light-blocking software for computer monitors, blue-light-blocking
glasses, red incandescent light bulbs installed in your bedroom, and much
more, you can minimize the effects of artificial light. In chapter 20, you will
discover a detailed explanation of how to do this.
Use PEMF to enhance slow-wave sleep: Research suggests that one of the
underlying mechanisms of age-related sleep deprivation is a reduction of
the slow brain waves produced during the first three of the four sleep
stages. So an effective strategy to help you fall asleep and stay asleep is to
use a pulsed electromagnetic field (PEMF) device. These devices can be set
to delta brain wave mode. As you lie in bed with the device underneath your
mattress, your sheets, or anywhere touching your body, your brain waves
will synchronize with the pulses given off by the device. This will help ease
you into a deep, slow-wave sleep state.
Avoid stimulants in the afternoon: While certain populations, like southern
Italians and Sicilians, can drink coffee late in the day and still get a good
night’s sleep, you might not respond to afternoon stimulants so well,
especially if you don’t carry the same fast-caffeine-oxidizing genes as these
folks. The effects of stimulants like caffeine can linger in your system for up
to six hours, preventing you from falling asleep or waking you up in the
middle of the night when the stimulant finally wears off and the subsequent
hypoglycemia kicks in.
So should you find yourself turning to caffeine for an afternoon pick-me-up,
make sure you incorporate supplements to reduce caffeine’s propensity to
disrupt sleep at night when consumed in the afternoon—chapter 5 includes
many examples and suggestions. For example, if you consume caffeine later
in the day, pair it with L-theanine, using a 1:4 caffeine-to-L-theanine ratio: if
you consume 100 mg of caffeine (roughly the amount in an 8-ounce cup of
coffee), consume it with 400 mg of L-theanine. Smaller doses of L-theanine,
--- END PAGE 333 ---

--- PAGE 334 ---
around 100 to 200 mg, can take a bit of the edge off caffeine, but you may
need more as you age, especially if you just have to have that post-dinner
espresso.
2. PAY ATTENTION TO THE GLYCEMIC CONTENT OF
YOUR FOOD.
If it takes you a long time to fall asleep, consume any high-glycemic-index
carbohydrates, such as rice, bananas, or baked potatoes, or anything else
that spikes blood sugar, at least four hours before bed (although I don’t
recommend consumption of high-glycemic-index carbohydrates at all,
unless during or after a workout). Avoid sweet desserts after dinner and
instead consume your nightly bar of dark chocolate or bowl of coconut ice
cream when you are in a more insulin-sensitive state, such as after a
workout. If you do have desserts, try to squeeze in a ten-to-thirty-minute
postprandial (after the meal) brisk walk. You can also swap your regular
desserts for coconut oil topped with almond butter, sea salt, and honey.
Avoid frequent snacking in the late afternoon and evening, and limit
dinnertime carbohydrates to lower-glycemic-index sources like sweet
potatoes or yams instead of white rice and yogurt instead of ice cream.
--- END PAGE 334 ---

--- PAGE 335 ---
3. HAVE A LIGHT DINNER.
Even though American culture is structured around huge evening dinners,
don’t make it a habit to consume large meals right before bed. High-
calorie meals consumed before bed may excessively spike blood glucose
and insulin levels, particularly if the meal is high in protein and
carbohydrates (more on both of those in a moment), and will inhibit the
release of the fat-burning hormones leptin and adiponectin. Push yourself
away from the table when you are 80 percent full and take a twenty-to-
thirty-minute postdinner stroll to assist digestion and control blood sugar.
If you do eat a large fat-and-protein-rich or spicy meal consisting of foods
like meat and hot sauces (Mexican takeout, anyone?), take a cold or
lukewarm shower to cool your core body temperature, eliminate pesky
meat sweats, and enhance deep sleep. Just ensure the water isn’t too cold,
because if you’re excessively chilled, you can experience an adrenaline
spike that keeps you awake.
4. CONSUME ADEQUATE PROTEIN.
Research suggests that consuming adequate protein can significantly
improve sleep quality. Your body breaks down protein into amino acids,
which serve as the primary building blocks of neurotransmitters. One of
these amino acids, tryptophan, is found in high concentrations in protein-
rich sources like turkey, chicken, red meat, eggs, fish, spirulina, almonds,
and pumpkin seeds. Tryptophan is necessary for your body to produce the
neurotransmitter serotonin and the hormone melatonin, so make sure you
eat enough of these protein sources to enhance your sleep quality and
quantity.
You can slightly increase the level of tryptophan in your brain by
consuming carbohydrates along with these protein sources. Indeed,
research suggests that, rather than turkey consumption alone, high
amounts of carbohydrates are partly responsible for the drowsiness that
--- END PAGE 335 ---

--- PAGE 336 ---
follows Thanksgiving dinner. This is because carbohydrates promote the
release of insulin, which shovels all amino acids except tryptophan into
muscle or fat tissue. As a result, you have more tryptophan than other
amino acids in your blood, so the amino acid transporters in the blood-
brain barrier are shuttling more tryptophan into your brain. Once it’s in
your brain, tryptophan is synthesized into serotonin and melatonin, and
you become tired.
You should aim to consume at least 0.55 g of protein per pound of
body weight per day, and if you have sleep problems, increase that to up to
0.7 to 0.8 g per pound. A healthy 160-pound man would need about 112 g
of protein per day, and a healthy 110-pound woman would need about 70
g. If you are doing any cyclic caloric restriction, increase your protein
intake throughout the day on lower-calorie days. For a low-calorie option,
I am a huge fan of supplementing with 20 to 40 g of essential amino acids
per day.
Golden Milk Bedtime Elixir
This delicious drink aids your digestion, relaxes an amped-up nervous
system, and helps you get in the mood for a night of restful sleep.•

½ cup full-fat coconut milk
• 1 teaspoon ginger powder, or 2 tablespoons ground fresh ginger
• 1 teaspoon turmeric powder, or 2 tablespoons ground fresh turmeric•

¼ teaspoon ground nutmeg
• 4 whole peppercorns, crushed
• 2 or 3 drops organic liquid stevia
• 1 teaspoon coconut oil
• Pinch of ground cinnamon (optional)
--- END PAGE 336 ---

--- PAGE 337 ---
1. Place all the ingredients except the coconut oil and cinnamon in a
saucepan over medium heat and bring to a simmer, then turn the
heat down to low. Simmer for 5 minutes, then remove the pan from
the heat and allow to cool for 5 minutes.2.

Strain the cooled liquid through a fine-mesh strainer or cheesecloth
into a glass or mug. Add the coconut oil. Sprinkle with ground
cinnamon if desired for additional flavor.
5. CONSUME ADEQUATE CARBOHYDRATES.
If you wake up frequently during the night, you may be one of those folks
who are so active that they need more carbohydrates to ensure they don’t
have middle-of-the-night episodes of hypoglycemia (low blood sugar).
On extremely active days, I consume 200 to 300 g of slow-release
carbohydrates, such as legumes, amaranth, quinoa, millet, and even sweet
potatoes. Many fat-lovers—folks who are just a bit too orthorexic about
their diets—are concerned that this will take them out of ketosis (the
metabolic state of primarily burning fat). Fact is, it will. But based on my
own blood and breath ketone testing and that of my clients, a fat-adapted
person can reenter ketosis by the morning. In addition, unless you are
managing a disease like epilepsy or multiple sclerosis, when it comes to
optimizing recovery, fat-burning, and cognitive function, regular nights of
deep, restorative sleep trumps being in ketosis 24-7.
6. LIMIT YOUR SATURATED FAT INTAKE.
Your evening meal should contain only low to moderate amounts of
saturated fat. If you often feel like you have a brick in your stomach after
dinner, don’t overdo it on the marbled meat, butter, coconut oil, and MCT
--- END PAGE 337 ---

--- PAGE 338 ---
oil. This is particularly important if you consume the coconut oil dessert
described earlier after dinner. The fat in the coconut oil is the maximum
amount of saturated fat you want to consume in the evening, especially if
you consume meat or fish at dinner. So, if you struggle with sleep, save the
fat caps on those pork chops and rib-eye steaks for another time. They go
great with scrambled eggs in the morning.
Supplements
There are hundreds of sleep supplements on the market, but research has
shown that certain compounds are more effective than others in
improving sleep onset latency, wake times, and deep-sleep percentages.
For example, there are a diverse array of nutrients that influence the
synthesis of serotonin and melatonin. In this section, I’ll identify these
and other nutrients that can help you maximize your sleep. Done-for-you
supplement stacks I’ve formulated, like Kion Sleep and Vitaboom Sleep,
contain many of these ingredients in one convenient serving.
TRYPTOPHAN
When tryptophan accumulates in your blood, it crosses the blood-brain
barrier and is converted into 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), a precursor of
serotonin. 5-HT is also a precursor of melatonin in your pineal gland and
causes lethargy and drowsiness. Consuming protein sources rich in
tryptophan, such as whey protein, increases tryptophan levels by up to 130
percent, significantly increasing brain levels of serotonin.
If you consume close to the protein recommendations above and eat
your carbohydrates at dinner, you probably don’t need to take
supplemental tryptophan. Should you need to supplement tryptophan,
research suggests that 0.5 to 1 g improves both the quantity and quality of
sleep. Just remember my advice in chapter 1 not to overdo tryptophan or
--- END PAGE 338 ---

--- PAGE 339 ---
5-HT due to the potential for imbalances in serotonin and estrogen. Most
people shouldn’t exceed 1 g per day.
B-COMPLEX VITAMINS
In addition to serotonin and melatonin, your body produces vitamin B , or
3niacin, from tryptophan. It may be beneficial to take supplemental niacin
so that less of the tryptophan you consume is used to synthesize niacin
and more is used to synthesize serotonin. Vitamin B , or folate, and
9vitamin B , or pyridoxine, also help convert tryptophan to serotonin.
6Vitamin B , or cobalamin, helps synthesize melatonin; supplementing
12with B is particularly important for vegetarians because it is primarily
12 found in animal foods. Most good multivitamins contain B-complex
vitamins. Just make sure folate is listed in the natural form as L-
methylfolate or MTHF and not synthetic folic acid.
MAGNESIUM
Magnesium helps convert 5-HT into N-acetyl-5-hydroxytryptamine, a
precursor to melatonin. The most absorbable forms of magnesium are
magnesium citrate, glycinate, taurate, and aspartate, although magnesium
that is bound to malate, succinate, or fumarate is also effective.
Magnesium carbonate, sulfate, gluconate, and oxide are the cheapest, most
poorly absorbed forms, so I recommend avoiding them.
Effective doses of magnesium range from 200 to 500 mg. As a word of
caution, consuming more than 1,500 mg per day of magnesium can result
in loose stools and disaster pants—or, in this case, disaster blankets.
ZINC
Research suggests that a zinc deficiency reduces melatonin levels. Perhaps
this is why many athletes, who are often zinc deficient, swear by the 1-2-3
--- END PAGE 339 ---

--- PAGE 340 ---
compound found in supplements called ZM—zinc monomethionine
aspartate, magnesium aspartate, and vitamin B6. Since I tend to get my
magnesium and vitamin B6 from other sources, I turn to a source of zinc
that is ten times higher in zinc than even the mighty shellfish: black ant
extract. A word of caution: if you begin to use zinc, copper, iodine, or any
other mineral, it is prudent to get a hair-tissue mineral analysis (HTMA)
to ensure you are using a proper amount and not creating any imbalances.
For example, zinc reduces the amount of copper your body absorbs, and
high doses of zinc can cause a copper deficiency. For that reason, many
doctors recommend taking 2 mg of copper along with a zinc supplement.
MELATONIN
Melatonin is a hormone secreted by the pineal gland (provided you aren’t
exposed to too much artificial light at night) that produces a sedative or
hypnotic effect, especially with high-dose supplementation. Higher
melatonin doses are often used to treat sleep disorders or, in my case, as a
potent cure for jet lag. But keep in mind that in some people, side effects
of chronic heavy melatonin use include headaches, nausea, daytime
drowsiness, and even nightmares.
Most research suggests doses of 0.3 to 12 mg to improve sleep. A more
natural way to increase melatonin levels and avoid drowsiness is to eat a
couple kiwi fruits or drink a cup of tart cherry extract, since both can raise
melatonin. Now, that being said, I have successfully used doses as high as
1,000 mg when traveling internationally. Using the so-called melatonin
“sledgehammer” for just one to three days upon arriving at my destination
seems to adjust my circadian rhythm and get rid of jet lag far more quickly,
and any morning grogginess from this dose is quickly alleviated with
bright light exposure.
L-THEANINE
--- END PAGE 340 ---

--- PAGE 341 ---
The amino acid L-theanine is most commonly found in green tea leaves
but can also be taken as a supplement. It can significantly reduce stress
and increase relaxation without causing drowsiness, most notably when
combined with a source of caffeine (such as an afternoon cup of coffee)
that would normally disrupt sleep.
Research suggests that L-theanine crosses the blood-brain barrier in
about thirty minutes and improves mental relaxation without loss of
alertness by acting directly on the central nervous system. Once it crosses
the blood-brain barrier, it reduces sympathetic nervous system activity,
improves post-stress relaxation, lowers blood pressure, and reduces
cortisol levels and anxiety. I recommend starting with a dose of 100 to 200
mg. If you consume it with a caffeine source like coffee, consume it at a 1:4
caffeine-to-L-theanine ratio. So, if you consume 100 mg of caffeine,
consume 400 mg of L-theanine.
CBD
In recent years, cannabinoids and their potential benefits for sleep have
gained considerable attention. When it comes to supporting a restful
night’s sleep, cannabinoids such as CBD, CBG, and CBN have emerged as
intriguing options. CBD, or cannabidiol, is particularly known for its
calming properties and ability to alleviate anxiety. By interacting with the
endocannabinoid system (ECS), CBD helps regulate various physiological
processes, including those related to stress and sleep-wake cycles. Known
as the “mother cannabinoid,” CBG, or cannabigerol, can also support
sleep through its interaction with the ECS. A combination of CBD and
CBG, either in separate supplements or as a full-spectrum CBD product
with a significant CBG content, can offer a synergistic sleep-enhancing
effect.
CBN, or cannabinol, is a by-product of THC degradation but is non-
psychoactive and can have noticeable sedative effects. While research on
--- END PAGE 341 ---

--- PAGE 342 ---
CBN is still in its early stages, some individuals report improved sleep
quality when using CBN-dominant products or combining CBN with CBD.
Individual responses to cannabinoids can vary widely. For example, I sleep
great on 200 to 400 mg of a full-spectrum CBD product that contains
trace amounts of CBN and CBG, but that amount could make some people
feel high due to the small but present amounts of THC. As with most
supplements, if you use cannabinoids for sleep, I recommend that you
start on the low end and gradually work your way up until you find the
sweet spot. I’ll include some good full-spectrum CBD brands on the
resources page for this chapter.
VITAMIN D
Vitamin D deficiency is strongly associated with nonspecific
musculoskeletal pain, chronic pain, and hormone deficiencies. Chronically
low vitamin D levels are also associated with poor sleep and may
contribute to the development of obstructive sleep apnea and associated
cardiovascular disease. Risk factors for chronically low vitamin D levels
include dark skin tone, obesity, limited sunlight exposure, pregnancy,
chronic anticonvulsant or steroid use, intestinal malabsorption
syndromes, and, as in my case, a genetic inability to properly synthesize
vitamin D from sunlight.
Typical vitamin D doses range from 2,000 to 4,000 IU per day, though
if you are coming down with a flu or other illness, a megadose of 30,000 to
50,000 IU can be dramatically helpful for shortening the duration. Doses
should always be taken with 100 to 150 mcg of vitamin K to limit the risk
2 of high blood calcium levels. For the same reason, I also recommend
taking around 400 mg of magnesium before bed if you are supplementing
with vitamin D.
SUPPLEMENTING FOR SPECIFIC CONCERNS
--- END PAGE 342 ---

--- PAGE 343 ---
Finally, author Stephen Buhner, in books such as The Secret Teachings of
Plants and Plant Intelligence, has written extensively about herbal
approaches for better sleep in people who have mold, mycotoxin, and
Lyme issues (all discussed at length in chapter 4). For this purpose, he
especially notes the benefits of Chinese skullcap root, pulsatilla, greater
celandine, and motherwort. In conditions of nervous system damage or
being stuck in fight-or-flight mode, valerian, kava kava, and passionflower,
along with the homeopathic remedies PSY-stabil, viscum, aconite, and
Somcupin, can be beneficial, as can 5-HTP (5-hydroxytryptophan), L-
tyrosine, Fibroboost, and GABA. One potent way to manage GABA is via
the troches made by Troscriptions, particularly Tro Zzz and Tro Calm,
which can be tucked into the upper-lip area prior to sleep.
Exercise
You probably won’t be surprised to learn that sleep quantity and sleep
onset latency both improve with physical activity. In this section, you will
discover how to optimize your workouts to enhance your sleep.
PERFORM LIGHT AEROBIC EXERCISE EARLY IN THE
MORNING.
Research suggests that thirty minutes of moderate-intensity aerobic
exercise at 65 percent of maximum heart rate attained at VO max prior to
2 breakfast is highly beneficial for enhancing sleep. Indeed, exercise can
cause circadian-phase-shifting effects that are perhaps as potent as bright
light. So, before breakfast, perform some light aerobic activity for twenty
to forty-five minutes. This activity won’t amplify high cortisol levels in the
morning, won’t spike your appetite so much that you face-feed the rest of
the morning, and will leave enough glycogen in the tank for a harder
workout later in the day.
--- END PAGE 343 ---

--- PAGE 344 ---
The simplest way to achieve this is with a brisk thirty-minute walk in
the sunshine. Walk to work and eat breakfast there, walk the dog, or walk
the kids to school—you get the idea. I am also a huge fan of going for a
relaxing swim in cool or cold water or performing a thirty-minute yoga
session or brief breathwork session in my sauna.
COMPENSATE FOR ANY EARLY-MORNING HARD
TRAINING.
Training hard in the early morning can shift your circadian rhythm
backward (meaning you get tired earlier in the day), so if you must
perform your intense workout in the morning, take a strategic nap during
the day or plan to go to bed earlier at night. For this reason, a hard
morning training session is a decent strategy for aligning your circadian
rhythm to a new time zone when traveling.
WHEN POSSIBLE, SAVE HARD WORKOUTS FOR THE
AFTERNOON.
Research suggests that longer workouts (up to two and a half hours)
between 2:00 and 6:00 p.m. at 50 to 80 percent of VO max can improve
2 sleep. In an ideal scenario, you should save any intense or high-volume
workouts for the afternoon or early evening. You gain the most benefits
when you do your hard workouts three to eight hours before bedtime, so
try to wrap up your session by 7:30 p.m. at the latest if you want to go to
bed at 10:30. In fact, thirty minutes of high-intensity exercise at 85 to 90
percent of maximum heart rate done to exhaustion three to four hours
before bedtime can increase sleep efficiency and reduce sleep onset
latency. But if the only time of day you feel like exercising hard is in the
morning and you want to “eat the frog” and get the hardest thing done
first, then do your hard exercise in the morning. Conversely, if that light
aerobic session or sauna session I recommended you do in the morning is
--- END PAGE 344 ---

--- PAGE 345 ---
something you prefer to do in the evening because it relaxes you after a
long day of work, that’s also fine. Ultimately, the best time of day to
exercise is when you’re actually going to do it.
COMBAT SLEEP DEPRIVATION WITH AEROBIC
EXERCISE.
Research shows that either longer thirty-plus-minute-sessions of easy
aerobic exercise or intense ten-minute bouts done every two hours during
a sleep-deprived day can partially alleviate sleepiness during periods of
sleep restriction. In other words, do one long-and-slow session, such as a
nature hike, or several short-and-fast sessions, such as a quick series of
kettlebell complexes or a few hard rounds on a stationary bike every two
hours.
CALM YOUR NERVOUS SYSTEM FOLLOWING
EXERCISE.
Exercise increases your body temperature (which has an inverse
relationship with sleep quality) and sympathetic nervous system activity
for several hours afterward. Perhaps this is why deep, relaxing breathwork,
nasal breathing (see below), or a lukewarm or cold shower after your
workout can enhance sleep. For the ultimate treat, I am a fan of catching
up on messages or reading a good book in a warm magnesium salt bath
with a few anti-inflammatory hydrogen tablets tossed in. I’ve even got red
incandescent light bulbs installed in my bathroom to enhance the
mitochondria-boosting effects of the magnesium and make the bath more
relaxing.
ADDRESS SLEEP APNEA.
Sleep apnea is a serious, notoriously underdiagnosed epidemic that has
increasingly become a focal point of concern in the realm of health and
--- END PAGE 345 ---

--- PAGE 346 ---
wellness. Characterized by pauses in breathing or periods of shallow
breathing during sleep, it disrupts the natural sleep cycle and can lead to a
host of health issues, including daytime fatigue, cardiovascular problems,
and impaired cognitive function. The prevalence of sleep apnea has been
on the rise, a trend that can be attributed to a combination of factors
including obesity, aging populations, and lifestyle factors detrimental to
respiratory health.
One of the underlying reasons for the surge in sleep apnea cases is a
modern lifestyle that causes mouth breathing, stress, and poor sleeping
posture, including forward neck posture from staring at a phone or other
screen. Additionally, as you can read more about in the book Jaws by Paul
R. Ehrlich, the high intake of soft and ultra-processed foods has been
linked to poor formation of the teeth, neck, and jaw, which can exacerbate
or even lead to the development of sleep apnea. These dietary habits,
especially prevalent in children, can affect the proper development of the
oral and facial structure, leading to narrowed airways and increased risk of
obstructive sleep apnea later in life.
Traditional testing for sleep apnea is pretty inconvenient and involves
a polysomnography test conducted in a sleep lab under the supervision of
professionals. However, advancements in technology have made possible
polysomnography tests that you can have shipped to your home. These at-
home sleep tests, while not as comprehensive, can still provide valuable
insight into your sleep patterns and potential apnea events. Furthermore,
wearable technology like rings and wristbands that now offer the ability to
track nighttime respiration and pulse oxygenation data can give you a
noninvasive glimpse into sleep quality that can signal the need for further
investigation. If you see that your nighttime heart rate and respiration rate
repeatedly spike, your oxygenation repeatedly dips, or your partner or a
recording device like the SleepSpace app next to your bed reveals snorts
and snores during your sleep, you probably have sleep apnea.
--- END PAGE 346 ---

--- PAGE 347 ---
A surprisingly simple yet effective method to mitigate sleep apnea is
the practice of nasal breathing by day and mouth taping at night. Mouth
taping essentially forces you to breathe through your nose during sleep,
which can significantly improve sleep quality and reduce apnea episodes.
Nasal strips are another non-invasive option that can help open up the
nasal passages, promoting better airflow and reducing the likelihood of
sleep apnea, and you can wear them at the same time as mouth tape.
Somnifix and Myotape are good brands of mouth tape; for men with hairy
faces, Hostage Tape is an even better option.
Exercises designed to strengthen the muscles of the mouth and throat,
such as tongue stretches, jaw-strengthening devices, and neck workouts
can also be beneficial in preventing or reducing the severity of sleep apnea
(I’ll include a helpful link on the resources page with pictures and
instructions for good exercises). For example, one intriguing new device
that many people are reporting works even better than an expensive CPAP
machine or mouth taping is the eXciteOSA Daytime Therapy Device,
which uses mild electrical currents to exercise and strengthen the tongue
muscles and help reduce snoring and treat mild sleep apnea. Similar to
how the EMSculpt device I describe in chapter 18 is an electrical workout
for your sexual and pelvic muscles, the eXciteOSA is a workout for your
tongue.
My own sleep apnea issues were solved by working with my podcast
guest and biological dentist Dr. Eniko Loud, who performed a series of
cervical, mouth, and jaw scans in her office and then custom-designed a
mouthguard for me that I could wear at night for both sleep apnea and
teeth grinding. Before bed, I put in the mouthguard; since I’m an
overachiever, I then slap a strip of mouth tape over my slightly pursed lips.
MY OWN ROUTINE FOR BETTER SLEEP
--- END PAGE 347 ---

--- PAGE 348 ---
Ultimately, I get the best sleep when I perform twenty to thirty minutes of
easy morning exercise in as much natural light as possible in a fasted state
prior to breakfast. Then I do a hard thirty-to-sixty-minute workout in the
late afternoon or early evening, which I follow with a quick cold shower or,
if time permits, a magnesium bath with near-infrared light exposure. In
my experience, this is a potent one-two exercise combo for enhancing
sleep, combined with a little biohacked invention from yours truly. When I
travel and time is tight, it’s often the opposite: a hard session in the
morning to align my circadian rhythms and then a light walk or sauna in
the evening to relax and decompress after the inevitably more stressful
business travel day.
SOUNDING AND GROUNDING
Two underemphasized aspects of sleep hygiene have been big wins for me
in the sleep department: sound and the ground.
If you live in a noisy neighborhood or near an airport, or if a train
passes by your house at midnight, 2:00 a.m., and 5:00 a.m. every night,
then you may need some help blocking out the noise. In this case, you can
use a wraparound sleep mask combined with earplugs to block out both
light and sound. Or you can use soft side-sleeper-friendly headphones,
such as SleepPhones, and listen to sounds from an app like SleepStream,
Brain.fm, or NuCalm to “silence” sirens, airplanes, and barking dogs. (Or,
if you are like my mother, you can use the sounds of whale song, the
relaxation effect of which I have never understood.) Many of these apps
have been specifically formulated to lull you to sleep and include options
such as meditation tracks, yoga nidra (my favorite!), gentle piano, ocean
waves, rain, and, of course, whales.
But managing sound for better sleep can go way beyond white noise
and earplugs: you can also use sound and music to alter your brain waves
--- END PAGE 348 ---

--- PAGE 349 ---
for deep relaxation. Remember from chapter 6 that brain wave
entrainment is the practice of bringing your brain wave frequencies in
sync with an externally produced frequency. When you’re asleep,
meditating, or deeply relaxed, delta and theta brain waves dominate, and
with a brain entrainment device that emits sounds at the right frequency,
you can bring your brain waves from focused and alert alpha and beta
brain waves to relaxed delta and theta brain waves.
The sound frequencies typically used in brain wave entrainment are
called binaural beats. Binaural beats are two tones close in frequency that
are played together, one in each ear. As both sounds encounter the brain,
they combine for a frequency that’s the difference of the original
frequencies. For example, a 495 Hz audio tone in one ear and a 505 Hz
audio tone in the other ear together create a 10 Hz tone. That’s perfect if
you’re seeking alpha brain waves, but for delta brain waves, you’d want the
difference between the two frequencies to be closer to 3 Hz.
--- END PAGE 349 ---

--- PAGE 350 ---
How can you use binaural beats to improve sleep? I recommend the
NuCalm or SleepStream app, both of which produce relaxing sounds
combined with binaural beats. Alternatively, you can use the AI-generated
sounds on the Brain.fm app, which does not produce binaural beats per se
but instead “confuses” the brain into producing delta brain waves.
You can also use Dr. Jeffrey Thompson’s Delta Sleep System tracks or
Michael Tyrrell’s sleep music tracks, both of which you can play as
background music in your bedroom to lull you to sleep. I recommend
placing a speaker on either side of your bed so that your brain is exposed
to a balanced sound from your left and right, or using “sound furniture,”
such as the HUMU sound-conducting pillow or the BioAcoustic mat.
Then there is grounding, which is so important for releasing
accumulated positive ions from your body. Also known as “earthing,”
grounding is the practice of exposing your body to the natural magnetic
frequencies produced by the earth. When you have your feet firmly
planted on the ground, you come into contact with negative ions, which
are produced by turbulent, crashing water, such as waves at the beach and
waterfalls, and in forests, mountains, and other places affected by
rainstorms or thunderstorms. When you are exposed to negative ions,
your body releases positive ions that accumulate via cellular metabolism.
Accumulated positive ions reduce the natural electrochemical gradient
across your cell membranes. This gradient is responsible for allowing
compounds in and out of your cells, so when excess positive ions disrupt
the gradient, they also disrupt cellular metabolism and increase
inflammation.
I spend about 90 percent of my time grounded, whether by going
barefoot, wearing grounding shoes or sandals, sleeping with a grounding
device under my mattress, or wearing a grounding wristband. This may
seem strange, but grounding is one of the best sleep hacks I know.
--- END PAGE 350 ---

--- PAGE 351 ---
In addition to wiggling your toes in the dirt each day, you can use a
mattress or mat wired to the earth through an outlet to tap into the earth’s
negative ions and natural magnetic frequency. These devices are called
grounding mats and have been used by professional athletes, including
Tour de France riders between grueling race stages, to enhance sleep and
recovery.
An even more potent grounding technique is to use a small device or
large bed that emits the same magnetic frequency as the earth,
concentrated as a PEMF signal. 10X, Celler8, Bubble+, EarthPulse, IcesM1,
and FlexPulse are all examples of portable, user-friendly devices that can
be placed on or near your body, while the BioBalance mat, BioMat, and
HigherDOSE mat are full-body devices that can be placed under your top
sheet to operate the entire night.
Grounding shoes and sandals from companies like Earthrunners and
Earthing Harmony include special conductive materials in the soles
designed to conduct a free flow of negative ions from the earth to your
body, allow you to become grounded (without being a barefoot dirty
hippie) when you walk on grass, sand, soil, or even concrete. Erthe straps
can be used to outfit an existing pair of non-grounded shoes.
For more information on grounding, watch the documentary The
Grounded. It tells the story of Haines, Alaska, where lives were changed
and health dramatically improved after people adopted a practice of
grounding as part of an experiment. I highly recommend that you add this
film to your must-see list. Dr. James Oschman, the scientist behind much
of the research in the film, has stated that grounding is “probably the most
important discovery since penicillin.”
And for a deep dive into the science and best practices for grounding
and earthing, I recommend the book Earthing by Clint Ober, Stephen T.
Sinatra, and Martin Zucker. Finally, should you want the most potent
earthing method possible, it turns out that submerging your body in a
--- END PAGE 351 ---

--- PAGE 352 ---
bathtub with a metal faucet and piping that eventually goes into the
ground, or a natural lake, river, pond, or preferably the saltwater-rich
ocean, can amplify the grounding effect.
TRAVEL AND SLEEP
My Five-Step Airplane Sleep System
Let’s face it: with the dry air, cabin pressure, poor food, inadequate water,
and hefty doses of dirty electricity, frequent flying is one of the worst
things you can do for your sleep patterns. I get plenty of complaints from
folks about how hard it is to sleep on airplanes, but after years of struggle,
I can confidently report that I’ve cracked the code on getting quality zzz’s
on a flight. Here’s my routine:1.

Request a window seat. It is far easier to sleep when you can lean
your head against the wall, especially with a side-sleeping travel
pillow (see below). You’ll find yourself less likely to be disturbed by
people climbing over you to use the bathroom or, if you’re lanky
like me, food and drink carts jostling your feet and shoulders.2.

Take an adaptogen. My go-to relaxation formula for a shorter
domestic flight is something that won’t leave me groggy on arrival
(as would be the case with the hefty dose of melatonin and CBD
that I take for international flights). Tulsi, astragalus, and reishi all
perform well. In my case, two packets of Four Sigmatic reishi
extract do the trick. I’ve also used a topical GABA cream called
Somnium, which works nicely.3. 
Use a J-shaped travel pillow. These inflatable pillows are the
highest-rated travel pillows on Amazon (the brand I use is
--- END PAGE 352 ---

--- PAGE 353 ---
Travelrest). They work especially well for side sleepers when
combined with the window seat trick, but they also do the job if
you are stuck in an aisle or middle seat.4.

Eliminate noise. Use foam earplugs combined with noise-blocking
headphones. For an upgrade, try the NuCalm app. Its 20- to 120-
minute “Rescue” tracks are the best I’ve found for airplane
sleeping. For longer international flights, I use a free downloaded
4- to 8-hour yoga nidra track from Ally Boothroyd’s YouTube
channel.5. 
Eliminate light and electricity. Wear a full wraparound sleep
mask and, for bonus points, any of the EMF-blocking gear from
NoChoice or Lambs. I own a NoChoice EMF-blocking jogging suit
that I put on as soon as I’ve gone through security. It even has
grounding tabs on the bottom for grounding/earthing when you get
to your destination, and it’s a game changer for feeling better after
being stuck in a metal tube full of smartphones and Wi-Fi signals
for hours on end.
Finally, I’ll toss in a few pro tips for frequent flyers:

• Avoid alcohol due to its vasoconstrictive effects (besides perhaps that
obligatory, celebratory sip of champagne if you happen to score a first-
class seat on an international flight). As a matter of fact,
vasoconstriction is such a problem on airplanes that anything you can
do to raise your nitric oxide levels is a good idea, including taking
nitric oxide tablets or lozenges or a preworkout that includes
ingredients like citrulline, arginine, beetroot, or cordyceps.
• Anytime you get up, stretch and move, doing ten to twenty air squats
for each bathroom break and frequent toe raises and shoulder shrugs
at the back of the plane.
--- END PAGE 353 ---

--- PAGE 354 ---
• Travel with your own food, preferably a bag of macadamia nuts or
pistachios, a few sticks of grass-fed beef jerky, a couple bottles of
ketones, and some electrolyte powder and hydrogen tablets to add to
your water.
How to Manage Jet Lag like a Champion
It doesn’t matter how fancy your compression socks are or how many
bodyweight squats and calf raises you do in the back of the airplane. When
you are on that plane, you are inside a tiny metal tube that’s being
bombarded by solar radiation and that’s completely disconnected from
the earth’s natural magnetic field. You are also exposed to WiFi signals
(often available during the entire flight), people talking on their phones
and checking email (which happens for the entire gate-to-takeoff and
landing-to-gate phases), dehydration from altitude, dry filtered air, toxin-
laden airplane food, bad water, airborne pathogens, and—if you are
traveling across multiple time zones—jet lag.
Jet lag sucks, as all frequent flyers know. The symptoms include longer
sleep onset latency (especially if you are flying east), early wake times
(especially if you are flying west), interrupted sleep, poor cognitive
performance, fatigue, headaches, irritability, and problems with digestion,
such as indigestion, constipation, and even reduced interest in and
enjoyment of food.
Jet lag is a chronobiological issue that occurs when you travel across
multiple time zones. The day-and-night cycle of your destination isn’t
what you’re accustomed to, so your body clock isn’t in sync with the
destination’s time. The problem is exacerbated because eating, sleeping,
hormone regulation, and body-temperature-variation patterns also do not
correspond to what you are used to. Not much beats flying for radiation
exposure, full-body inflammation, free radical production, reduced
--- END PAGE 354 ---

--- PAGE 355 ---
recovery, and inhibition of important biological processes like protein
synthesis.
I don’t know about you, but when I am traveling and have to perform
at peak capacity, often just hours after my flight touches down, I simply
can’t afford the full-body damage and loss of fitness that can occur every
time I hop on a flight to a race or conference.
The basics of managing jet lag are quite similar to the basics for
managing good sleep in general. First, you can implement zeitgebers (a
word that literally means “time giver”), which are environmental variables
capable of acting as circadian time cues that can increase or decrease your
sleep drive and can be quite effective when crossing time zones or
adjusting your circadian rhythms. The most important zeitgebers are
• Plenty of natural light and blue light during the day and mitigation of
bright light at night
• Eating meals timed to the normal eating time in your current location
you’re in, which means opting out of intermittent fasting or breakfast
skipping if you’re in a new time zone and instead consuming a
nutritious breakfast that ideally includes 20 to 30 g of protein
• Cold exposure in the early hours of the day, then sleeping in a cool
environment at night
• Movement, preferably via an exercise session performed within the
first two to four hours after waking
Second, you must implement the following four gold-standard sleep
hygiene components: light, temperature, sound, and stress management.
To manage light, get exposed to natural sunlight and use a light-producing
device like the EVY or Beacon40 flashing light and the Ayo or Re-Timer
glasses by day, then dim the screens, don blue-light-blocking glasses, and
implement red-light bulbs and/or red-light headlamps at night. Keep the
room as cool as possible (60 to 64 degrees Fahrenheit is the sweet spot),
--- END PAGE 355 ---

--- PAGE 356 ---
and avoid hard exercise sessions and heavy or spicy meals in the three
hours leading up to bedtime. To manage sound, use earplugs and
background-noise-producing apps such as SleepStream or sleep with a set
of soft wraparound headphones like SleepPhones that play NuCalm or
Brain.fm tracks or a yoga nidra session (my favorites are the tracks from
Ally Boothroyd, free on YouTube).
The fourth component of sleep hygiene—stress management—is often
the trickiest to tackle. I used to be the guy who would wander around my
hotel room and open my laptop on the bed or keep a business book handy
by the bedside. Bad move. That routine mentally associated the sleeping
area with stress, stimulation, and work. This can be all the more
problematic for hard-charging, high-achieving people who are often
genetically hardwired (as I learned when I interviewed Doug Brackman,
author of Driven) with patterns that would have allowed us to be good,
awake, and alert sentries or soldiers four thousand years ago but doesn’t
serve us well in the modern era where an incoming message to the laptop
propped up on your belly in bed really isn’t as big of a sleep-disrupting
threat as your brain perceives it to be.
The two genes that most affect this stress response are the COMT and
ADRA2B genes. For example, your COMT gene determines how fast your
body can clear important neurotransmitters like dopamine and
noradrenaline. If you have a slow COMT gene, you are more likely to stay
stressed for a longer time, and stress can of course interfere with your
sleep. If you’re one of those folks who is genetically hardwired to lie awake
at 3:00 a.m. plotting out twenty-seven crazy business ideas and
reprocessing your recent argument with a coworker, my best advice is to
eliminate as many forms of work as possible from the bedroom (including
business books), banish the laptop and TV, and use software like the
1TapZap, the red-light iPhone trick, or the “greatest health hack ever”
--- END PAGE 356 ---

--- PAGE 357 ---
smartphone shortcut (I’ll include links to all on the resources page for this
chapter) to render your device useless, boring, and dim at night.
So, besides managing light, temperature, sound, and stress, what else
can you do about jet lag? Here are nine more ways to beat it.
1. PRACTICE GROUNDING.
Grounding, as explained earlier in this chapter, is the practice of exposing
your body to the natural magnetic frequencies produced by the earth.
Grounding becomes most effective after flying, since hurtling forty
thousand feet above the planet in a metal tube is about as disconnected
from the earth as you can get.
How do you ground yourself when traveling? As soon as I land at my
destination, I make it a point to go outside barefoot, swim in a pool or
natural body of water, or don grounding shoes or sandals for a walk. I also
use the PEMF devices discussed earlier, set at about 7 to 10 Hz, to achieve
a grounding effect when simply lying in bed, and I travel with a lightweight
grounding mat from Ultimate Longevity that I can easily place under the
sheets on any hotel bed.
2. GET LIGHT EXERCISE.
Research suggests that exercise can regulate circadian rhythms. As lousy
and miserable as you may feel training after a day or two of international
travel, the sooner you can vigorously move after arriving at your
destination, the sooner you will bounce back from jet lag and normalize
your circadian rhythm.
You don’t have to do a killer WOD or an epic run. If I am feeling a bit
blah after traveling, my top three exercise choices are walking (barefoot or
in grounding shoes or sandals if possible) in the sunshine or on a beach,
swimming (preferably in cool or cold water), and outdoor barefoot yoga.
During long layovers, I’ll often log up to ten thousand steps walking
--- END PAGE 357 ---

--- PAGE 358 ---
through the airport while listening to an audiobook or podcast, with
random bouts of air squats or push-ups thrown in if I find a quiet spot
where my grunting won’t annoy the seated Cinnabon eaters.
3. AVOID STIMULANTS UNTIL YOU ARRIVE.
Limiting the consumption of caffeine, alcohol, and nicotine is a relatively
common recommendation for reducing jet lag. Because these chemicals
overstimulate the central nervous system and have the potential to disrupt
an already disrupted circadian rhythm, I absolutely agree and do not go
near caffeine or any other CNS stimulant while en route to my
destination. But once you arrive at your final destination, these same
compounds can work wonderfully to keep you awake until it is officially
bedtime in your new time zone, or to jump-start your cortisol drive as you
get accustomed to the morning hours of your new destination. Any of the
nootropics or smart drugs from chapter 5 will work for this purpose.
4. TAKE MELATONIN.
When I’ve traveled across more than three time zones, before going to bed
my first night at my final destination, I consume a 500 to 1,000 mg
sledgehammer dose of melatonin via the Sandman suppositories from
Mitozen. This seemingly insane amount of melatonin was prescribed by an
oncologist friend of mine to help his patients deal with pain at night, and
upon learning this from him, I gave it a few tries as a jet lag hack. It works,
but you may find yourself extremely groggy the next morning, in which
case ample morning light exposure can kick it out of your system faster.
Melatonin is also a natural anti-inflammatory, so it will help reduce the
inflammation that occurs during air travel.
5. DRINK LOTS OF WATER.
--- END PAGE 358 ---

--- PAGE 359 ---
You become dehydrated when sitting in the dry cabin air of an airplane, so
a crucial part of overcoming jet lag is drinking enough water. I have
experimented with a very high water intake and have found that it helps
quite a bit compared to the disappointingly tiny water cup the flight
attendant hands me every couple of hours.
I drink close to 16 to 20 ounces of water, nearly a full bottle, each hour
and feel a distinct difference in sleep, mood, and energy upon landing. Just
make sure that, if you are in a middle or window seat, your aisle-based
seatmate is spry and willing to move every time you need to pee, or you
can politely ask to switch seats. Find water boring? Travel with a small
bottle of organic stevia and add it to club soda or sparkling water to create
a cream soda–esque experience. As a word of caution, consuming this
much water per hour may cause hyponatremia (water intoxication), so I
recommend that you consume trace liquid minerals or electrolytes with
each bottle. To upgrade your water with a potent dose of jet lag–fighting
antioxidants, add a scoop of vitamin C powder and a few hydrogen tablets.
6. TAKE A COLD SHOWER.
In addition to lowering body temperature prior to sleep, cold showers
reduce inflammatory cytokine levels, activate brown adipose tissue to
burn fat, and induce a hormone response, particularly by causing a spike
of adrenaline. I have gone so far as to go into an airport lounge for a ten-
to-fifteen-minute cold shower during a long layover. I also take a two-to-
five-minute cold shower in the hotel when I arrive at my final destination.
Finding a nearby spa allows you to take things to the next level, as you can
do hot-cold contrast therapy with several rounds of dry sauna exposure
followed by a cold plunge or cold shower. Just make sure you’re not
getting so cold that you’re shivering, because that level of chilling will
result in an adrenaline surge that can actually keep you awake. In other
words, get cold but not too cold.
--- END PAGE 359 ---

--- PAGE 360 ---
Splashing lots of cold water in your face can also help, but it is not
nearly as effective as immersion or showering. Cold showers also dilate
your blood vessels because they release more nitric oxide, and the
subsequent increase in glucose and oxygen uptake by your organs and
muscles can dramatically reduce jet lag.
7. CONSUME CURCUMIN.
Curcumin, which is found in turmeric and curries as well as in
concentrated supplement forms, is a potent antioxidant when taken on an
empty stomach both before and after flying. It easily crosses the blood-
brain barrier and shuts down inflammatory cytokines in neural tissue and
may even boost testosterone and growth hormone production.
Upon landing at my final destination, I take about 1,000 mg of
curcumin from a highly absorbable source such as Meriva, which is found
in many supplements, like the Thorne multivitamin, or from the
turmerosaccharides in a serving of Kion Flex.
8. SEEK OUT SULFUR.
Sulfur-rich foods are excellent antioxidant precursors and help reduce the
inflammation that can occur when flying. Sulfur is found in broccoli,
cauliflower, garlic, onions, and Brussels sprouts. Of course, if you opt for
sautéed garlic and onions preflight, you may need to brush your teeth
afterward (unless you plan on creating enemies during the flight).
Fermented foods like kimchi and sauerkraut are also good sulfur sources
and, as a bonus, can help restore the microbiome imbalances caused by air
travel, though a good probiotic can also work well for helping the gut to
recover. Supplements containing sulfurous compounds, such as
glutathione, N-acetylcysteine, MSM, and DMSO, can be even more
effective than sulfurous foods. But if you squeeze a few meals with these
foods into the days leading up to your flight and just after, you will feel
--- END PAGE 360 ---

--- PAGE 361 ---
much better when you travel and will be less likely to suffer immune
system deficits.
For an even more potent dose of antioxidants, you can take a cocktail
of (or get an IV with) glutathione, astaxanthin, selenium, vitamin E,
CoQ10, N-acetylcysteine, vitamin C, and alpha-lipoic acid. Animal studies
have shown that a large dose of antioxidants like this can reduce the
oxidative stress caused by the radiation experienced during airline travel,
as can taking a large dose of DHA, shilajit, methylene blue, chlorella, or
spirulina before flying. For faster cellular repair and recovery, I also
recommend a dose of NR, NMN, or NAD, which you’ve already learned
work well for sleep deprivation, particularly when combined with creatine.
9. GET A HIT OF OXYTOCIN.
Oxytocin is a potent hormone that lifts your mood and acts as an
antioxidant, antidepressant, and anti-inflammatory. It’s naturally released
after sex and during childbirth and breastfeeding, but you can supplement
with an oxytocin nasal spray dose of about 10 to 21 IU per day, so you can
get an oxytocin fix any time and any place, including while you are
traveling.
In addition to using a nasal spray, you can hug someone or, while it is
slightly less effective, warmly shake someone’s hand. Bodily contact will
cause your brain to release low levels of oxytocin. So, when you get to your
destination, find the first person who is okay with it and give him or her a
big, loving bear hug. Or do some partner carries up the stairs at the hotel
(which, incidentally, makes a great travel workout). Just brush your teeth
first if you used the garlic-and-onions trick.
10. USE THESE ADDITIONAL TRICKS AND TIPS.
In addition to the previous nine tactics, there are plenty of other tricks
you can use to feel amazing when you hop off your flight:
--- END PAGE 361 ---

--- PAGE 362 ---
• Don’t eat until it’s mealtime at your final destination, and by all means
don’t get up in the wee morning hours to eat, as consuming food
outside of normal eating times will make adjusting your circadian
rhythm far more difficult. If you find yourself lying awake with the
munchies at 2:00 a.m. in Tokyo, try a yoga nidra session instead. That’s
my best trick.
• Wear graduated compression socks on the flight to control blood
pooling and swelling in the legs and feet.
• Use magnesium. It’s not only going to help you sleep at night but can
offset some of the electrochemical imbalances that occur during
airplane travel.
• Travel with Omica Organics vanilla- or butterscotch toffee–flavored
liquid stevia that you can add to club soda or seltzer water for more
flavor (trust me, it tastes like a delicious vanilla cream soda) and to
help keep hunger at bay.
• Smear the insides of your nostrils with sesame oil or olive oil to keep
your nasal passages moisturized in the dry cabin air. You can also use a
nasal spray for mold and mycotoxin exposure, like the peptide VIP or
GlutaStat nasal spray, along with a throat spray like Beekeeper’s
Naturals propolis spray or liquid silver spray added to a cheap travel
spray bottle. Thieves essential oil added to water is also good for the
immune system during travel.
• Use the light-producing Re-Timer or Ayo glasses on your first morning
at your final destination, especially if you know you will be indoors for
much of the day or you won’t be able to get any sunshine.
10 TIPS FOR CONQUERING THE
NAP
--- END PAGE 362 ---

--- PAGE 363 ---
Napping is one of the most potent ways to combat accumulated sleep loss.
I nap for twenty to sixty minutes per day, usually by curling up in my
hyperbaric chamber or on a warm infrared mat. I also use this time to
“test” the host of meditation and relaxation apps and technologies I’m
constantly trying, so a typical nap for me might also involve some
newfangled meditation track, a pair of gradated compression boots, a
relaxation supplement, or some kind of vagal nerve stimulation device.
Not only does this keep my wife from getting annoyed at me testing this
stuff out in bed later on (trust me: it’s not sexy), but by dividing my day in
two with the equivalent of one sleep cycle’s worth of deep sleep, this nap
effectively gives me two days of productivity squeezed into one, or, as I
like to call it, a “second day” within a day. Let’s face it: it also keeps a
hardworking guy like me from being tired, grumpy, and annoyed at family
dinner.
Research suggests that following sleep restriction, a thirty-minute nap
significantly improves athletes’ performance in speed trials. Research also
suggests that naps can improve cognitive processes that are dramatically
affected by sleep restriction, which may enhance highly complex motor
skills and prevent exercise-induced injuries.
Siestas are particularly rich in slow-wave (deep) NREM sleep, which is
why a nap significantly increases alertness, creativity, recall, and memory
in the second half of the day. Naps also help reduce waking blood pressure
and improve cardiovascular health. If you miss a good night of sleep, a
well-timed nap can help you dig your way out of a sleep-deprivation hole.
On the other hand, poorly timed naps (in the late afternoon or evening)
can actually worsen insomnia and reduce alertness later in the day, so
curling up for a nap before dinner is usually not a good idea. Here are my
top ten dos and don’ts for conquering the nap.
1. DON’T USE AN ALARM CLOCK UNLESS YOU HAVE
TO.
--- END PAGE 363 ---

--- PAGE 364 ---
Why shouldn’t you use an alarm clock? I am a fan of the disk and RAM
(random-access memory) metaphor. Think of the brain and its sleep
cycles as a PC. During the day, while learning information, you store new
data in temporary RAM. During NREM sleep, you write the data down to
the hard disk. During REM sleep, you organize the data, sort it, and build
new neural connections.
This cycle repeats until all RAM data is neatly transferred to the disk
for long-term use and your RAM is clear for the next day. Upon waking up,
you reboot the computer. But if you reboot too soon with an alarm clock,
you may leave your disk fragmented. Your data access will be slow, and
your thinking will be confused. Some of the data may not even get written
to the disk, as if you had never stored it in RAM at all. There are also the
biological implications of using an alarm clock. Like a slap in the face or a
bucket of cold water, an alarm clock quickly wakes you up and causes an
immediate, unnatural release of adrenaline and cortisol.
Fact is, after a while, you don’t really need an alarm clock. Once you
begin a healthy napping habit, your body will naturally wake up in twenty
to sixty minutes. If you must set an alarm, use one that wakes you
gradually, such as the SunRise Alarm Clock, the Sleep Time by Azumio
iPhone app, or the Sleep as Android app for Android phones. Alternatively,
the chiliPAD and BedJet devices can be programmed to circulate warm
water or air under your body at the time you’d like to begin waking up,
which can be an effective strategy for gradually waking without a blaring
alarm clock. The Apollo wearable can be scheduled to shift at a certain
time from relaxing sleep vibrations to more alert and focused haptic
sensations, and the Hapbee pillow or wearable can do the same using
magnetic frequencies.
If I do wake up groggy, a few quick stretches and exercises such as Stu
McGill’s “Big 3” back exercises, the 5 Tibetan longevity exercises, the
Foundation Training exercises, or even jumping up and down on a mini-
--- END PAGE 364 ---

--- PAGE 365 ---
trampoline for a few minutes, preferably combined with a cold plunge,
bring me back to life quickly and result in fewer sleep issues that evening
compared to an energy drink or an afternoon cup of coffee. I’ll link to
some of my favorite waking stretches and exercises on the online
resources page for this chapter.
2. DO TIME YOUR NAP.
It’s best to take your nap when you are the least alert, which is seven to
eight hours after you wake up in the morning. For example, I wake at 6:00
a.m. and have my best naps at around 1:00 p.m. Research suggests that
anytime between 11:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., which is seven to eight hours
after waking for most people, are good times to nap.
3. DON’T DRINK COFFEE OR CAFFEINATED DRINKS
BEFORE YOUR NAP.
It is a myth that if you drink caffeine before a nap, the caffeine will hit
your bloodstream as you wake up. Even tiny amounts of caffeine can
significantly disrupt sleep quality, especially if you metabolize caffeine
quickly.
4. DO SLEEP MORE AT NIGHT IF YOU FIND
YOURSELF TAKING LONG NAPS.
If you nap for more than an hour and a half, you probably are not sleeping
enough at night, or you have some adrenal imbalances that you need to
address. That, or you smoked a joint at lunch.
5. DO AVOID STRESS FOR AN HOUR OR TWO
BEFORE NAPPING.
I try to schedule my lowest-stress activities for right before my naps. For
me, this typically means office and household duties, like rearranging my
--- END PAGE 365 ---

--- PAGE 366 ---
desk, cleaning the garage, reading, writing, or eating lunch—definitely not
doing phone consults or responding to emails.
6. DON’T EXERCISE IMMEDIATELY BEFORE YOUR
NAP.
Naps can assist with exercise recovery, but try to finish working out at
least forty-five minutes before your nap.
7. DO EAT BEFORE YOUR NAP.
Don’t go down for a nap hungry, as hypoglycemia can disrupt sleep. This is
why a post-lunch siesta can be so effective.
8. DON’T FORCE IT.
If you try napping for a month and simply can’t nap no matter what, don’t
worry about it. Go back to your regular sleep routine and look at the free-
running sleep information I’ve added as a resource on
BoundlessBook.com/7.
9. DO HAVE A NAPPING RITUAL.
Whenever possible, nap at the same time of day and perform the same
pre-nap sequence of activities each day (for example, work, exercise,
shower, eat, and nap in that order).
10. DON’T USE ALCOHOL OR SEDATIVES TO
INITIATE A NAP.
A couple of glasses of wine at lunchtime will cause you to wake up sluggish
and fatigued. Instead, try an adaptogen like reishi, tulsi, or astragalus; a 5
to 10 mg microdose of CBD; or a serving of kava root drops or liquid
(TruKava is a good brand).
--- END PAGE 366 ---

--- PAGE 367 ---
THE LAST WORD
The science and logistics of sleep are incredibly important, and the host of
tools, hacks, and strategies for optimizing sleep can be dizzying and
confusing. But I have made a concerted effort to distill into this chapter
my most effective sleep-optimizing strategies.
Should you want to take an even deeper dive into sleep, I recommend
a gold mine of a website: SuperMemo. I spent nearly a month poring over
it and found many well-researched ideas for this chapter. It includes
everything from advanced sleep hacks to the best timing for naps to
instructions for perfecting free-running sleep. It is a lot of information,
but it will satisfy your inner sleep geek and fill in any gaps in your
understanding.
In the meantime, congratulations! You have conquered boundless
energy of mind and are fully prepared to achieve whole and balanced
boundless energy of body. In the next several chapters, you will discover
potent strategies for building muscle, improving your cardiovascular
system, and boosting longevity, fat loss, and recovery, so you can create a
sound body to carry your optimized mind.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Each morning this week, preferably within a couple hours of waking,
expose your eyes, ears, skin, or entire body to as much natural sunlight or
blue light as possible ( just ten to twenty minutes counts!). Each night,
eliminate as much artificial light exposure as you can by wearing blue-
light-blocking glasses (or, in a pinch, sunglasses), limiting screen time,
putting red light bulbs in your bedroom or using a red-light headlamp in
--- END PAGE 367 ---

--- PAGE 368 ---
the evening, and installing blue-light-blocking software on your electronic
devices. Finally, memorize and implement the four major elements of
sleep hygiene: light, temperature, stress, and sound, along with the four
major zeitgebers: light, food, movement, and temperature.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/7. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 368 ---

--- PAGE 369 ---
08
LEAN AND MEAN
HOW TO BURN FAT FAST WITHOUT
DESTROYING YOUR BODY
“Dude, you Photoshopped your head onto that body.” I shook my head and
smiled proudly as my friend Gerad stared up at the framed photo in my office—a
photo of me standing wide-legged onstage with a giant creatine-fueled grin on
my face as I held a double biceps flex pose.
“You were really at three percent body fat?”
--- END PAGE 369 ---

--- PAGE 370 ---
I nodded. “Two hundred fifteen pounds and three percent body fat.”
It’s true. As a competitive bodybuilder, I spent three years cracking the
code on burning massive amounts of fat tissue without wasting away into
malnourished, muscle-depleted oblivion.
Copious amounts of time spent in advanced nutrition, anatomy,
physiology, biochemistry, and pharmacology science classes at the
University of Idaho, combined with a hefty dose of time spent lurking on
bodybuilding forums, taught me how to chisel my body and brain into fat-
loss ninjas.
Following my short-lived bodybuilding career, I spent the next decade
immersed in equally unhealthy body-abusing sports, including thirteen
Ironman triathlons, for which I continued to decipher body composition
optimization in pursuit of the perfect power-to-weight ratio, and four
years of professional obstacle course racing, during which I had to decode
the delicate balance of getting strong like a bull while simultaneously
maintaining low enough body fat percentages to sprint up steep
mountains.
But my approach to fat loss is not just influenced by my time in the
bodybuilding and racing trenches. It also takes a deep research dive into
the science of what works for safe, effective, and lasting fat decimation—
strategies that go far beyond the sage, age-old advice to move more and
eat less. Sure, fat loss and the attainment of a sexy, lean body begin with
getting off your butt, moving more, working out, and slowly lowering the
supersized dark chocolate bar away from your gaping maw. But when it
comes to losing fat fast, staying shredded, ripped, and toned year-round,
and getting to the weight you want—without two-a-day workouts and
being cold and starving all the time—there are potent strategies that fly
under the radar.
For example, take the flawed concept that while you can add more fat
cells to your body, you can never eliminate them. This dogma, commonly
--- END PAGE 370 ---

--- PAGE 371 ---
accepted in the fitness and diet industry, dictates that if you have ever had
excess weight or bits of undesirable fatty tissue on your waist, hips, and
butt, then the fat cells never disappear, even with weight loss—they just
shrink. Smaller in size but not in number, these fat cells then lurk in the
wings for the next time you mess up and eat a few too many bites of steak
or an extra scoop of ice cream, at which point those calories are doomed
to get shoveled directly into the eager, waiting fat cells.
But this isn’t true. I realized this when I interviewed physician and
nutritionist Cate Shanahan on my podcast. Dr. Shanahan explained that if
you eliminate just one notorious biological variable present in most
people eating a standard Western diet, then you can not only lose fat but
also kill existing fat cells and transform them into more metabolically
active tissues, such as brown fat and even stem cells, making yourself
more resistant to future weight gain. What is this variable?
It’s not excess calories. It’s not chocolate. It’s not, to the chagrin of
diet book authors worldwide, gluten. It’s not refined carbohydrates or
saturated fat.
It’s inflammation.
That’s right: inflammation—particularly from exposure to a toxin-
laden environment, consumption of heated and rancid vegetable oils, a
stressful lifestyle, and sleep deprivation—can make fat cells resistant to
dying. Inflammation promotes insulin resistance, which in turn causes
higher insulin levels to accumulate in your blood. In response to this
excess insulin, your body reduces the metabolism of stored body fat. So, to
achieve lasting fat loss, you have to shut down inflammation. This chapter
will explain the best way to do that. But before you learn how to beat
inflammation-induced weight gain, you must understand the basic
mechanics of fat loss.
--- END PAGE 371 ---

--- PAGE 372 ---
FAT LOSS 101
Where does all the fat go when you lose weight? Most fat-loss books and
so-called weight-loss experts, physicians, dietitians, and personal trainers
will tell you that fat is converted to energy or heat, but actually, this would
violate the law of conservation of mass—mass, in an isolated system, is
neither created nor destroyed. Fat also isn’t pooped out or turned into
muscle.
Instead, you breathe away fat.
That’s right: your lungs are the primary excretory organs for weight
loss. Here’s how it works: Any excess carbohydrates or protein that you
eat, even that half stick of butter you drop into your piping-hot cup of
coffee, are converted to triglycerides, a type of fatty acid, and stored in the
lipid droplets of fat cells (adipocytes). Meanwhile, excess dietary fat
undergoes lipolysis (the breakdown of fat) followed by re-esterification to
allow it to be stored in adipocytes. People who want to lose weight while
maintaining muscle and other important tissues are, biochemically
speaking, attempting to burn through the triglycerides stored in
adipocytes. These triglycerides are composed of carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen atoms. Triglycerides can only be broken down when these atoms
are unlocked through a process known as oxidation, which requires
oxygen.
Researchers found that for 22 pounds of fat to be oxidized, 64 pounds
of oxygen must be inhaled. The oxidation results in about 61 pounds of
carbon dioxide being excreted via the breath and about 24 pounds of water
being excreted via urine, feces, breath, and sweat.
Thus, your lungs are the primary excretory organs for fat loss. Now
stick with me here on the math: Each breath contains a little over 0.001
ounce of CO₂, of which about 0.0003 ounce is carbon. So a total of 17,280
breaths during the day (an average of 12 breaths per minute, a normal
--- END PAGE 372 ---

--- PAGE 373 ---
resting rate) will rid the body of at least 0.32 pound of carbon, with
roughly a third of this fat loss occurring while you are completely inactive
—assuming you get about eight hours of sleep per night.
How do you replace all that carbon you breathe out? Unless you have a
horrible habit of munching on charcoal rocks or decide to overdose on
charcoal capsules, the only significant carbon sources I know of are dietary
carbohydrates, proteins, and fats.
So, from as simple a standpoint as possible, losing fat means
consuming less carbon than you have exhaled. If you were to spend a day
doing nothing but sleeping for eight hours, resting for eight hours, and
performing light activities that double your resting metabolic rate for
eight hours, you would exhale about 7 ounces of carbon. Substituting one
hour of rest per day with one hour of moderate exercise, such as hiking or
cycling, increases your metabolic rate about sevenfold. This removes an
extra 1.5 ounces of carbon from the body, increasing the amount of carbon
exhaled by around 20 percent, from 7 ounces to 8.5 ounces.
(sleep x 8 hrs) + (rest x 8 hrs) + (light activity x 8 hrs) = 7 oz carbon
(sleep x 8 hrs) + (rest x 7 hrs) + (light activity x 8 hrs) + (moderate
exercise x 1 hr) = 8.5 oz carbon
The problem is, weight loss can easily be offset by eating. A single 100
g muffin, for example, provides about 20 percent of the average person’s
daily energy requirement. This means physical activity as a weight-loss
strategy is foiled even by relatively small quantities of food. So what is the
most effective, albeit traditional and boring, solution to this conundrum?
Simple: move more and eat less.
There’s one more important thing to know: Anytime you use an
equation to estimate your BMR (basal metabolic rate), research suggests
--- END PAGE 373 ---

--- PAGE 374 ---
there’s a 68 percent chance that your true BMR is within 200 calories of
the estimate provided and a 95 percent chance that your true BMR is
within 400 calories of that estimate. So, if a BMR equation predicts that
you have a BMR of 1,500 calories per day, there’s a 68 percent chance that
your actual BMR is between 1,300 and 1,700 calories and a 95 percent
chance that it’s between 1,100 and 1,900 calories. This variability means
that two people with the same height, weight, age, sex, body composition,
and lifestyle could have energy needs that differ by at least 800 calories
per day!
Congratulations, you now know as much about the true mechanisms
behind weight loss as the average biochemistry student. But let’s say you
are already eating less and moving more. You are—theoretically, at least—
engaging in enough physical activity to breathe off more than enough
carbon, and the scale still isn’t budging. What gives?
You are about to discover sixteen reasons why you are not burning fat,
why you may be resistant to weight loss, or why you are piling on pounds,
and exactly what you can do to turn yourself into a fat-burning machine.
16 REASONS YOU CAN’T BURN FAT
When you’re having trouble moving the needle on your weight, the answer
isn’t necessarily dieting or exercising more. If you’re already active and eat
healthy, then it’s time to consider whether one or a combination of these
sixteen factors may be impeding your weight loss.
1. Inflammation
Remember the common belief that fat cells never go away? That simply
isn’t the case. There is something you can do to annihilate those fat cells,
--- END PAGE 374 ---

--- PAGE 375 ---
and that is to rid yourself of inflammation.
Before I jump into the nitty-gritty, let me emphasize that not all
inflammation is bad. Acute inflammation is a natural biological reaction to
stressors. For example, when you cut yourself, the area surrounding the
cut becomes inflamed as your immune system and regenerative processes
respond to prevent infection and quickly heal the cut. Acute inflammation
also occurs when muscle fibers are broken down and then rebuilt after a
hard workout.
But overloading your body with physical and mental stress to the point
that it produces a constant stream of inflammatory chemicals can cause
chronic inflammation. A combination of increased transforming growth
factor beta signaling and a reduction in certain BMP-like signaling
pathways promotes inflammation and can lead to adipose tissue
dysfunction in obesity. Matrix metalloproteinases, enzymes that remodel
the extracellular matrix (the network of molecules outside cells that give
them support and structure) and regulate white blood cell movement, can
also cause inflammation when their blood plasma activity gets too high.
High levels of vascular endothelial growth factor, which aids in the growth
of new blood vessels, are correlated with inflammation and obesity.
Genes can also play a role in chronic inflammation. For example, the
enzyme nitric oxide synthase is involved in nitric oxide (NO) production,
and while some NO is good, nitric oxide synthase hyperactivity can lead to
excess NO, which can increase meta-inflammation, a state of low but
chronic inflammation in immune and fat cells. Many genetic and
epigenetic factors can contribute to this process, which is often called
“NOS uncoupling.” Rather than making nitric oxide, NOS uncoupling
produces superoxide free radicals, particularly reactive ions, that can
contribute to the destructive path of inflammation. (You can get a genetic
analysis from the company StrateGene to determine if you have a
predisposition to NOS uncoupling.)
--- END PAGE 375 ---

--- PAGE 376 ---
Another gene related to inflammation is the NFE2L2 gene, which
manages the expression of Nrf2, a protein that helps protect against
oxidation. If Nrf2 is not working properly, your body won’t handle iron
properly, and it may make excess free radicals. Often, people with variants
in their NFE2L2 genes suffer from inflammatory conditions that nothing
seems able to resolve.
Functional genetic testing can help determine whether you have issues
with this gene. Fortunately, there are some natural substances, such as
sulforaphane (found in broccoli), resveratrol (found in the skins of grapes
and in certain berries), bacopa, milk thistle, and turmeric, that support
healthy Nrf2 activity and thereby reduce inflammation. A simple salivary
DNA test can tell you whether you have an issue with Nrf2-related
inflammation; I’ll link to a few of my favorite DNA tests on the resources
page for this chapter.
There are more chemicals, enzymes, and factors involved in
inflammation, but you get the idea: chronic inflammation is systemic and
affects the entire body.
The biggest and most underemphasized cause of chronic inflammation
is rancid oil. Oil that has been exposed to high temperatures or pressures
causes a one-two whammy of inflammation and insulin resistance.
Polyunsaturated fats, which are especially prone to becoming rancid, are
found in canola, safflower, peanut, and sunflower oils, which are
commonly used in restaurants and in popular comfort foods from french
fries, pizza, and chicken wings to mac ’n’ cheese, packaged sushi, and trail
mix. When polyunsaturated fats become oxidized and rancid, they
promote the production of toxic substances in your arteries, which, in
turn, promote chronic inflammation throughout your entire body. So the
number one tactic for turning your body into a fat-decimating factory is to
cut out those oils and replace them with healthy ones, such as coconut oil,
extra-virgin olive oil, avocado oil, and macadamia nut oil.
--- END PAGE 376 ---

--- PAGE 377 ---
Many nutritionists claim that the greatest inflammation-inducing
aspect of any diet is sugar. But compared to rancid oils, glucose, fructose,
sucrose, and other sugars are not all that inflammatory as long as they are
quickly metabolized. Sure, in massive quantities, such as half a dozen
bananas a day, a stack of pancakes for breakfast, or multiple stops each day
at the coffee shop baked goodies section, sugars can cause serious issues
(in a moment, I’ll explain how fluctuating blood glucose levels can prevent
you from losing weight). However, overheated, overpressurized oils are
inflammatory even if they are metabolized.
A second major cause of inflammation that is not addressed often
enough is chronic stress. Constant stress—from working way too much,
PTSD, a tragic event, relationship issues, poor breathing patterns, frequent
travel, and many other sources—can cause your brain to become
overexposed to excitatory neurotransmitters such as glutamate and your
limbic system to become stuck in fight-or-flight mode. The limbic system
is a complex system of nerves and networks in the brain that controls
basic emotions such as fear, pleasure, and anger and basic drives such as
hunger and sex. As the limbic system becomes overstimulated, your
immune system can become hyperactive and begin to see many foods and
supplements as foreign invaders, resulting in a cytokine cascade and
systemic inflammation, especially in hard-charging high achievers, who
may also be acetylcholine-dominant (see here). This type of inflammation
responds well to breathwork, yoga, meditation, sleep, relaxing exercise,
and other stress-mitigating strategies.
No discussion of inflammation would be complete without discussing
the cell danger response (CDR). CDR is the metabolic answer to danger
that protects cells and their hosts—including you, the human host—from
harm. When you encounter chemical, physical, or biological threats that
surpass your cells’ ability to handle the accompanying emotional, exercise,
or chemical stress, CDR kicks into gear. At that point, your cells become
--- END PAGE 377 ---

--- PAGE 378 ---
drained of resources necessary for functional capacity, which produces a
number of changes in cell function, including electron flow, membrane
fluidity, protein folding, metal detoxification, vitamin availability, oxygen
consumption, and carbon and sulfur resource allocation.
When CDR first kicks in, it causes the release of metabolic
intermediates like ATP, ADP, ROS, and oxygen, all of which can trigger an
inflammatory response. Once the stressor has been eliminated, your body
activates anti-inflammatory, regenerative mechanisms to counteract CDR
and undo the damage. But if you experience chronic CDR from chronic
stress, it disrupts your gut microbiome and metabolism, impairs organ
system function, leads to behavioral changes, causes a decline in fat loss
and muscle synthesis, promotes chronic disease, and triggers your body to
release a harmful steady stream of inflammatory cytokines.
So what can you do about CDR? The most important treatment
strategy for dealing with this “stuck” inflammation is to identify the
emotion, traumatic event, infection, or toxin responsible for the response
and treat it thoroughly. Treatment usually requires a combination of
supplements, dietary and activity changes, and nutritional adaptogen
therapies, and the best course of action is to meet with a functional
medicine practitioner well versed in the syndrome. I recommend that you
review chapter 3 if you haven’t yet, and read the book Toxic by Dr. Neil
Nathan. In addition, look up the work of Dr. Robert Naviaux at Naviaux
Lab (naviauxlab.ucsd.edu) to find solutions for CDR that has arisen due to
emotional trauma, exercise overtraining, chemical stress, mold or
mycotoxin exposure, or any other major life stressor that may have left
you in a constantly activated fight-or-flight mode.
2. Glycemic Variability
--- END PAGE 378 ---

--- PAGE 379 ---
Meet the elephant in the room that affects a host of longevity and chronic
disease parameters, as well as fat loss: glycemic variability (GV). This term
refers to the level and intensity with which your blood sugar fluctuates.
GV accounts for hypoglycemic periods, postprandial rises in glucose
levels, protein converted to sugar from a mess of steak or bacon and eggs
(a process known as gluconeogenesis), and even blood sugar increases
from stress or cortisol. (Shockingly, when I run 24-7 tests of my blood
glucose levels via the continuous blood glucose monitor that is implanted
into my tricep, the highest my blood glucose ever gets is after my big
morning cup of coffee, due to the cortisol release and the subsequent
dumping of liver glycogen into my system.)
GV is such a crucial component of your physiology that physician
Peter Attia said, in an interview on the eight keys to longevity, that “the
name of the game is glucose disposal. Can you maintain a low average
level of glucose and a low variance of glucose and a low area under the
curve of insulin?” (The “area under the curve of insulin” refers to the
amount of insulin displacement that occurs over the course of a day.)
If GV gets out of control and your blood sugar gets too high, your body
has two choices: either shovel the sugar into your muscles and liver or
store it as body fat. So if your energy expenditure throughout the day isn’t
high enough to convert blood sugar to potential energy in your muscles,
you are going to gain fat tissue. Below, you will find six ways to prevent
that from happening and even get rid of the carbohydrate-related body fat
you already have. But first, you should understand one important fact:
sugar in your food isn’t always bad.
Yeah, you read that right.
Although sugar is demonized by waistline-conscious health nuts and
elite athletes, sugar is not the menace it is made out to be. Every form of
sugar—whether from bread, rice, bananas, yams, plantains, Mexican Coke,
or coconut milk ice cream—is converted to glucose or triglycerides, both
--- END PAGE 379 ---

--- PAGE 380 ---
of which can be burned as energy if you are in a caloric deficit. You run
into problems when you consume too much sugar, consume it too
frequently, consume too much protein, or consume too much food overall.
You’ll notice that the list of examples above includes foods that many
people don’t think of as high in sugar and may even consider healthy—
bananas, yams, and plantains, for instance. But these are sources of sugar,
just as donuts are. So now that you understand that you might be on a
high-sugar diet even if you don’t consume a lot of what most people would
recognize as sugar, here are my six most effective strategies for controlling
your blood sugar. The best way to keep your finger on the pulse of your
GV? You guessed it: a continuous blood glucose monitor (CGM), which
tracks your glucose 24-7 and gives you valuable real-time insights about
how your blood sugar is affected by your lifestyle, diet, and exercise
choices.
STRATEGY #1: STRENGTH TRAINING
Strength training increases your ability to drive glucose into muscle tissue.
The glucose transporter GLUT4 is critical for skeletal muscle glucose
uptake in response to insulin and muscle contraction, and strength
training is a potent method to enhance GLUT4 expression and allow for
muscle to literally become a “sugar sink.” In this way, strength training
decreases blood glucose levels and increases insulin sensitivity, even if
you’re lifting weights that are only 30 percent of your single-repetition
maximum weight (1RM). This means you can control blood sugar,
upregulate sugar transporters, and reduce the storage of sugar as fat with
relatively light bodyweight exercises, such as push-ups, air squats, and
lunges.
STRATEGY #2: PRE-BREAKFAST FASTED CARDIO
--- END PAGE 380 ---

--- PAGE 381 ---
Research has shown that exercising before breakfast, particularly in a
fasted state, is a potent strategy for controlling blood sugar. Incidentally,
this is also an Ayurvedic strategy described in books like Suhas
Kshirsagar’s Change Your Schedule, Change Your Life. (I’ll talk more about
Ayurvedic medicine in chapter 15.)
One study assigned a group of participants to train in the morning
before eating, drink only water during training, and then eat a large
breakfast after training. Despite eating a large breakfast, the group’s
participants gained almost no weight, and their metabolic rates increased
so that they more efficiently burned the energy they consumed later in the
day. So get a little training in before having your gluten-free muffin or
creatine smoothie or handful of fish oil pills.
STRATEGY #3: POSTPRANDIAL WALKS
A Japanese study divided participants into three groups and had each
group either sit, stand, or walk after a meal. They found that low-volume,
easy walking for thirty minutes kept the concentration of fat in the blood
18 percent lower than sitting or standing after a meal, and subsequent
studies have shown that even as little as five to ten minutes of walking is
effective. So not only should you exercise before breakfast in a fasted
state, but you should also go out of your way to move before and/or after
breakfast, lunch, and dinner, even if it’s just a quick trip to the stairwell or
a few jumping jacks in your office. And yes, you can count dancing, having
sex, playing backyard badminton, chasing the kids, or doing yard work as
“walking.”
STRATEGY #4: STANDING
While walking is more effective than standing after a meal, standing is
much more effective than sitting. One office study found that standing for
180 minutes after lunch instead of sitting for the same amount of time
--- END PAGE 381 ---

--- PAGE 382 ---
reduced blood sugar spikes by 43 percent. Another study found that
alternating between standing and sitting every thirty minutes throughout
the workday reduced blood sugar spikes by 11.1 percent on average. So
even during a day of work, you don’t have to work out to control blood
sugar. The trick is not to sit down for the entirety of your workday and to
hack your office environment so you stay physically active all day long
(more on that in chapter 11).
There’s fascinating science behind why standing is so effective and
why twitching, calf raises, frequent activity, and other “non-exercise”
forms of daily movement are a game changer when it comes to glucose
and lipid regulation, lowered risk of type 2 diabetes, fat loss, and general
physiological health.
The term inactivity physiology was first put forward in 2004 to describe
the research on the potential causal role of sedentary behaviors in the
development of cardiovascular and metabolic diseases. The basic premise
is that sitting too much is not the same as lack of exercise and has its own
unique metabolic consequences. Research shows that even if you follow
current public health guidelines to be classified as “physically active,” if
you work out or exercise at the beginning or end of the day but sit for
eight hours in between, you’re basically an “active couch potato” with
poor blood glucose and fat-loss management.
But this doesn’t mean you need to swing kettlebells all day. Studies
have used radioactive fat tracers to examine the metabolic effects of not
standing on leg muscles like the quadriceps. These muscles quickly lose
more than 75 percent of their ability to siphon off the fat circulating in the
bloodstream when they’re not contracting, as is the case when you are
sitting. This is caused by a 90 to 95 percent loss of lipoprotein lipase (LPL)
activity, which is important because LPL is one of your best weapons to
burn fat all day long. But nonexercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT)
keeps LPL nicely activated even if you’re not hitting the gym. This is why I
--- END PAGE 382 ---

--- PAGE 383 ---
have a pull-up bar in the door of my office, a kettlebell on the floor of my
office, a standing desk with a walking treadmill, and a constant hum of
low-level physical activity all day long.
Perhaps the most useful tool in my NEAT arsenal is the mighty soleus
push-up, which is basically a glorified seated calf raise. One study titled “A
potent physiological method to magnify and sustain soleus oxidative
metabolism improves glucose and lipid regulation” showed that simply
contracting your calves by doing a heel-to-toe raise while in a seated
position is enough of a physical stimulus to keep blood sugar regulated
and fat burning. The beauty of the soleus push-up is that you can do it on
an airplane, in a car, at a board meeting, or just about anywhere.
STRATEGY #5: PLANTS, HERBS, AND SPICES
For those times when you can’t exercise, you are forced to sit for most of
the workday, you have an eleven-hour flight, or you just want some extra
help with blood sugar management before you head to a cheat meal at a
steakhouse, you can consume plants, herbs, and spices that help keep
blood sugar stable. These are called glucose disposal agents (GDAs), and
some notable examples are Ceylon cinnamon, Gymnema sylvestre,
berberine (particularly a form called dihydroberberine), rock lotus (aka
shilianhua or stone lotus), and bitter melon extract. Even a shot of apple
cider vinegar or a splash of bitters and a squeeze of lemon over soda water
can do the trick.
STRATEGY #6: FIBER
Anaerobic bacterial fermentation breaks down dietary insoluble fiber into
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). About 95 percent of the SCFAs in your
body are composed of acetate, propionate, or butyrate. Research has
shown that acetate inhibits the conversion of glucose to fatty acids in the
liver. This reduces the accumulation of fat in adipose tissue and the liver
--- END PAGE 383 ---

--- PAGE 384 ---
and improves blood sugar management. Propionate improves glucose
tolerance and insulin sensitivity. (Interestingly, propionic acid, of which
propionate is the conjugate base, can inhibit gluconeogenesis in the liver
and is also derived from the fermentation of fiber.) In mice, butyrate has
been shown to prevent and treat diet-induced insulin resistance by
increasing insulin sensitivity, allowing the mice to metabolize glucose
better.
You can find insoluble fiber in foods such as nuts, sweet potatoes,
yams, dark leafy greens, and legumes. If these foods cause gas, bloating, or
other GI issues for you, you can approximate the same effects by getting
into a state of ketosis or by using drinkable ketone esters. One form of
bacteria, Akkermansia muciniphila, is a gut microbiota that breaks down a
sugary protein in the intestine’s mucus layer and is associated with better
metabolic and immune health, even showing anti-diabetic effects in
humans and rodents. Pendulum is a good brand for Akkermansia.
Walking, standing, fasted cardio, a little weight training, a few common
herbs and spices you can obtain at your local health-food store, and some
extra fiber or bacteria can all help prevent the glycemic variability that
holds many people back from fat loss and achieving the body they want.
Peptides for Weight Loss: What You Need to
Know
If you’re interested in getting bigger, stronger, sexier, and faster with age
and you’re already engaged in smart strategies like lifting weights, eating
adequate protein, engaging in low-level physical activity all day long, and
avoiding inflammatory foods, then peptides can be another tool in your
toolkit to help you simultaneously build muscle and burn fat.
Peptides, which are usually administered in oral, injectable, or intranasal
form, are short chains of amino acids that have gained significant attention
in medical research, particularly in fields like hormone replacement therapy,
--- END PAGE 384 ---

--- PAGE 385 ---
immunology, and drug development. Perhaps the most famous peptide
category is GLP-1 agonists like semaglutide (sold under the brand names
Ozempic and Wegovy) and liraglutide (Victoza and Saxenda). Hollywood
celebrities, Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, fashion models, and increasingly
what seems like half of the folks in your neighborhood are now taking these
drugs in vast quantities.
Designed as diabetes drugs, these peptides mimic the effects of glucagon-
like peptide-1, a hormone normally released when you eat. GLP-1 stimulates
the release of insulin, inhibits the release of glucagon, and slows gastric
motility and the passage of food through the gut, which signals satiety and
makes you feel fuller for longer. I first realized the power of these peptides
when I went out to dinner with a foodie friend who had dosed up that week.
He sat there mildly nauseated as most of his favorite foods came to the
table and ultimately nibbled on half a deviled egg during an entire three-
hour dinner, satisfied by nothing more than a couple glasses of water.
So do these peptides work for losing weight? Absolutely, and they are
probably more effective than just about any weight-loss drug that has ever
been developed. Of all the weight-loss drugs the industry has pushed and
tested and tried, the GLP-1 agonists actually help people lose up to 15
percent body fat over a couple years, compared to just a 2 percent loss in
placebos. That’s massive, especially when you consider that they can also
lower blood pressure, reduce major cardiovascular event risks, and improve
blood sugar balance.
But there are downsides to GLP-1 agonists. For example, once you start,
you’ll probably have to take them for life. Studies have shown that those
who eventually go off the drug quickly regain most of the weight and lose
almost all the other health benefits (blood sugar, blood lipids, blood
pressure, etc.). Next, these drugs can increase adipogenesis, which is the
creation of new fat cells. This process normally occurs in childhood and is a
major reason why childhood obesity is so hard to overcome and so often
leads to adult obesity. If you’re not very careful with your diet, these extra
fat cells readily get filled back up when you are an adult. This means weight
regain is all the easier once you stop taking your GLP-1 agonist.
Besides the problems of nausea, diarrhea, and high heart rate, another
concerning issue with GLP-1 agonists is the loss of muscle mass in those on
the drug. Sure, you can mitigate this loss by going out of your way to eat
--- END PAGE 385 ---

--- PAGE 386 ---
adequate protein and lift weights, but you certainly have to do extra work if
you don’t want to get skinny and gaunt when on a GLP-1 agonist.
Journalist Tucker Carlson recently exposed the pharmaceutical industry’s
unethical push to profit from these drugs, unveiling the industry’s clever
strategies to pay physicians to prescribe these massively profitable drugs to
their patients—patients who would be better served by preventive tactics
like eating more protein and fiber, walking, or lifting weights. The
pharmaceutical and food industries have a pattern of heavily funding and
influencing the NIH, FDA, and healthcare industry, leading to lobbying and
consulting efforts that prioritize funding and profits over public health, and
GLP-1 agonists are no exception. Should you want to learn more, I’ll include
links to a couple of informative but troubling videos on the resources page
for this chapter, but the summary is this: GLP-1 agonists are one giant human
experiment driven by profit, with very little long-term safety data. You can
also read the book Magic Pill: The Extraordinary Benefits and Disturbing
Risks of the Ozempic Drug by Johann Har, which explores the disturbing
risks of GLP-1 agonists.
Probiotics (particularly Akkermansia muciniphila, Clostridium butyricum, and
Bifidobacterium infantis strains), fasting, and exercise are examples of
natural ways to stimulate GLP-1. Berberine, green tea, curcumin, Ceylon
cinnamon, and resveratrol can act similarly. Amarasate, the active ingredient
in a supplement called Calocurb, was developed over thirteen years with
$30 million in funding and has been clinically proven to reduce hunger by 30
percent, cravings by 40 percent, and calorie intake by 18 percent. It does so
by stimulating the release of appetite-satiating compounds like CCK, PYY,
and—you guessed it—GLP-1 (an over six-time increase!). Formulated with
bacterial strains specific to GLP-1 stimulation, Pendulum’s GLP-1 probiotic
can have similar effects.
The good news is that there are other weight-loss peptides and peptide
stacks that are less concerning with fewer side effects than GLP-1 agonists,
with the added bonus of supporting lean muscle gain. Some of my favorite
stacks include the following peptides:•

IGF-1 LR3: A long-acting version of insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1),
IGF-1 LR3 is a potent anabolic peptide that works to increase muscle by
stimulating hyperplasia (an increase in muscle fiber number). Dosing
guidelines are 50 to 150 mcg once a day for a four-week cycle, usually via
--- END PAGE 386 ---

--- PAGE 387 ---
subcutaneous injection, preferably preworkout or with your first meal of
the day.•

Ipamorelin: Because it increases the secretion of growth hormone (GH),
ipamorelin is a potent muscle-building and hunger-suppressing peptide.
GH has major effects on skeletal muscle and function, which is why it is
such a widely used—and abused—sports-performance drug. But
ipamorelin is far safer. Dosing guidelines are 100 to 500 mcg one to three
times per day for a twelve-week cycle. For muscle gain and fat loss, I’ve
experienced the best results taking ipamorelin on an empty stomach
before bedtime.•

CJC-1295: CJC-1295 functions as a growth hormone-releasing hormone
(GHRH) and increases IGF-1, which helps promote fat loss and muscle
protein synthesis. For this stack, I recommend you use CJC without DAC
(drug affinity complex), which is the shorter-acting version that more
closely mimics the body’s natural growth hormone pulses. Dosing
guidelines are 100 mcg one to three times per day for a twelve-week
cycle, preferably taken before sleep on an empty stomach. CJC-1295
Ipamorelin is a convenient combination of peptides that works well
because of the growth hormone release from the CJC-1295 paired with
the hunger-suppressing and growth hormone–increasing effects of
ipamorelin.•

Tesamorelin: Tesamorelin’s mechanism of action is similar to that of
ipamorelin, meaning that it works on growth hormone pathways,
stimulates IGF-1, and triggers the production of muscle protein. It’s also
been shown in large clinical trials to decrease visceral fat and reduce
levels of triglycerides in the blood. Dosing guidelines are 1 mg once or
twice a day, five days per week, for a twelve-week cycle, preferably
preworkout or with your first meal of the day.•

5-amino-1MQ: One other notable peptide to consider is 5-amino-1MQ,
which plays an instrumental role in the metabolism of fat. It is recognized
for its ability to block an enzyme known as NNMT, which is associated
with obesity and fat storage. By inhibiting this enzyme, 5-amino-1MQ can
contribute to the reduction of body fat and facilitate weight loss, along
with giving massive amounts of clean energy for, say, a fasted morning
workout.
--- END PAGE 387 ---

--- PAGE 388 ---
It’s important to understand that the best effects from any of these peptides
come via pairing them with a consistent weight-training routine, a physically
active lifestyle, and adequate protein intake. Ultimately, if I were going to
use peptides to accelerate fat loss and lean muscle gain, I’d run a couple of
twelve-week cycles (five days on, two days off) each year of IGF-1 LR3 and
tesamorelin in the morning, then ipamorelin and CJC-1295 in the evening,
and then throw in another twelve-week cycle (also five days on, two days
off) of 5-amino-1MQ a couple times a year, skipping the more concerning
GLP-1 agonists entirely. On the resources page for this chapter, I’ll include
helpful peptide sources, a peptide “cheat sheet,” and one of my favorite
sources for orally bioavailable peptides specifically targeted for muscle gain,
fat loss, cognition, and sexual health: a company called LVLUP Health.
Finally, as I discuss in my podcast with Dr. Tyna Moore, many of the risks and
downfalls of GLP-1 peptides can be mitigated with a microdosing approach
that uses 1/10 or less volume. I’ve personally microdosed with the GLP-1
agonists tirzepatide and semaglutide and had a noticeable decrease in
appetite with no gut discomfort or other problematic side effects, along
with an improvement in blood sugar control.
--- END PAGE 388 ---

--- PAGE 389 ---
Is Insulin Always Bad?
I personally don’t engage in extreme carbohydrate restriction or a strict low-
carb, high-fat ketogenic diet because I want to maintain healthy insulin
levels. Like cortisol, insulin is often vilified, but it’s actually a superhormone
that performs a host of functions beyond shoving excess sugar into fat cells.
In fact, insulin performs several important jobs that have nothing to do with
glucose—jobs that it performs far less efficiently if carbohydrates are
excessively restricted.
SKELETAL MUSCLE METABOLISM: Insulin is critical for protein metabolism
in muscle tissue and performs anabolic and anticatabolic actions—meaning
it’s crucial for muscle growth and repair. It increases the rate of transport of
amino acids into muscle tissue, making them available for muscle protein
synthesis. It also reduces muscle protein breakdown.
THYROID FUNCTION: The hormone thyroxine (T4) is produced in the
thyroid gland and is then converted to the more active hormone
triiodothyronine (T3). This process is upregulated by insulin and is
significantly decreased during periods of excessive caloric or carbohydrate
restriction.
BONE HEALTH: Cells called osteoblasts create new bone tissue and
remineralize existing bone matrix by secreting hydroxyapatite crystals.
Insulin increases osteoblast activity, proliferation, differentiation, and survival
while also increasing collagen synthesis to improve connective tissue
integrity.
HEALTHY IMMUNE RESPONSES: When insulin is elevated, immune cells
become more stable. Insulin activates immune cells called neutrophils (the
first line of defense during infection or injury) and other immune system
sentinel cells. It even enhances the effectiveness of natural killer cells, which
destroy infected or cancerous cells. It also activates helper T cells, which
assist with immune attacks, and regulatory T cells, which modulate immune
responses and prevent autoimmune diseases.
Conversely, blocking insulin can reduce the proliferation and migration of
regulatory T cells. This is why high insulin levels can be inflammatory and at
the same time insulin resistance or constantly suppressed insulin levels are
--- END PAGE 389 ---

--- PAGE 390 ---
associated with autoimmune issues and the suppression of the immune
system.
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM HEALTH: Insulin can cross the blood-brain
barrier and bind with receptors in different areas of the brain. For example, it
can bind to receptors in the hypothalamus and hippocampus, where it
regulates hunger and energy balance and even increases cognitive functions
such as neuroplasticity, learning, and memory. Poor insulin signaling in the
brain is associated with cognitive impairment, dementia, and Alzheimer’s
disease.
Insulin also protects against neuroinflammation by binding to receptors on
microglial cells, the brain’s resident immune cells. When insulin is low in the
brain, the level of inflammatory cytokines in neural tissue increases. In
people with particularly low insulin levels, this is often treated with intranasal
insulin supplementation.
HORMONE REGULATION: Insulin acts with insulin-like growth factor 1 and
follicle-stimulating hormone to increase estrogen and testosterone
production. It also decreases levels of sex hormone binding globulin, which
binds to testosterone and estrogen in the blood and renders them inactive.
This means that, to a certain point, higher insulin levels give you more sex
hormones and improve their bioavailability. Insulin also interacts with
cortisol, growth hormone, and glucagon, as well as neurotransmitters like
dopamine, serotonin, and melatonin.
DIGESTION: Insulin increases stomach acid and bile production, increases
the production of sodium reabsorption transporters in the kidneys, increases
sodium and water reabsorption, and stimulates potassium and other
micronutrient transport into cells while increasing the production of
appetite-suppressing hormones and decreasing the production of appetite-
stimulating molecules.
For all these reasons, I make sure to consume natural, healthy amounts of
carbohydrates, particularly in the evenings on my more physically active
days.
--- END PAGE 390 ---

--- PAGE 391 ---
3. Cortisol and Stress
When you are stressed, your body releases hormones such as cortisol that
turn on functions that are essential for your immediate survival, such as
higher blood pressure and rapid decision-making, while inhibiting
nonessential functions, such as immune function, digestion, and protein
synthesis. This is helpful if you need to handle an acute stressor (like a
looming deadline or an obstacle race), but it is also the reason why
chronic stress restricts your ability to shed that extra weight around your
midsection. Cortisol suppresses insulin secretion, inhibits glucose uptake
into your cells, and disrupts insulin signaling to muscle tissue. That means
chronic stress directly causes insulin resistance, which then leads to
weight-loss resistance, increased inflammation, dyslipidemia (elevated
blood fat and cholesterol levels), and hypertension.
I have coached many clients, especially lean, hard-charging, type-A
men, who were already addressing many of the other factors mentioned in
this chapter but still couldn’t eliminate that last bit of belly fat. Once they
learned how to manage stress and reduce cortisol, the extra belly fat often
vanished, much to their surprise and satisfaction. (The other adjustment
--- END PAGE 391 ---

--- PAGE 392 ---
that achieves a similar effect is the extreme mitigation of alcohol,
vegetable oils, and foods with added sugar.) Even exercise, when
performed in excess, can leave you chronically stressed and with elevated
cortisol levels. This type of overtraining does not just happen to pro
athletes—you may be in this category if you are not recovering properly
(see chapter 12), you undernourish your body, or you fail to get quality
sleep.
Other stressors that spike cortisol include the following:
• The death of a loved one
• Relationship or personality conflicts and sexual frustrations
• Losing a job
• Academic stress or continuing educational pressure
• Emotions such as boredom, hunger, anger, depression, fear, and
anxiety
• Toxins and pollutants from your food or environment
• Excessive heat, cold, or humidity (including some harebrained
decision to take a thirty-minute ice bath every day or blast yourself
with a ninety-minute hot yoga class five days a week)
• High altitude or poor oxygen availability (including shallow chest
breathing)
• Poorly designed, restrictive, or uncomfortable clothing and shoes
• Psyching yourself up too frequently (like engaging in Wim Hof fire-
breathing at the beginning of every activity, from waking to
working out to making an important call)
• Pressure to perform and constant attention from social media
• Lack of encouragement or love from others
One of the best ways to know if you are chronically stressed is to
measure your heart rate variability (HRV). HRV is the variability in the
--- END PAGE 392 ---

--- PAGE 393 ---
amount of time between heartbeats and can be used to track nervous
system health and recovery status. When the parasympathetic “rest-and-
digest” nervous system is activated, it releases acetylcholine to induce a
low heart rate and a state of relaxation. Your HRV will be highest at this
point, so a high HRV indicates a low state of stress.
If you are not well-rested, the normal, healthy beat-to-beat variation in
your heart rhythm falls. Abnormal variation can indicate a stress issue,
especially if you observe consistently low HRV values. Actual values tend
to vary from device to device because different algorithms are used to
track HRV, but any wearable or app should be able to show when it’s low.
And if it is, then low HRV could be affecting your endocrine system or vice
versa. Tracking your HRV allows you to see if you are potentially
overstressing your body, producing excess cortisol, or becoming resistant
to weight loss. In chapter 12, I’ll explain how to track HRV quickly and
effectively and how to interpret your numbers.
Low HRV can arise from a poor diet, shallow breathing, stress,
overtraining, low vagal nerve tone, poor air quality, excessive artificial
light exposure, electrical pollution from Wi-Fi and Bluetooth signals,
micronutrient deficiencies, impure water, inadequate sleep, or food
intolerances and allergies. Just imagine if more people were told to look
into these issues rather than just eat less and less while exercising more
and more.
--- END PAGE 393 ---

--- PAGE 394 ---
4. Sleep Deprivation
Only about 35 percent of Americans get the recommended amount of
sleep every night—between seven and nine hours—and many get less than
six hours. Sleep deprivation has severe effects on the body and weakens
the immune and nervous systems so much that you become vulnerable to
diseases and neurodegeneration. When it comes to fat loss, research has
shown that getting between four and five hours of sleep per night causes
insulin resistance and high glycemic variability, leading to diabetes,
appetite cravings, and weight gain in people who would otherwise be
healthy. Scarier yet is that all it takes to cause this type of damage is a
single night of partial sleep.
Sleep deprivation is known to raise cortisol levels, reduce glucose
tolerance, and increase sympathetic nervous system activity. One study
found that, in addition to reducing insulin sensitivity and glucose
tolerance, sleep deprivation reduces levels of the satiety-inducing
hormone leptin and increases levels of the hunger-stimulating hormone
ghrelin. So not only does sleep deprivation reduce your ability to
metabolize glucose, but it also makes you want to consume more sugar
and hedonistic, vegetable-oil-laden snack foods. This is why it’s so easy to
grab a second helping at the buffet or fail to stroll by a vending machine
unscathed when you are sleep-deprived. Want more? Read chapter 7.
5. Snacking and Postworkout Calories
When I was bodybuilding, it was well known in the “mass gain”
community that one of the best strategies for piling on the pounds was to
arrive at work with a container of yogurt, a couple of Tupperware
containers of lean chicken with rice and broccoli (bricken!), a couple of
zip-top plastic bags of almonds, a handful of energy bars, and a premade
--- END PAGE 394 ---

--- PAGE 395 ---
protein shake, and consume all this food gradually over the course of the
day. Sure, by lifting heavy weights morning and night for a couple of hours
at a time, I would convert most of this food to muscle, but this type of
grazing is also a fantastic strategy to pile on body fat, especially if you
don’t spend your life pumping iron.
The theory that you need to eat six small meals throughout the day to
keep your metabolism elevated is a myth that I am guilty of having
preached to many of my fat-loss clients. But it has long since been
debunked by science. While digestion does produce a thermic effect that
increases your metabolism, the bump is slight.
Frequent snacking increases glycemic variability and prevents you
from getting the gut- and longevity-boosting benefits of fasting. It also
keeps your blood sugar levels elevated and shifts your metabolism into
sugar-burning mode, which does not allow your body to tap into its stored
fat for fuel. In fact, there is no evidence that eating more than three meals
per day boosts your metabolism, helps you lose weight, or aids in appetite
control. On the other hand, if you eat only two or three meals per day in a
compressed feeding window, your body burns fat and releases more
antiaging and growth hormones. So eating six small meals per day may be
worse for your waistline than eating two or three larger meals spread
throughout the day.
The belief that you will enter “starvation mode” if you don’t eat
frequently is also false. It takes about three days of complete fasting or up
to four weeks of extreme caloric restriction for your body to downregulate
metabolism and thyroid activity. Research has shown that short-term
fasts, such as daily, overnight twelve-to-sixteen-hour fasts, actually
increase your metabolic rate due to an increase in norepinephrine, one of
the hormones that signal fat cells to break down. You don’t necessarily
have to reduce your caloric intake, especially if you are active. The trick is
--- END PAGE 395 ---

--- PAGE 396 ---
to eat less often, not to eat less. (For helpful calorie calculators based on
age, height, weight, and activity levels, visit BoundlessBook.com/8.)
Another common myth is that you need a protein shake or giant bar
from the gym fridge immediately after a workout. The idea behind eating
right after finishing a workout is to maximize muscular adaptations, repair
damaged tissues, and rapidly shuttle glycogen into muscle for ample
anabolic growth during a limited window of maximum carbohydrate
absorption (twenty minutes to two hours after training). But in every
study looking at the benefits of immediate postworkout eating,
participants ate after exercising in a fasted state, usually to exhaustion—
and frankly, most of us are not jumping out of bed to exercise for 90 to 120
minutes with no fuel. So unless you want to gain significant mass (for
example, if you are a high school or college football player trying to get to
the next level by putting on 20 pounds), as long as you ate at some point
prior to working out, there is no need to drop everything to slug down that
postworkout protein drink. Your blood levels of amino acids and stored
carbohydrates will still be elevated from any eating done prior to your
workout—meaning that for a 5 p.m. visit to the gym, your body can
metabolize your breakfast or lunch for fuel. In fact, occasionally waiting a
couple of hours after you exercise to eat may boost growth hormone and
testosterone levels. Unless you are performing two-a-day workouts within
an eight-hour window, there is no need to drop the barbell and hustle to
your gym bag for a shiny, wrapped recovery snack.
Ultimately, calories are calories, and it will be harder to lose weight if
you have a habit of mindlessly munching on random handfuls of almonds,
taking sips of sugary kombucha, polishing off your kid’s leftovers, or force-
feeding snacks in an effort to “keep the metabolism elevated.”
6. Not Moving Enough
--- END PAGE 396 ---

--- PAGE 397 ---
You’ve already learned about NEAT and why tiny muscle twitches
throughout the day add up to significant amounts of glucose control and
fat loss. Whether I am standing, lunging, kneeling, sitting, leaning, or in
any other position during a day of work, I stop a few times an hour for a
quick burst of activity such as kettlebell swings, a sprint up the stairs,
jumping jacks, or a handful of burpees. Heck, I even pull over my car
frequently during road trips to crank out push-ups, duck into the
bathroom at restaurants for forty air squats in a stall, and do elaborate
stretch routines at the back of airplanes. If I’m stuck sitting for long
periods with no option to stand, I’ll do the soleus push-ups discussed
earlier, or even isometric exercises like pressing my palms or thighs
together in a hard ten-to-twenty-second contraction.
I don’t do this because I am a hyperactive freak who is addicted to
exercise (though I do get restless pretty quickly if I don’t move
frequently). Rather, as you have learned, weight loss requires an
expenditure of energy greater than the intake of energy through your diet.
The brutal truth is that for most people, sitting for eight hours a day does
not expend enough energy to counterbalance breakfast, lunch, dinner, and
snacks, no matter how much exercise they perform at the beginning or
end of the day. Even in people who exercise, habitual sedentary behavior is
associated with metabolic syndrome, increased risk of obesity, type 2
diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and premature mortality. When you are
regularly sedentary for extended periods, your blood sugar levels go
haywire because a low level of physical activity causes unfavorable changes
in insulin signaling, glucose transport, and the activity of lipoprotein
lipase, the primary enzyme responsible for breaking down fats.
The solution? Move more, especially at work, which is when people
tend to move the least. Even in a traditional cubicle-based office, it is not
difficult to duck away to the bathroom for air squats, the parking lot for
jumping jacks, or the stairwell for stair climbs.
--- END PAGE 397 ---

--- PAGE 398 ---
Research suggests that the effects of being sedentary, including insulin
resistance, are partly independent of the amount of time spent in
moderate- and vigorous-intensity physical activity. In other words, if you
spend the majority of your day sitting or just standing there with your
knees locked, that hour you spend at the gym isn’t doing you many
metabolic favors. Sitting and even static standing may even place you at
risk for heart issues during exercise because a hard workout at the end of
the day becomes an attempt to force blood through “kinked” vessels.
Remember this: while a formal workout at the beginning or end of the
day is not necessary for weight loss, low-level physical activity throughout the
day is. (For details on how to turn your office into a calorie-decimating
workstation, visit BoundlessBook.com/8.)
7. Too Much Exercise
Not only do you not lose weight when you don’t move enough, but you
also don’t lose weight when you move too much. That may not be what
you want to hear in an era of self-fulfillment and self-identity through
exercise, with hard-core CrossFitters trying to stay on the whiteboard,
Navy SEALs inspiring housewives to get up at 4 a.m. to crush the day and
go to the pain cave, and a physical culture all about zero days off, no pain
no gain, balls to the wall, and going HAAM (Google that one if you’re
curious).
Don’t get me wrong. I am not opposed to going to the pain cave,
consistently going to the gym, and exercising more than the average
person (especially if you are trying to climb your own Everest, such as
training for a triathlon or a Spartan Race or, well, Mount Everest). But
excessive exercise can lead to elevated levels of cortisol and inflammation,
and we live in an era of overtrained, inflamed folks with hormonal
dysregulation and cortisol coming out their ears.
--- END PAGE 398 ---

--- PAGE 399 ---
To gain strength, you have to tear muscle fibers by lifting moderately
heavy weights, which tells your body that it needs to build more muscle in
that area. To tear your muscle fibers, especially if you are already a trained
individual, you have to push your muscles past their comfort levels. So to
get stronger, you must lift weights beyond what you can comfortably
handle. Increasing endurance involves a similar approach: you must
encounter exhaustion and push the borders of your stamina to build
everything from red blood cells to new mitochondria. But you don’t need
to do so every day. Indeed, consistently difficult daily training is
accompanied by serious physiological complications. One study concluded
that severe overtraining leads to immune system damage, fatigue, mood
disturbances, physical discomfort, sleep difficulties, and reduced appetite.
Even during the recovery stages of this study, fatigue and immune system
deficits persisted if individuals pushed themselves to the brink of
overtraining.
The fix? Take days off. Take more days off if you are older. Most hard-
charging high achievers under forty benefit from at least one day of rest
and recovery per week, and most folks over forty benefit from two to three
such days. This doesn’t mean couch and dark-chocolate-face-stuffing time.
It just means you scratch your “I must make my body better” itch via
activities such as sauna sessions, easy yoga, breathwork, a cold soak, a
massage, some trampolining, a nice hike (not the one with a brutality
rating of five stars on your trails app), or anything else that allows you to
enhance your body without beating it to shreds.
8. Chronic Cardio
No gym seems complete without a whole room or hallway dedicated to the
rat-on-a-wheel glory of treadmills, stationary bikes, elliptical trainers, and
—my favorite—steppers. But cardio tends to be vastly misunderstood as a
--- END PAGE 399 ---

--- PAGE 400 ---
fat-burning tool, and there is even an ongoing debate between meatheads
and endurance junkies over what good or harm cardio does. The general
belief among park joggers is that running melts fat off the belly like butter,
while those who eschew cardio say it can harm your heart and even make
you fatter.
The truth is a bit more nuanced than “cardio is good” or “cardio is
bad.” Cardio does not directly make you fat, especially since the daylong
low-level physical activity I endorse in this chapter could technically be
classified as cardio.
But cardio is not risk-free—especially the type that involves long
marathon-training death marches, multihour cycling sessions, or the
excessive, draining slog on the lineup of cardio machines at the gym. For
example, legendary ultramarathoner Micah True died in 2012 at age fifty-
eight during a typical “easy” twelve-mile run. Considering that he could
run as many as a hundred miles in a single day, twelve miles should have
been nothing. But the autopsy showed that his heart was enlarged and
scarred, and his death is believed to be due to Phidippides
cardiomyopathy, which is caused by chronic, excessive endurance exercise.
Named for a Greek messenger who died after running more than 175 miles
in two days, Phidippides cardiomyopathy is characterized by a heart that is
enlarged and scarred and is accompanied by elevated cardiac risk
biomarkers such as troponin and natriuretic peptides, along with small
patches of cardiac muscle damage that can be responsible for heart
arrhythmias and even sudden death.
Unless you consistently run extreme distances, it is unlikely you need
to worry about suffering (or pronouncing) Phidippides cardiomyopathy.
But True’s death (as well as many other such instances detailed in my
book Beyond Training) illustrates that long bouts of cardio, while they may
significantly improve endurance, are not necessarily the best for your
--- END PAGE 400 ---

--- PAGE 401 ---
health—or your waistline. In fact, one of the problems that many
endurance athletes become frustrated with is an inability to shed fat.
The reason for this is simple: endurance training and chronic cardio
create a state of extreme metabolic efficiency. When you engage in aerobic
exercise, your body wants to work as efficiently as possible while
producing the greatest amount of physical output. So if you’re performing
long cardio sessions with increasing volume and frequency, your body will
attempt to shed unnecessary, excess weight and store usable energy it can
draw on during these sessions. Do you know what weight is more or less
unnecessary when you run because of its need to be carried and cooled?
Muscle. And do you know what’s a great source of stored, usable energy
for cardio? Body fat. So, when you perform increasingly grueling death
marches, your body gets rid of muscle and stores fat to prepare for each
bout of cardio, while also downregulating anabolic hormones such as
testosterone and growth hormone, which are paradoxical to extreme
endurance efficiency. To see what I mean, perform a Google image search
for “sprinter vs. marathoner” or “sprinter vs. long distance runner” and
compare the body types—many marathoners, especially recreational
marathoners, even have a visible paunch of fat at the waistline and lower
belly.
To make matters worse, since muscle tissue mobilizes stored fat,
especially when you are resting, the less muscle mass you have, the less fat
you tend to burn. In addition, your body will eventually adapt to
endurance cardio and burn energy more efficiently, which means that
when you launch into a cardio session, you will use less and less of your
stored body fat. Unless you reach the training volume of hard-core
endurance athletes like Scott Jurek, Dean Karnazes, and Timothy Olson,
who often perform cardio in excess of four hours a day (which isn’t
necessarily good for your heart, time management, or productivity),
chronic cardio won’t do much to help you reach your weight-loss goals.
--- END PAGE 401 ---

--- PAGE 402 ---
Indeed, research suggests that aerobic exercise and cardio are effective
only when you are both overweight and new to exercise.
So if you are already active, you can engage in short, high-intensity
interval cardio sessions and switch cardio modes frequently, meaning that
if you do three intense cardio sessions per week, you could alternate
between swimming, cycling, and running. One study found that after
twenty weeks of training, the participants who performed HIIT (high-
intensity interval training) lost more body fat than those who engaged in
steady-state endurance training (like long, slow treadmill runs). HIIT is
also effective for preventing and managing insulin resistance and type 2
diabetes. Most HIIT sessions last about thirty minutes at most, so you are
getting a lot more bang for your buck than if you were to spend an hour
tooling along on a treadmill. As far as long, slow aerobic cardio is
concerned, you need less than you think if you’ve engineered your routine
for low-intensity physical activity throughout the day. For example, once a
week I’ll go on a long hike or bike ride for around two hours. If you’re
sprinkling in HIIT and moving naturally each day, that’s ample
“structured” aerobic exercise time for improving cardiovascular fitness
from week to week without overtraining on excessive cardio. Obviously, if
you decide to do an Ironman triathlon or marathon, you’ll need more
cardio than that, but don’t fool yourself into thinking it’s healthy or the
best strategy for fat loss.
9. The SAID Principle
The SAID principle is one of the first principles I learned in my
undergraduate exercise physiology courses. It stands for “specific
adaptation to imposed demands” and means that your body will
eventually adapt to the demands you place upon it. If running is your only
form of cardio or push-ups are your only form of upper-body training,
--- END PAGE 402 ---

--- PAGE 403 ---
your body will become so adapted to those demands over time that it
burns fewer calories and experiences fewer gains in response to these
stimuli. As a result, you see fewer and fewer results from that tried-and-
true exercise regimen that seemed to work so well for twelve weeks.
Perhaps there is something to adopting the latest workout fad found in
the last health magazine you read (“Get the Six-Day Beach Body You
Deserve with These 12 Bodyweight Moves!”), then dropping it for an
entirely new routine once the next magazine arrives a month later
(“Norwegian Volume Training for a Better Butt!”). Sometimes the best
workout plan is the one you are not currently doing. Not only that, but the
best time of day to work out is often whatever time you are not currently
working out, the best length of time for an HIIT cardio workout is
anything shorter or longer than what you are currently doing, and the best
sport for shedding pounds is whatever sport you are not currently playing.
Sure, you want some consistency and a reliable routine that keeps you
motivated, but if the scale isn’t budging, sometimes randomness and
variety are the answers.
The following are six specific modifications you can make to minimize
the effects of endless repetition.
MODIFICATION #1: COMBINE EXERCISES
If your regimen includes a lot of weightlifting, you can combine many lifts
into dynamic movements. If your current routine has you performing a set
of squats and a set of shoulder presses, for instance, you can shock your
muscles by combining the lifts into one single squat-to-shoulder-press
movement. You can also do lunges and curls, vertical jumps and push-ups
(a burpee), or medicine ball lift-and-throws.
MODIFICATION #2: IMPLEMENT ACTIVE REST
PERIODS
--- END PAGE 403 ---

--- PAGE 404 ---
Rather than resting between weight-training sets, do a thirty-, sixty-, or
ninety-second cardio boost or core exercise. For example, between sets of
pull-downs or presses, run to the stationary bike and sprint for a minute,
or hold a front plank. The metabolic demand of your workout will
completely change. (This is my usual workout mode at hotel gyms because
of the potent combination of strength and cardio training, called
concurrent training.)
MODIFICATION #3: TAKE IT OUTSIDE
Instead of your usual forty-five-minute jaunt on an elliptical, grab a set of
dumbbells or a weighted backpack or vest and hit the hiking trails. The
unpredictability of undulating terrain can significantly increase physical
demands and throw your body new curveballs.
MODIFICATION #4: CHANGE THE CENTER OF
GRAVITY
If you usually use a barbell for lunges, switch it up and try using
dumbbells, kettlebells, or a medicine ball instead. Don a weighted vest or
weighted backpack during a walk. For a cable exercise, move the cable up
or down a few notches and come at the movement from a new angle. The
altered weight positions and angles will force your body into an entirely
new metabolic situation.
MODIFICATION #5: WORK OUT AT A DIFFERENT
TIME OF DAY
Been working out in the morning for the past few years? Throw your body
for a loop and hit the gym an hour before dinner. The whole workout will
feel entirely different. If you normally exercise after lunch, turn lunch into
a nap session and hit the gym for an early-morning workout instead. The
only folks for whom this trick isn’t such a great idea are those suffering
--- END PAGE 404 ---

--- PAGE 405 ---
from poor sleep: exercising at random intervals throughout the day isn’t
great for your chronobiology.
MODIFICATION #6: SAME WORKOUT, DIFFERENT
TOOLS
Add to your home gym or workout bag a few extra tools that you can bring
out when the going seems to have gotten too easy. Rather than cranking
out push-ups and squats on the floor, use a vibration platform. Try blood
flow restriction (BFR) bands for a rowing machine, bike, incline walk, or
bodyweight workout. Use a resistance breath-training device (see chapter
3) for a HIIT workout. Wear a weighted vest for any workout you feel
you’ve gotten used to. The added bonus of this tactic is that it can make a
stale workout more interesting and give you a chance to try new biohacks
or tools while doing exercises your body is familiar with.
These are just a few ways you can switch up your workouts and minimize
repetition. When in doubt, follow this rule: Don’t go more than four weeks
without significantly changing some staple of your exercise program.
10. Not Enough Exposure to Cold
It might surprise you to learn that not all fat is created equal. When most
people think of fat, they think of the fat that accumulates around the belly,
waist, hips, butt, and thighs. But that’s just the tip of the fatberg.
White adipose tissue (WAT, or white fat) is a form of stored energy
that sits there waiting for you to mobilize it, providing a bit of insulation
and organ cushioning in the meantime. In contrast, brown adipose tissue
(BAT, or brown fat) is primarily located around the sternum, clavicle, and
rib cage and generates heat by directly mobilizing the energy stored in
white fat. This process is known as nonshivering thermogenesis
(commonly referred to as “cold thermogenesis”) and occurs in the
--- END PAGE 405 ---

--- PAGE 406 ---
mitochondria of BAT cells when calories are turned into heat instead of
ATP.
The hypothalamic and stem regions of the brain cause an upregulation
of the sympathetic nervous system when activated by a sensation of cold.
So BAT uses calories rather than ATP to create heat, which means that
being cold can drain your gas tank the same way fasting or calorie
restriction does.
Another type of fat, called beige fat, is BAT that appears within white
adipose tissue after cold exposure. This process is known as the browning
of white adipose tissue. But functionally, there is no difference between
the metabolic activity of brown fat and beige fat, so the distinction pretty
much comes down to location.
The key takeaway is that cold exposure stimulates brown fat to burn
white fat, so one of your primary fat-burning techniques should be daily
cold thermogenesis. In addition to implementing two-to-five-minute cold
showers or cold soaks at no more than 55 degrees Fahrenheit, a weekly
longer cold soak for ten to twenty minutes in an ice tub, three-to-five-
minute visits to a cryotherapy chamber, or frequent forays from the sauna
to the cold and back, you can even use cold gear, especially in the summer
or when you can’t hunt down cold water (or you don’t want to leave your
office to get wet), to enhance the formation of BAT. For example, the Cool
Fat Burner vest wraps around your upper torso and activates the BAT in
those regions, while the Cool Gut Buster enhances the formation of
metabolically active beige fat around the waistline.
Strike, Stroll, Shiver
For two decades, from my days of ripped bodybuilding madness to lean
triathlon competition to my current more sane, less masochistic daily
routine, I have relied on one simple yet elegant daily fat-loss technique that
--- END PAGE 406 ---

--- PAGE 407 ---
has never failed me or the clients I train for everything from the elimination
of morbid obesity to competition stage readiness. It is my most potent 1-2-3
fat-loss technique, and I call it Strike [as in “hunger strike”—aren’t I clever?],
Stroll, Shiver.
1. Strike: This first step is optional, but it will give you an added fat-burning
bonus: prior to step 2, “Stroll,” drink a cup of coffee or green tea to help
mobilize fatty acids and boost your metabolic rate slightly. It has to be plain-
Jane coffee or tea—no sugar, cream, MCT oil, or butter—but you can add a
couple capsules of a blood sugar stabilizer such as berberine or bitter melon
extract, a shot of apple cider vinegar, or a teaspoon or two of Ceylon
cinnamon or cayenne extract to enhance the fat-burning effects. Want even
more? Use a brown fat activator like grains of paradise or green tea extract.
Just remember: no calories. If you are concerned about losing muscle or are
attempting to gain significant lean muscle mass, you can also consume 10 to
20 g of essential amino acids, which will provide a small anabolic effect
without significantly spiking blood glucose or insulin. If you just can’t seem
to tackle this morning routine without getting hangry, you can throw in a
serving of liquid ketones. Neither will significantly “break your fast.”
--- END PAGE 407 ---

--- PAGE 408 ---
2. Stroll: As soon as you wake up—before you sit down to breakfast or make
yourself a smoothie or pour butter into your coffee or jump into your
messages or take a shower—do a ten-to-forty-minute light aerobic session.
Do it while you are in a fasted state, which will allow your body to tap into
its own fat for fuel. Choose a simple exercise you can perform 24-7, 365 days
a year, such as a walk in the sunshine (bonus: morning vitamin D, grounding
if you touch the earth, and circadian rhythm alignment!), an easy yoga
session, walking the dog, riding your bike, a leisurely swim, or even a sweat
in a dry or infrared sauna. Choose anything that’s light, easy, aerobic,
conversational, and low-stress. It won’t cause a significant release of cortisol,
it won’t completely exhaust you for the day, it will still allow you to perform
a hard workout later in the day, and it won’t make you feel famished and
want to devour every breakfast item in sight afterward. But it will jump-start
fat-burning, and it’s far more frictionless than driving to the gym for a hard
workout.
--- END PAGE 408 ---

--- PAGE 409 ---
3. Shiver: Complete your “stroll” and dive straight into two to five minutes of
cold exposure. Any of the cold thermogenesis tactics in chapter 2 count,
including a hot-cold contrast shower, a dip in a cold river or lake, a cold
bath, or even donning cold thermogenesis gear such as the Cool Fat Burner
or Cool Gut Buster vest (the latter can be worn for forty to sixty minutes as
you work, commute, clean the garage, or eat breakfast). This step will not
only help strip inflammatory white adipose tissue off your belly but also
increase your metabolically active brown adipose tissue, which will further
enhance your capacity to burn fat. Alternatively, you can do your workout in
a cold setting, such as a brisk walk in the fall or winter or easy laps in a cool
pool.
That’s it! I stick to this strategy just about every day of the year, and it is one
of the biggest fat-loss game changers I have ever utilized. It also fits nicely
into the simple category of “move more and eat less,” with a few extra hacks
thrown in.
11. Hormonal Imbalances
Endocrine disruption and hormonal imbalances can occur when you’re as
young as your early twenties and can be caused by exposure to chemicals
such as pesticides and plasticizers; external stress such as relationship or
financial problems; internal stress such as viruses, heavy metal
accumulation, and blood sugar swings; dietary contaminants; deficiencies
--- END PAGE 409 ---

--- PAGE 410 ---
in critical micronutrients; lack of sleep; and poor digestive health. When
hormones are disrupted, metabolism slows, appetite rages, and
inflammation manifests.
Although both men and women struggle with hormonal imbalances,
women seem to have more trouble with imbalances that specifically cause
resistance to fat loss. For example, the hormone estrogen is higher in
women and promotes cell division, cell growth, and, in excessive amounts,
the formation of fat tissue. Women also naturally produce more
progesterone, which protects against such excessive fat growth. Problem
is, progesterone production declines much faster with age than estrogen
production, so between ages thirty and fifty, a woman can develop
estrogen dominance. At that point, fat rapidly accumulates and becomes
much harder to lose. Of course, men can experience similar age-related
issues as testosterone falls and estrogen rises.
There are steps you can take to minimize the effects of hormonal
imbalances. But first, it’s best to determine whether a hormonal imbalance
is causing weight-loss resistance. Some blood tests give you a snapshot
view of your hormone levels at a single moment, but you can test for
hormonal imbalances that occur throughout a twenty-four-hour cycle with
the DUTCH urine test, which I’ll talk more about in chapter 16.
If you do find hormonal imbalances after receiving the results of your
DUTCH panel, or if you suspect a hormonal imbalance is keeping you
from losing weight, I recommend working with a functional medicine
practitioner to balance your hormones with supplements, medications, or
both, but you can also make key lifestyle and dietary changes to mitigate
the damage, including a few of the following examples.
HORMONE STRATEGY #1: EAT MORE CRUCIFEROUS
VEGGIES AND FATS
--- END PAGE 410 ---

--- PAGE 411 ---
Cruciferous vegetables include broccoli, cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, and
cabbage. They contain indole-3-carbinol, an antioxidant that metabolizes
excess estrogen. In addition, since cholesterol and fat-soluble vitamins
support hormone health, ditch a fat-phobic approach and embrace healthy
intake of clean fish, eggs, avocados and avocado oil, olives and olive oil,
raw unsalted nuts like macadamias and pistachios, nut butter, pumpkin
seeds, flax seeds and flaxseed oil, and chia seeds.
HORMONE STRATEGY #2: FILTER YOUR WATER
Heavy metals and chemicals like fluoride (which is a registered insecticide
and rodenticide) found in drinking water can damage the endocrine
system. You can eliminate these metals and chemicals by installing a
drinking water filtration system, such as a reverse osmosis filter or carbon
block, in your home. You can get a unit with a built-in remineralizer to
refortify your water with good minerals like calcium, magnesium, and
potassium, or just add extra electrolytes and good salts to your water and
food throughout the day.
HORMONE STRATEGY #3: USE GLASS OR
STAINLESS-STEEL PRODUCTS INSTEAD OF PLASTIC
Chemicals that interfere with hormones, like BPA, can seep from plastic
bottles and cups into drinking water and food. The book Estrogeneration by
Anthony Jay addresses how plastic exposure affects estrogen, and I
recommend reading it, and point #12 below, if you want to learn more
about how environmental factors are affecting hormones and harming
health. (Chapter 20 also includes plenty of potent environmental-hacking
strategies that will significantly reduce your exposure to endocrine
disruptors such as BPA.)
--- END PAGE 411 ---

--- PAGE 412 ---
12. Exposure to Toxins and Chemicals
You should know about the fascinating website Slimemoldtimemold.com
(not the most appealing name, I’ll admit). Over a dozen long-form
articles, the site provides reams of research and solid evidence that
environmental factors, specifically toxins, play a significant role in the
obesity epidemic, delving into the hypothesis that toxins in our
environment, food, and products disrupt metabolic processes, leading to
increased fat storage and weight gain. This perspective obviously
challenges conventional wisdom on obesity, which often focuses solely on
diet and exercise, by highlighting the complex interplay between our
bodies and the contaminated world we inhabit.
Through an examination of historical data, scientific studies, and
patterns of disease distribution, there is a compelling case to be made that
addressing obesity requires an approach that includes reducing exposure
to toxins and chemicals, which makes perfect sense because one of the
ways the body deals with toxins is to create new and bigger fat cells in
which to store those toxins.
Three-letter-acronym toxins like PCB, DDT, DDE, and BPA and (my
favorite) persistent organic pollutants (POPs) have been found in
concerningly high concentrations in human fat tissue and cause significant
metabolic damage, hormonal imbalances, and even more fat storage. Your
body shovels these compounds into adipose tissue to protect other
functional tissues and your internal organs. If you store too many toxins
and nondegradable chemicals in fat tissue, you will have a much harder
time losing weight, no matter how much you exercise or how much clean
food you eat or how much cold exposure you get. This is also why a rapid
fat-loss regimen often results in skin rashes, zits, and diarrhea: as you
mobilize fat, you also mobilize the toxins it contains. The toxins cause
other symptoms unless they are dealt with via a detox protocol.
--- END PAGE 412 ---

--- PAGE 413 ---
Filtering your water, using glass or stainless steel instead of plastic,
using natural beauty and cleaning products, and engaging in regular
detoxification via sweating, exercise, and healthy bowel movements are
strategies to minimize toxin and chemical damage. You can also take steps
to minimize uncomfortable side effects, such as irritability and
inflammation, that can occur as chemicals and toxins get mobilized from
fat and released back into your circulatory system. A full spectrum of
whole-food antioxidant sources can be beneficial in eliminating the free
radicals and oxidants that cause cellular damage and accelerate aging.
Plus, if you get some of your antioxidants from plant sources such as dark
berries and leafy greens, then you will also get more satiating and lipid-
managing fiber in your diet. Fiber acts like a sponge and can soak up toxins
from your system as they are released. For this reason, while on any fat-
loss regimen, you should aim for 35 to 60 g of fiber per day from organic
produce, berries, and a limited amount of larger fruits, seeds, and nuts.
(There are more details and guidelines for dealing with toxins in other
chapters: chapter 4 has a list of foods and ingredients high in antioxidants,
as well as some supplemental antioxidants; chapter 13 explains how to
detox your body; and chapter 20 explores detoxing your home from
invisible chemicals in air and water.)
13. Food Allergies and Intolerances
Food allergies and intolerances can have a ripple effect when it comes to
weight gain. While there isn’t research demonstrating that these issues
directly cause people to put on extra pounds, the reactions you experience
as a result of them can indirectly lead to weight gain. For example, if you
experience brain fog, lethargy, and gut upset in response to your diet, your
daily activity level and motivation may decrease dramatically, leading to
higher numbers on the scale. Chronic inflammation caused by a response
--- END PAGE 413 ---

--- PAGE 414 ---
to food can also result in insulin resistance, which subsequently leads to
weight gain.
If you have a food allergy, then you probably know it. Food allergies are
accompanied by severe symptoms such as throat swelling and respiratory
distress—as you may know from a friend who needs to be within a stone’s
throw of an ambulance if he so much as sniffs a peanut. An allergy occurs
when the immune system misidentifies a protein as harmful and mounts
an emergency response. Some proteins or protein fragments, such as
those found in peanuts or shellfish, are resistant to digestion, and in
people with an allergy, the proteins that don’t get broken down during
digestion are tagged by an antibody called immunoglobulin E. This fools
the immune system into thinking that the protein is an invader, so the
immune system attacks it and triggers an allergic reaction. The effects can
include hives, shock, severe drops in blood pressure, respiratory distress,
and anaphylaxis. As you can imagine, weight gain is not the primary
concern if this happens—simply staying alive is the priority.
In contrast, a food intolerance is much more subtle and can happen
because of a number of physiological deficiencies, such as insufficient
levels of the liver enzymes that dissolve fructose or low levels of the
enzyme lactase, which can lead to an intolerance of unfermented dairy
products (the fermentation process involved in making, say, yogurt tends
to significantly reduce levels of lactose). Gluten intolerances are also
common, although many people who believe they have gluten issues may
have an entirely different problem. Most gluten-containing foods also
contain gliadin. If you have a subclinical sensitivity to gliadin, consuming
these foods can cause an inflammatory response in the small intestine (I’ll
talk plenty more about this in chapter 13). This sensitivity is more
common in people of Northern European and Eastern European descent.
The symptoms of all these food intolerances can be similar to those of
food allergies, but they’re not as pronounced. But both allergies and
--- END PAGE 414 ---

--- PAGE 415 ---
intolerances involve an inflammatory response, which can lead to weight
gain if you consistently consume foods you can’t tolerate.
Cyrex Laboratories and Zoomer offer highly accurate food intolerance
and allergy panels. Rather than giving you a frustrating and inaccurate
laundry list of foods you are never supposed to touch again, these tests
identify a targeted list of foods to remove from your diet without an
annoying false-positive list of foods you’re not allowed to eat (more on
why this is the case in chapter 13). For example, Cyrex’s approach to
testing for reactivity to cooked, processed, and raw foods sets the
laboratory apart from its competitors because once a food is heated to 118
degrees Fahrenheit or more, its protein structure and potential for
triggering an antigen reaction may change. After all, a person’s
inflammatory response to cooked chicken may be far different from the
response to raw chicken. (In addition to simply avoiding foods you don’t
tolerate well, there are many things you can do to fix your gut once
damage has been done, as I’ll explain in chapter 13.)
14. Micronutrient Deficiencies
If you have spent any time trying to balance your diet, you have
undoubtedly heard the term macros, which refers to the three
macronutrients: protein, carbohydrates, and fats. While these are crucial
nutrients, they don’t even begin to cover all the vitamins, minerals, and
other micronutrients that your body needs to function. Research has
shown that specific micronutrient deficiencies are associated with weight
gain and obesity. Among these, the most significant are vitamin D,
chromium, biotin, thiamine, and antioxidants. Deficiencies in these
micronutrients can prevent fat loss via mechanisms that include altered
insulin gene transcription, amplification of intracellular insulin signaling,
and changes to glucose and amino acid metabolism. Metabolism and
--- END PAGE 415 ---

--- PAGE 416 ---
weight loss are also negatively affected by deficiencies in magnesium,
boron, vitamin A, vitamin K₂, and choline.
Micronutrient deficiencies can be caused by digestion issues or,
because many micronutrients are fat-soluble, fat deficiencies and
malabsorption. How much of which micronutrients are needed varies
from person to person (a diversity that I first discovered in Roger
Williams’s book Biochemical Individuality and that I’ll talk more about in
chapter 13). For example, some people have higher rates of excretion of
micronutrients than retention, and people with tuberculosis have far
greater needs for vitamin C and vitamin A. While it is unlikely that you
have tuberculosis, you get the idea: different people have different
nutritional requirements.
Due to this nutritional diversity, it is worth investing in a laboratory
test to determine whether you are deficient in any micronutrients. A
comprehensive micronutrient test measures a host of vitamins,
antioxidants, minerals, fatty acids, and amino acids in your blood to
determine sufficiencies and deficiencies, along with giving clues about
toxins, chronic inflammation, fungus, yeast, neurotransmitters, and more.
The best at-home micronutrient test is the Metabolomix by Genova
Diagnostics, which can help identify nutritional deficiencies that may be
causing resistance to fat loss.
15. Hypothyroidism
The thyroid gland produces hormones that regulate metabolism. It
secretes thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), which influence the
metabolic rate of lipids, cholesterol, glucose, and proteins within the cells
throughout your body. When the thyroid becomes underactive, it results
in a condition called hypothyroidism, which can often cause weight gain.
--- END PAGE 416 ---

--- PAGE 417 ---
What causes hypothyroidism? In adults, it can be due to deficiencies in
iodine and selenium but can also occur as an anomaly at birth known as
congenital hypothyroidism. Excess stress can cause disorders of the
hypothalamus that reduce levels of T3 and T4. Long-term caloric or
carbohydrate deprivation can also reduce thyroid activity. As you can
imagine, when you combine hard exercise, a busy work life, and lack of
sleep, the thyroid takes a big hit. For example, the lowest thyroid activity I
have ever experienced was when I was a skinny, carbohydrate-restricting
Ironman triathlete, and the only factor saving me from the stereotypical
endurance athlete “muffin top” was my extreme level of physical activity.
If you suspect that you have hypothyroidism, you can get a
comprehensive blood test for thyroid activity or a resting metabolic rate
(RMR) test to evaluate whether your metabolic rate is too low. If you do
identify thyroid-related issues that are holding you back from burning fat,
you can, as ironic as it may seem, consider slowing down and not starving
yourself. Overtraining and excess calorie or carbohydrate restriction are
key contributors to thyroid-related weight-loss resistance. Back-to-back
days of weightlifting or empty miles of the same ho-hum pace, limited
recovery days, and the absence of recovery weeks are all tough on thyroid
function. In addition, you can seek out nutrient-dense, thyroid-supporting
foods: seaweed and dulse for iodine; Brazil nuts, shellfish, and oysters for
selenium; and coconut oil for proper thyroid conversion and metabolism
in the gut. Heavy exposure to chemicals like ingested fluoride,
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), bisphenol-A (BPA), and phthalates are
also problems for the thyroid. Coleus forskohlii, L-tyrosine, bioperine, and
perhaps most notably the T2 hormone (3,5-diiodo-L-thyronine) can assist
with thyroid gland function. These can all be found in an impressive
supplement designed by my former podcast guest Dr. Amie Hornaman
called Thyroid Fixxr, which can noticeably improve your body’s ability to
--- END PAGE 417 ---

--- PAGE 418 ---
burn fat without the jittery, hyper side effects of common fat-burning
stimulants.
16. Lack of a Regular Eating Schedule
Research suggests that for some people, maintaining a regular eating
schedule can improve the metabolic response to meals. So if you are
having trouble losing weight, rather than skipping breakfast some days and
eating it on others or having dinner late some nights and early on other
nights or shifting from restaurant to restaurant for your lunch choices,
you should establish far more consistent meal patterns. Heck, I have had
clients who shed pounds simply by eating the same meals (a smoothie for
breakfast, a salad for lunch, meat or fish and vegetables for dinner) at the
same times day in and day out for a few months.
Women seem to benefit most from this type of regularity. In one study
of healthy lean women, an irregular meal pattern resulted in lower
postprandial metabolism than a regular meal pattern. In another study,
lean women who ate meals on a regular schedule had better insulin
sensitivity and improved blood fat levels. In yet another study, this time of
healthy obese women, regular mealtimes increased postprandial
thermogenesis, insulin sensitivity, and blood lipids, putting the women in
a state more conducive to weight loss.
Some folks can thrive on an erratic eating schedule. But for many
people, irregular mealtimes seem to significantly lower the metabolic rate
compared to regular mealtimes. The result can be dysregulated appetite
and altered metabolism. So if you don’t have a structured eating schedule
and you are having trouble losing weight, try eating at the same times
every day for a while, and keep the volume and nature of the meals
relatively consistent.
--- END PAGE 418 ---

--- PAGE 419 ---
THE LAST WORD
This chapter covered a lot of factors that can prevent you from losing
weight and detailed how to reverse those negative effects to get the body
that you desire. But before you go waltzing off into the sunset with your
physique toolbox, expecting to attain a perfect, shredded body, there is
something you should understand: everybody is different, and so is every
body.
Even if you aren’t satisfied with your physique according to the
subjective beauty standards thrown at you in pop culture, it may be the
case that your body has reached its ideal weight. You may not like to read
this, and it may not seem fair, but you can reach a state of healthy
homeostasis even if you have a higher-than-desired body fat percentage. If
you are doing everything right, if you have nailed every element in this
chapter, and you still can’t seem to lose more weight, you might have to
accept the fact that you have reached your healthy homeostasis and you
just weren’t designed to have veins in your abs or striated lats or skinny
calves. And that’s okay—own those thick legs!
Excessive exercising and dieting with an orthorexic approach to life
while beating your body to smithereens with fat-loss biohacks is not going
to shift you into maximum fat-burning mode or shrink your waistline. In
fact, it is more likely to downregulate vital components of having
boundless energy, such as relationships, satisfaction, and happiness.
So accept the fact that you have a unique body. Inject light levels of
physical activity or mild discomfort into the day, stand while you work,
take cold showers, avoid sitting for long periods of time, engage in deep
diaphragmatic breathing, implement intermittent fasting, and use the
other unconventional fat-loss techniques that will enhance not just fat
loss but health. Then simply be satisfied and happy with the body you have
been blessed with.
--- END PAGE 419 ---

--- PAGE 420 ---
Finally, it’s important to know that a healthy body fat percentage is
higher than many people think, and definitely higher than in the people
gracing the covers of the average fitness magazine. The latest systematic
review on body fat and risk of all-cause mortality revealed that a healthy
body fat percentage is about 11 to 22 percent for men and 22 to 35 percent
for women. Though there are outliers, of course—including me, who can’t
seem to gain a pound even if I eat 4,000 calories a day, and my wife with
her skinny Montana rancher genes that somehow magically give her eight-
pack abs at age forty-plus—body fat percentages higher or lower than
these values are associated with early death, not to mention low libido,
thyroid dysfunction, and nutritional deficiencies if too low. So be wise
with the knowledge you’ve gleaned from this chapter, and don’t just
myopically burn fat at all costs.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Since I said earlier that it is my favorite fat-burning technique, you
probably saw this coming: tomorrow morning, perform “Strike, Stroll,
Shiver,” the potent 1-2-3 fat-loss technique outlined on here. First,
consume some caffeine in the form of black coffee or green tea (if desired,
toss in a brown fat activator like berberine or bitter melon extract).
Second, perform ten to forty minutes of light, fat-burning aerobic activity
at an easy conversational pace. Finally, take a two-to-five-minute cold
shower or cold soak. If you make this practice a staple in your life, it will
help keep you lean year-round.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
--- END PAGE 420 ---

--- PAGE 421 ---
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/8. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 421 ---

--- PAGE 422 ---
09
SEXY FOREVER
HOW TO BUILD FUNCTIONAL MUSCLE
FOR LIFE
30, 29, 28, 27, 26 . . . Sandwiched between music producer Rick Rubin and
author Neil Strauss, I struggled against a giant Nautilus machine in the basement
of eighty-five-year-old Don Wildman’s Malibu home, churning out reps in what
--- END PAGE 422 ---

--- PAGE 423 ---
Esquire magazine had dubbed “The Hardest Workout in the World”: a puke-
inducing two-hour suffer-fest that Don performs three times per week, humbling
younger fitness enthusiasts like myself.
Afterward, as I lay flat on my back recovering on the carpet of Don’s
basement, I pondered which was more difficult: the workout I had just
completed, the three hours of Ultimate Frisbee I’d played with sixty-five-
year-old primal godfather Mark Sisson, the extreme single-set-to-failure
ARX workout with eighty-year-old longevity icon Art De Vany, my
underwater pool workout with seemingly ageless big-wave surfer Laird
Hamilton, my rock-tower-building workout in the desert with fifty-seven-
year-old fitness icon Paul Chek, my four-hour sauna foray with the crazy
sixty-seven-year-old Finnish inventor and fitness icon Vessi Jalkanen, a
weekend of bleeding hands at several Russian kettlebell certifications,
three days of Spartan death race competition at thirty-six degrees below
zero Fahrenheit in backwoods Vermont, or a full week of Spartan Sealfit
training in Encinitas, California, complete with daily forays into near
hypothermia from beatdowns in the Pacific Ocean.
From adventures like these and many more, I have picked up quite a
few tips. First, as you learned in chapter 3, don’t fool yourself into thinking
that masochistic workouts are good for you. They’re not, and I’ve since
adopted a habit of striking a balance between climbing random personal
Mt. Everests and allowing my heart, joints, and endocrine system a bit
more of a careful approach. Next, occasionally having something
physically intimidating on your calendar is a great way to maintain fitness
motivation, but it doesn’t have to be an Ironman triathlon. A pickleball
tournament, a breathwork course, or a Turkish kettlebell get-up personal
best also counts.
Finally, if you want to know how to reverse or slow years of aging, it
turns out that walking speed, maximum oxygen utilization, grip strength,
and muscle power are all mighty powerful. As a result, perhaps the biggest
--- END PAGE 423 ---

--- PAGE 424 ---
takeaway you’ll get from this chapter for staying sexy forever (or at least
for an impressively long time) can be summed up in three words: lift heavy
stuff.
In this chapter, you will learn why lifting heavy stuff is one of the most
potent tactics for defying age. You can consider this chapter your ultimate
guide to preserving youth and building lean, functional muscle in the
cleanest, most efficient way possible.
I will delve into fascinating twin studies on antiaging and weightlifting,
the best type of muscle fiber to possess, a single gene that turns on
muscle-building and antiaging pathways, how to stop the average loss of 6
pounds of muscle per decade, the type of exercise that beats the pants off
cardio and aerobics, how to turn your cells into tiny muscle-building
machines, and much, much more.
We will also venture out of the whitewashed lab with its petri dishes
and into the real world. After all, the important question is whether
strength training, load bearing, and powerlifting can truly make you live
longer, and this chapter will give you the best antiaging secrets from some
of the fittest old people on the face of the planet.
A fit body is a sound physical dwelling for boundless energy. You will
leave this chapter equipped to get the body you want quickly, safely, and
without spending oodles of hours in the gym.
LONGEVITY AND LIFTING 101
Muscles become smaller and weaker with age via a process called
sarcopenia. Research suggests that a key part of this decline occurs in your
muscle cells’ mitochondria, the primary engines of energy production. A
2007 study demonstrated that six months of progressive resistance
training, otherwise known as “lifting heavy stuff,” made the gene
expression of aging mitochondria appear significantly younger. During this
--- END PAGE 424 ---

--- PAGE 425 ---
study, researchers discovered that men at an average age of seventy were
able to improve strength by approximately 50 percent. The strength-
training seniors closed the strength gap between themselves and men who
were nearly forty years younger, taking it from 59 percent to 38 percent.
That is an improvement of almost 36 percent in a mere six months.
Muscle biopsies from the study showed a remarkable reversal of the
expression profile of 179 genes associated with age and exercise. Genes
that are downregulated with age were upregulated with exercise, while
genes that are upregulated with age were downregulated with exercise.
The researchers reported: “Healthy older adults show a gene
expression profile in skeletal muscle consistent with mitochondrial
dysfunction and associated processes such as cell death, as compared with
young individuals. Moreover, following a period of resistance exercise
training in older adults, we found that age-associated transcriptome
expression changes were reversed, implying a restoration of a youthful
expression profile.”
Yes, you read that right: when it comes to mitochondria, strength
training reversed nearly forty years of aging! But exercise doesn’t only
affect mitochondria. It also promotes the growth of fat-burning fast-twitch
muscle fibers and even protects DNA from the wear and tear of aging by
acting on telomeres, the end caps of DNA molecules.
Why Telomeres Matter
Telomeres cap the chromosomes in your cells and protect them from
damage. As you age, telomeres wear out and shorten from repeated cell
division, oxidative stress, and inflammation, eventually leaving your cells’
chromosomes unprotected. When your telomeres disappear, the wear and
tear begins to cut into your genes, your cells become damaged, and soon
they are discarded.
--- END PAGE 425 ---

--- PAGE 426 ---
Here’s how it works: when a cell prepares to divide, the double helix of a
DNA strand inside the chromosome is unzipped, leaving the genes open so
they can be copied. But the telomeres at the ends of the chromosome can’t
be completely copied, so once the DNA has been copied, a little bit of the
telomere gets snipped off. The telomere theory of aging dictates that as
cells divide and proliferate, the telomeres become shorter and shorter until
they disappear. At this point, the rest of the chromosome can’t be copied;
the cell is now incapable of replicating itself, so it simply ages.
Oddly enough, this phenomenon doesn’t seem to happen to everyone. A
group of researchers in Sweden recently discovered that some people’s
telomeres don’t get shorter through cell replication; in fact, they can even
get longer over time. It could be that those people have robust, built-in
cellular antiaging mechanisms, or they could have an early sign of cancer
(for example, the potential for uncontrolled DNA replication), or it could be
something we simply don’t know about yet.
Even though the science is young, a simple blood test allows you to
determine your telomere lengths and track the effectiveness of any
antiaging tactics you implement. An example of an at-home test is
Teloyears. A functional medicine physician can also oversee a slightly more
accurate Spectracell analysis. In chapter 19, you will discover much more
about telomeres and how to keep them from shortening, along with an
intriguing enzyme called telomerase.
--- END PAGE 426 ---

--- PAGE 427 ---
In another study, scientists measured telomeres in twins to determine
the effects of exercise on aging. The researchers hypothesized that, from a
biological standpoint, telomere lengths might be able to tell them how old
someone is. They had 2,401 twins (2,152 women and 249 men, aged
eighteen to eighty-one) fill out questionnaires on physical activity level,
smoking status, disease status, and socioeconomic status, and extracted
DNA from participants’ blood samples.
What did the researchers find? Telomere lengths decrease with age. No
surprises there. But both women and men who were physically active had
longer telomeres than their sedentary counterparts, even after adjusting
for age, weight, diseases, socioeconomic status, and smoking. In addition,
the subjects who performed more than three hours of vigorous physical
activity per week had longer telomeres than subjects ten years younger.
These results indicate that people who don’t put heavy physical loads
on their bodies may be biologically ten years older than active people of
the same chronological age. Since the subjects were identical twins, this
--- END PAGE 427 ---

--- PAGE 428 ---
effect isn’t due to genes but rather to a lifestyle factor: exercise. When one
twin exercised significantly more than the other, they had longer, more
durable telomeres.
In yet another study, researchers found that replacing slow-twitch
(type I) muscle fibers with stronger fast-twitch (type II) muscle fibers
produced a significant reduction in both fat mass and insulin resistance.
The researchers examined genetically engineered mice that contained a
muscle-growth-regulating gene called Akt1 that could be turned on and off
by the researchers.
Activating the Akt1 gene caused the mice to grow type II fibers without
exercise (this is important to note, since mice don’t lift weights that well,
even when commanded to by scientists in white lab coats). When the Akt1
gene was turned on, the mice adopted the characteristics of a lean and
powerful sprinter or weightlifter. When the gene was turned off, the mice
reverted to type I muscle fibers and became more obese and insulin
resistant with no change in diet.
The researchers reported that “remarkably, type II muscle growth was
associated with an overall reduction in body mass, due to a large decrease
in fat mass. In addition, blood tests showed that these mice became
metabolically normal [with no insulin resistance]. This work shows that
type II muscle doesn’t just allow you to pick up heavy objects; it is also
important in controlling whole body metabolism. It appears that the
increase in type II muscle fiber orchestrates changes in the body through
its ability to communicate with other tissues.”
The key takeaway from this study is that when you have more slow-
twitch muscle fibers, which develop when you engage in chronic
endurance exercise, you gain fat more easily. When you have more fast-
twitch muscle fibers, you burn fat faster and can more quickly achieve the
body you want. Do you know what builds fast-twitch muscle fibers? That’s
right: strength training.
--- END PAGE 428 ---

--- PAGE 429 ---
Is All Endurance Exercise Bad?
Hefty bouts of chronic cardio and endurance exercise don’t do you many
fat-loss favors. But do long bouts of aerobic exercise provide any benefits?
Is it all bad for your heart, as many scientists and weight-training junkies
claim?
A series of studies have revealed that endurance exercise is actually quite
effective at preserving telomere lengths, which may help slow aging (see
here). For example, one study found that ultrarunners’ telomeres were 11
percent longer than those of non-runners, which corresponds to a sixteen-
year reduction in biological age. Another, more recent study found that the
people who exercised the most had biological aging markers that appeared
nine years younger than those who were sedentary. But how much cardio do
you have to do to see telomere benefits? Do you really have to go out and
run ultramarathons?
Researcher Larry Tucker of Brigham Young University has investigated this
question and published three relatively recent studies on telomeres. Tucker
analyzed data from nearly six thousand adults and examined their telomere
lengths and physical activity patterns. Those who exercised did indeed have
longer telomeres, but only those who exercised the most. Even after
adjusting for differences in demographics and lifestyle, the high-physical-
activity group’s cells were almost nine years younger than the sedentary
group’s cells. There were no significant differences in telomere lengths
between the sedentary, low-activity, and moderate-activity groups. This
means that to get the benefits of running, you have to engage in the highest
amount of activity. Based on his research, Tucker recommended a threshold
of about thirty minutes of cardio five days per week for women and forty
minutes of cardio five days per week for men.
While these studies didn’t account for time spent strength training and
didn’t have a control group of people who performed HIIT training or heavy
lifting, they do suggest that not all chronic cardio is harmful. This makes
sense when you consider the high levels of low-intensity physical activity
done throughout the day in many centenarian and hunter-gatherer
populations.
Now, a recent study revealed that there really is not a law of diminishing
returns when it comes to cardiovascular fitness and mortality. But this
--- END PAGE 429 ---

--- PAGE 430 ---
shouldn’t be interpreted to mean that there’s no ceiling to the amount of
exercise you can benefit from, which is how popular media interpreted this
latest research, making claims such as “New Study Shows You Can’t Exercise
Too Much” and “There’s No Such Thing as Too Much Exercise.” At first
glance, this study does appear to bust the myth that chronic cardio is bad
for you and contradict the U-shaped curve of endurance training showing
that a certain amount is good, but more is not better. It appears that the
results do suggest that the more you train, the longer you’ll live. But this
study didn’t actually measure time spent training. Instead, the study
subjects were given treadmill stress tests to determine their cardiovascular
fitness, and then they were divided into different tiers of fitness based on
the results. As you can imagine, everything from genetics to training
efficiency to cardiovascular health could drastically affect these results, and
they in no way imply that the more you train, the better. All we can really
infer from this study is that higher levels of cardiovascular fitness predict
greater longevity. For more, check out my comments on the “Goldilocks
Zone” of exercise in chapter 3.
Beyond the age of thirty, we lose approximately 6 pounds of muscle
mass per decade. These studies indicate that strength training may be
critical in the fight against aging, obesity, and related ailments, such as
diabetes, heart disease, stroke, hypertension, and cancer.
Finally, a study on strength training looked into reports of abnormally
short telomeres in the skeletal muscle of athletes with exercise-associated
fatigue. The goal of the study was to determine whether chronic hard
exercise might negatively impact muscle telomere lengths.
The researchers compared telomere lengths of powerlifters who had
trained for an average of eight years against those of healthy, active
subjects with no history of strength training. There was no abnormal
shortening of telomeres in the powerlifters. In fact, the powerlifters’
telomeres were significantly longer than those of the control group and
were positively correlated to the powerlifters’ individual records in the
--- END PAGE 430 ---

--- PAGE 431 ---
squat and deadlift. In other words, the stronger the powerlifter was, the
longer his telomeres were.
These results indicate that long-term strength training is not
associated with abnormally short telomere lengths and that the heavier
the load on your muscles, the longer your telomeres. And remember that,
from a longevity standpoint, big, bulky, bodybuilding-esque muscles can
be inferior to compact, wiry, explosive, powerlifting-esque muscles. Makes
even more sense now, eh?
LIFTING HEAVY STUFF CAN MAKE
YOU LIVE LONGER
Let’s get this out of the petri dish and into the real world. Can strength
training and powerlifting actually make you live longer?
A recent study showed that older adults who met twice-weekly
strength-training guidelines had lower odds of dying. This study was the
first to demonstrate such an association in a large, nationally
representative sample over an extended period, particularly in an older
population.
Sure, previous studies had found that older adults who were physically
active had a better quality of life and a reduced risk of mortality. There’s a
lot of research suggesting that regular exercise is associated with health
benefits that include a reduced risk of early death, cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, and cancer.
However, this study on the effects of strength training on mortality in
older adults was a bit of a bigger deal. Researchers analyzed data from the
1997–2001 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) as well as death
certificate data through 2011. The NHIS collects data on health, disease,
and disability in the United States from a nationally representative
--- END PAGE 431 ---

--- PAGE 432 ---
sampling of all fifty states and the District of Columbia. The 1997–2001
survey included more than thirty thousand adults aged sixty-five and
older.
The researchers found that during the survey period, more than 9
percent of older adults reported at least twice-weekly strength-training
sessions. They then followed the participants for fifteen years through
death certificate data from the National Center for Health Statistics’
National Death Index to get a long-term view of the association between
strength training and mortality.
What did they find? Older adults who engaged in strength training at
least twice a week had 46 percent lower odds of death for any reason than those
who did not. They also had 41 percent lower odds of dying from cardiac
problems and 19 percent lower odds of dying from cancer.
More recent 2023 studies showed that consistent resistance training is
associated with a 10 to 17 percent lower risk of all-cause mortality,
cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes. However, these studies also
indicated that doing more than 140 minutes per week of hard resistance
training, especially when training more than three times a week, is
associated with an increased risk of all-cause mortality, particularly in the
elderly. In science, this is referred to as a J-shaped curve, meaning both
too little and too much resistance training is associated with increased
risk of mortality, so the optimal amount is moderate. In addition,
combining resistance training with regularly scheduled aerobic exercise
and ample amounts of low-intensity physical activity throughout the day
stacks up to a combined result of a 40 percent lower risk of all-cause
mortality, so it’s important not to neglect cardiorespiratory fitness.
Older adults who met strength-training guidelines were, on average,
slightly younger (closer to sixty-five, the minimum age for the survey) and
were more likely to be married white males with higher levels of
education. They were also more likely to have healthy body weights,
--- END PAGE 432 ---

--- PAGE 433 ---
engage in aerobic exercise, and abstain from alcohol and tobacco. But
when the researchers adjusted for these demographic variables, health
behaviors, and health conditions, the results remained the same.
Even after the researchers controlled for physical activity level, people
who practiced strength training seemed to enjoy a greater mortality
benefit than those who reported physical activity alone.
This groundbreaking study provided substantial, statistically
significant evidence that strength training in older adults is beneficial for
slowing the effects of aging.
Do Some Sports Make You Live Longer?
When it comes to sports and mortality, the research is quite interesting. One
study led by Oxford University and published in the British Journal of Sports
Medicine looked at eighty thousand people over the age of thirty to find out
what effects different types of sports have on longevity. It turns out that
people who play racquet sports (such as tennis or racquetball) on a regular
basis can reduce their risk of dying prematurely by 47 percent. The next
most beneficial exercise was swimming, which reduced the risk of dying
prematurely by 28 percent, followed by cycling at 15 percent. Another
reason activities like racquet and water sports could be associated with
longevity is the cognitive demands and left and right brain hemispheric
coordination requirements, such as kicking, stroking, and breathing while
swimming or rotating, anticipating the ball, and swinging in tennis.
Running, football, and rugby did not seem to impact longevity. But while the
benefits of basic physical activity and aerobic exercise are well established,
there is less research on strength training—although researchers have
demonstrated the benefits of strength training for diabetes, osteoporosis,
lower back pain, and obesity, and smaller studies have observed that greater
muscular strength is associated with lower risk of death.
--- END PAGE 433 ---

--- PAGE 434 ---
WHAT KIND OF WEIGHT TRAINING
IS BEST?
Lest you rush to the gym salivating to engage in the ultimate antiaging,
muscle-toning routine and launch into an Arnold Schwarzenegger–esque
workout, I have one reminder for you: bigger muscles aren’t always better.
Compact and explosive muscle beats out pure muscle mass for slowing
aging. The healthiest muscles are those found on a wiry physique of
modest size, capable of exerting a lot of force over a short period. Sure,
you can certainly get strong and muscular doing CrossFit-type workouts
that require maximum deadlifts in two minutes, or ungodly amounts of
snatch reps, or body-building workouts that have you doing biceps curls
until you are bleeding out the eyeballs—but when it comes to maximizing
longevity, those approaches are unlikely to be sustainable. Remember, you
want to be able to maintain strength and muscle in an uninjured state
when you are forty, sixty, and eighty years old. For this, especially if you
are just getting started or want the minimum effective dose of strength
training, I recommend performing two specific workouts each week.
The first workout is a super-slow lifting protocol similar to that
described by Doug McGuff in his book Body by Science. For twelve to
twenty minutes, perform a few multijoint exercises with relatively heavy
weights, doing each rep over thirty to sixty seconds. The workout should
include the following:
• An upper-body push (e.g., overhead presses, push-ups, chest presses)
• An upper-body pull (e.g., bent or upright rows, lat pull-downs, pull-
ups)
• A lower-body push (e.g., leg presses, squats)
• A lower-body pull (e.g., deadlifts, Romanian deadlifts, lower back
extensions, reverse hyperextensions)
--- END PAGE 434 ---

--- PAGE 435 ---
Why is this type of workout so darn effective? The first benefit is that
performing reps very slowly has low injury-producing potential. In
addition, a recent study co-authored by Dr. McGuff highlights how super-
slow resistance training to muscular failure results in the same type of
cardiovascular adaptations caused by a long run. These adaptations
include a better ability to buffer lactic acid, increased mitochondrial
density, and even better blood pressure. If you really want to take super-
slow training to the next level, you can implement blood flow restriction
(BFR) bands during your workout or use an ARX machine, which utilizes
adaptive resistance technology and motorized 2-horsepower resistance to
dynamically adjust the resistance you receive, in real time, for precisely
the right amount of force you can handle on every rep of every set. The
ARX has a hallowed place in my home gym and is the single best resistance
training strategy I’ve ever used to get strong like a bull in a very short
period. The downside is that it’s spendy at just shy of $40,000, but many
biohacking centers and health clubs now have a unit that you can use as a
membership perk.
The second workout is some kind of a quick, high-intensity
bodyweight routine that also targets the explosive, powerful muscle
associated with longevity. A perfect example, designed by researchers to
maintain strength and muscle in as little time as possible, was featured in
the New York Times as a “Scientific 7-Minute Workout.” Each exercise
below is to be performed for thirty seconds, with ten seconds of rest
between exercises. Aside from the wall sits, you should perform these
exercises as explosively as possible. The exercises are these:
• Jumping jacks or burpees
• Wall sits
• Push-ups or clapping push-ups
• Crunches or knee-ups
--- END PAGE 435 ---

--- PAGE 436 ---
• Step-ups or lunge jumps
• Squats or squat jumps
• Dips
• Planks
• Jump rope, stair sprints, or running in place with high knees
• Lunges or lunge jumps
• Push-ups with rotation (at the top of the push-up, alternately raise
your arms and point them straight up)
• Side planks
This style of quick bursts of explosive training is a bit similar to the
philosophy utilized by Russian kettlebell masters like Pavel Tsatsouline. In
his book The Quick & The Dead, Pavel presents a compelling case that the
excess accumulation of lactic acid, similar to what you would experience
in a traditional multi-set, higher-rep, bodybuilding-esque CrossFit WOD,
metcon, or strength training routine, can muffle the brain’s commands to
the muscles, inhibit energy systems related to strength and speed, and
interfere with optimum contraction and relaxation.
This theory is based on the idea that within your muscles are tiny
bubbles called lysosomes, which contain enzymes that dismantle and
dispose of metabolic components that are damaged or no longer needed.
These lysosomes operate exclusively in an acidic environment. When
acidity is moderate, they do what they are supposed to do and even help
muscles grow. But when the “burn” is out of control, lysosomes go on a
destructive rampage, and you feel sore and stiff a day or two afterward.
Pavel’s solution to the inhibition of strength and power adaptations
due to excess lactic acid? Quick bursts of strength and power lasting fewer
than twenty seconds, accompanied by long, luxurious rest periods. A
sample routine using this approach would be thirty minutes of ten
--- END PAGE 436 ---

--- PAGE 437 ---
kettlebell swings and ten push-ups, with each set performed every ninety
seconds, for a total of one hundred swings and one hundred push-ups.
Single-set-to-failure training, such as the super-slow routine described
earlier, can also mitigate the effects of excess lactic acid because rather
than hitting the muscles over and over again in a workout, you’re
exhausting them only once for a brief period of time.
Ultimately, if you want the minimum effective dose of strength
training to help you find the sweet spot between longevity and muscle,
you can get away with as few as two strength workouts per week—one
with slow, controlled heavy lifting and one with high-intensity bodyweight
movements. In a perfect strength-training week, I prefer to accomplish
two super-slow workouts and two more intense bodyweight or kettlebell
explosive workouts.
In chapter 10, you will discover a done-for-you two-week training
schedule that works to improve the cardiovascular system, build
mitochondria, increase metabolic efficiency, and more.
Can You Really Build Muscle with
Bodyweight Training?
The conventional ways to build muscle are to perform big, compound lifts,
such as squats and deadlifts, or to combine the super-slow approach and
the fast, explosive approach. But those aren’t the only methods for gaining
size and strength. Contrary to popular belief, you can gain muscle
(hypertrophy) by performing more reps with light weights or even your own
body weight.
One study on the effects of high reps and low reps on muscle growth
compared sets performed with weights at 80 percent of one-rep maximum
(1RM) to complete muscular fatigue with sets performed with weights at 30
percent of 1RM to complete muscular fatigue. Turns out that the weight of
the load is not important. Instead, what matters is whether a muscle is
--- END PAGE 437 ---

--- PAGE 438 ---
worked to complete fatigue. This study demonstrated that high reps and
light weights can stimulate just as much muscle growth as low reps and
heavy weights. So you can, for example, build chest muscles by doing a few
sets of high-rep push-ups to complete failure. This is a potent tactic if you
are stuck in a hotel or living room or if you have no access to bars and plates
and still want to build muscle.
In another study, super-slow lifting at 55 to 60 percent of the participant’s
1RM increased both muscle thickness and maximal strength just as much as
standard-speed lifts performed at 80 to 90 percent of the participant’s 1RM.
In yet another study, both heavy lifts of eight to ten reps and light lifts of
eighteen to twenty reps activated the genes involved in muscle growth.
Research has also demonstrated that twenty-five to thirty-five reps with
lighter weights leads to the same gains in muscle size as eight to twelve reps
with heavier weights. Even in seasoned weightlifters, twenty to twenty-five
reps with a light weight leads to the same muscle growth as eight to twelve
reps with a heavy weight.
More recent research shows that the “hypertrophy rep range” is way larger
than most people realize, demonstrating similar per-set hypertrophy with
loads ranging from 30 to about 85 percent of 1RM, although dipping below
20 percent appears to be too low to create adequate muscle tension to
maximize growth. But that 20 percent can include—you guessed it—your
own body weight. The key is to get as close to muscular failure as possible,
which appears to be more important with lower loads or body weight.
Ultimately, if you want to add muscle mass as fast as possible, you’ll get the
best results in the shortest period of time by using heavy weights, since less
volume is required. But you can still build muscle with light weights and high
reps—and research suggests this approach is particularly effective when
training legs. This is especially useful information if you don’t know how to
lift heavy weights, you’re trying to minimize your risk of injury, or you have
limited access to equipment.
WHY BIGGER MUSCLES AREN’T
BETTER
--- END PAGE 438 ---

--- PAGE 439 ---
Do you ever try to move fast? No, I mean F-A-S-T. When was the last time
you were at the gym and tried to hoist a barbell over your head as
explosively as possible? When was the last time you were running on a
treadmill or riding a bicycle and moved your legs so fast that your brain
hurt trying to keep up?
Fact is, when it comes to optimizing the performance of your nervous
system and cementing the connection between your brain and the rest of
your body, it doesn’t really matter how heavy you lift or how much muscle
you build.
Sure, strength training and muscle building are fantastic tools for
aesthetics, symmetry, musculoskeletal development, and even slowed
aging—fundamental goals that will be addressed in later chapters. But
when it comes to optimizing your brain and nervous system, recruiting
more muscle fibers faster, enhancing nerve-firing speed, and optimizing
brain-body coordination, it is far more important to focus on fast,
explosive movements.
I was first exposed to the extreme benefits of moving fast when I
interviewed a well-known sports performance coach named Nick Curson.
Nick, the creator of a training system called Speed of Sport, trains some of
the best UFC and NFL competitors on the planet. Rather than giving
enormous weights to the men and women he coaches, he has them move
light loads and their own body weight as freakin’ fast as they possibly can.
As a result, his athletes are incredibly explosive and functional and don’t
walk around with relatively useless slabs of extra muscle mass.
There is also a direct link between your power-to-muscle-mass ratio
and your longevity. What does that mean? It means bigger muscles aren’t
always better. Instead, when it comes to slowed aging and longevity, your
ability to quickly recruit muscle fibers seems to matter most. I became
aware of the fascinating truth about why bigger muscles aren’t necessarily
better when I spoke with author Paul Jaminet on my podcast about his
--- END PAGE 439 ---

--- PAGE 440 ---
theory that a smaller muscle capable of exerting more force is a healthy
muscle, while a gargantuan but relatively weak muscle is an unhealthy
muscle.
To understand how large muscles—muscles that are big and bulky but
don’t necessarily produce much explosive force—may be unhealthy, look
at cardiomegaly, or enlargement of the heart. When heart tissue is
incapable of exerting as much force as it should, the heart often grows
larger to compensate. Those who have cardiomegaly, including exercise
enthusiasts, often die an early death because the heart has to work so hard
to support its own bulk. In the same way, old-school bodybuilding
techniques or other exercise styles that are designed to produce pure mass
rather than force can potentially damage your health. Indeed, Paul cited a
study on guinea pigs that showed that lower muscle mass and higher
muscle-force capacity, which is found in powerlifters and anyone training
more for power and speed than for strength and size, could actually be
associated with longevity.
In other words, the healthiest muscle strength gains might come with
only small muscle size gains, because larger muscles take far more energy
to carry and cool and require far more antioxidants for repair, recovery,
and mitochondrial activity. It is well established in exercise science that
muscle contractions lead to elevated levels of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) in skeletal muscle, and although these highly reactive molecules are
beneficial for normal cell signaling, when in excess, they have many
deleterious effects, particularly because they contribute to a net
inflammatory state. So if your goal is the ultimate combination of
performance, aesthetics, and longevity, what you should pursue are
functional, efficient, powerful muscles rather than unnecessary pounds of
excess muscle mass. You should also take into consideration that the more
muscles you have, the more calories you must consume to maintain (or
build) that muscle—which flies in the face of the proven science that
--- END PAGE 440 ---

--- PAGE 441 ---
moderate caloric restriction can enhance a variety of health factors,
including, most notably, longevity. After all, when was the last time you
saw a professional bodybuilder eating once a day? If you watch any Netflix
video about a professional bodybuilder, half the show will typically involve
their shoveling massive plates of food down their gaping maws. I
personally experienced this when I had to eat 5,000 to 7,000 calories per
day as a 215-pound bodybuilder.
The fact that excess muscle mass negatively impacts longevity is
backed up by data on growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor
1 (IGF-1), both of which play an intricate role in the aging process. GH,
which is secreted by your pituitary gland, stimulates the production of
IGF-1. In fact, the growth-promoting effects of GH result from IGF-1,
which stimulates the proliferation and survival of cells.
Now don’t get me wrong: these compounds are certainly beneficial.
IGF-1 released in response to GH is anabolic and promotes the growth and
repair of skeletal muscle. IGF-1 also acts as a neurotrophic factor in the
brain, promoting neurogenesis (the growth of new neurons) and the
survival of existing neurons, along with better cognitive function.
Activities like exercise or a thirty-to-sixty-minute sauna session can
induce GH release and, therefore, IGF-1 release.
On the other hand, research suggests that lower levels of GH and IGF-
1 can also result in increased longevity. For example, mice, worms, and
flies that are genetically engineered to be deficient in GH or IGF-1 live
nearly 50 percent longer. Research also suggests that the overexpression
of GH in mice, worms, and flies causes up to a 50 percent shorter lifespan,
mainly due to kidney and liver dysfunction. Ultimately, the key is to find
the sweet spot for GH, which doesn’t necessarily include the use of GH
injections.
Research has also associated variations in the gene that encodes for
IGF-1 receptors (which reduce IGF-1 levels) with a significantly longer
--- END PAGE 441 ---

--- PAGE 442 ---
lifespan in humans. This is likely because reduced IGF-1 levels increase the
expression of genes involved in stress resistance, especially resistance to
oxidative stress. So in the same way that having too much muscle mass
increases antioxidant needs, so do excessive levels of GH and IGF-1.
Fact is, research suggests that pure muscle mass does not increase
longevity. Instead, longevity is more heavily correlated with muscle quality
and the ability of the muscle to support daily functional activities such as
walking, sprinting, and lifting heavy stuff, all of which positively impact
insulin resistance, fat-burning rates, mitochondrial density, mobility,
muscle fiber type, and strength.
In addition, bigger muscles don’t necessarily mean you’re stronger.
Plenty of other factors can have significant effects on strength, such as the
strength of individual muscle fibers, muscle force, joint biomechanics, and
body proportions. Especially early on in training, there’s a surprisingly
weak relationship between gains in muscle and gains in strength, and
gains in muscle mass can explain as little as 2 percent of the variation in
strength gains for new lifters. In contrast, for more-experienced lifters,
gains in muscle mass can explain up to 65 percent of the variability in
strength gains. Ultimately, muscle mass definitely influences strength, but
it’s not the single determinant of strength.
So, when it comes to muscles, bigger is not the same as better. In
simple terms, the greater the proportion of a muscle’s contractile tissue to
its noncontractile tissue, the greater the amount of force it can produce
for its size and the greater its muscle quality. In addition, higher-quality
muscles developed for performance rather than size also have increased
mitochondrial density and more energy-producing capacity per pound of
muscle. Perhaps this is why many professional bodybuilders die young or
suffer from chronic inflammation-related diseases. The healthiest muscles
are those found on a small, wiry, powerful physique with modest size but a
high force-producing potential and the ability to summon significant
--- END PAGE 442 ---

--- PAGE 443 ---
amounts of power and speed. To build these muscles, you have to recruit
more muscle fibers, enhance nerve-firing speed, and optimize speed and
power. You are about to learn how to do just that so you can move like a
cat, sprint like a cheetah, spring like a tiger, and achieve a sweet spot that
gives you enough muscle for a better brain and body but not so much
muscle that you reduce your lifespan.
Should You Get Growth Hormone
Injections?
Injecting GH is becoming an increasingly popular therapeutic tactic for
stimulating muscle growth, improving wound and bone fracture healing,
improving sleep quality, and enhancing longevity, although the general
consensus in antiaging medicine is that excess GH may shorten lifespan
because it makes the body too anabolic. But the story behind how GH is
processed may give you a new understanding of whether GH is really
capable of shortening, not lengthening, lifespan.
Here’s how it works: Whether GH is injected intravenously or produced
naturally by the pituitary gland, upon introduction to the bloodstream, it
travels to the liver and switches on the production of nine proteins. Two of
these proteins are IGF-1 and IGF-2, but the rest are known as binding
proteins and have a wide range of health effects. For example, binding
protein 1 (BP1) reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease. When you are
deficient in BP1, you experience impaired cardiovascular function and an
increased risk of heart attack. Meanwhile, a BP2 deficiency leads to reduced
insulin sensitivity and increased risk of diabetes. BP4 has strong anti–colon
cancer factors and increases apoptosis—programmed cell death, which
clears the way for healthy new cells. BP5 stores IGF-1 and transports it to the
bone to support bone health, and BP6 improves neural function,
neuroprotection, and neurogenesis.
Then there’s BP3, the most commonly tested-for binding protein, which is a
significant carrier of IGF-1 and mitigates the risk of cancer. The Melbourne
Collaborative Cohort Study found that small increases in levels of BP3
induce a 48 percent reduction in colon cancer. This is because BP3 absorbs
--- END PAGE 443 ---

--- PAGE 444 ---
IGF-1, which stimulates cell reproduction and therefore could, if not properly
bound, increase the risk for cancer.
What this means is that if you have cancer or a higher risk of cancer, using a
GH therapy—which will increase IGF-1—may encourage the cells carrying a
cancer-causing genetic mutation to replicate, increasing your risk of cancer
growth.
Within your cells, a protein called p53 acts as a regulatory mechanism for
cancer: it determines whether a mutation-carrying cell is reproducing, and
when it finds one of these cells, p53 tries to fix the mutation. If it fixes it,
then all is good. But if it can’t, p53 turns on the production of BP3, which
absorbs IGF-1 so that it can’t stimulate cell reproduction. This, in turn,
reduces the chance of the mutation spreading.
All these binding proteins are stimulated by GH, which means that GH does
have a significant impact on longevity and long-term health. It also means
that the presence of IGF-1 isn’t necessarily an issue—the problem is how it’s
handled and removed when levels get too high, particularly by your binding
proteins.
In other words, if your binding protein levels are inadequate during a GH
protocol, which would likely be due to low antioxidant intake, a diet void of
wild plants, or a lack of proper supplementation with nutrients such as
quercetin (which is particularly potent at increasing binding protein levels),
it is indeed highly possible that a GH treatment may be increasing your risk
of cancer.
In addition, there are other reasons I am not convinced that the current
antiaging infatuation with GH injections is a healthy practice. While I am a
fan of incorporating lifestyle strategies to increase GH, such as intermittent
fasting (particularly the fascinating research by Dr. Jason Fung showing that
GH levels climb 200 to 300 percent with one day of fasting and remain
elevated for up to forty-eight hours!), heavy lifting, and adequate protein
consumption, I just haven’t seen enough data to prove that GH is particularly
effective or safe (although I’d love to see studies done on folks who are both
using GH and implementing these strategies).
For example, to evaluate the safety and efficacy of GH in healthy older
people, one team of researchers reviewed thirty-one GH studies. The dose of
GH varied considerably among these studies, and the duration of therapy
ranged from two weeks to a year, but each dose did succeed at boosting
--- END PAGE 444 ---

--- PAGE 445 ---
levels of IGF-1 (which, as you now know, reflects the level of GH) by 88
percent.
Compared to the subjects who did not get GH, the treated individuals
gained an average of 4.6 pounds of muscle and shed a similar amount of
body fat. But unfortunately, the GH-injected individuals also experienced a
high rate of unpleasant side effects, such as fluid retention, joint pain, breast
enlargement, and carpal tunnel syndrome. Other research suggests that GH
injections induce an increased risk of cancer in general and prostate cancer
in particular.
The data on GH for performance is unimpressive as well. Because GH is
banned in most sanctioned sports, scientists have been unable to evaluate
GH in many real-world conditions. But they have conducted randomized
clinical trials that administer GH or a placebo to athletes and then measure
body composition, strength, and exercise capacity in the lab. It turns out
that after receiving daily injections for an average of twenty days, subjects
who received GH increased their lean body mass, but this did not translate
into improved performance. GH did not produce any significant increases in
strength or exercise capacity. In addition, the subjects who received GH
were more likely to experience fluid retention and fatigue.
When it comes to GH, I’m often asked about a popular recent longevity
study called the TRIIM (Thymus Regeneration, Immunorestoration, and
Insulin Mitigation) trial, which investigated the possibility that GH use in a
population of men in their fifties and early sixties could prevent or reverse
signs of the deterioration of the immune system that is typically attributed
to natural age development, known as immunosenescence. The researchers
added metformin and DHEA to counter the potential effects of GH on
hyperinsulinemia (high insulin). The investigators reported a mean
epigenetic age among the admittedly small group of nine male participants
as about 1.5 years lower than baseline after a year of this treatment, along
with evidence of restoration of thymus function, a key marker of
immunosenescence mitigation. However, there was no control group, the
population size was tiny, and the aging measurement used was a Horvath
epigenetic clock, which has only weak to moderate accuracy. I also wonder
if similar results could have been achieved using a food GH source such as
colostrum combined with a natural insulin-management agent like berberine
and DHEA-elevating dietary fat sources such as coconut products,
avocados, olive oil, nuts, seeds, and fatty fish. Considering the expense and
--- END PAGE 445 ---

--- PAGE 446 ---
side effects of GH and the potential for metformin to restrict muscle growth
and mitochondrial health, this could be a better option to consider.
2 NONTRADITIONAL WAYS TO
BUILD AND MAINTAIN MUSCLE
The prevailing thought among exercise enthusiasts is that if you stop
training for a certain period, you will lose muscle strength and mass. So
far, this chapter has addressed the most traditional ways to build and
maintain muscle: lifting weights and doing bodyweight exercises. But
there are other ways you can maintain muscle, even if you are injured or
can’t make it to the weight room or a home gym.
1. Electrical Muscle Stimulation (EMS)
You have no doubt seen the as-seen-on-TV ads for the special electrodes
you attach to your abs to magically get a six-pack. Known variously as
electrical muscle stimulation (EMS), neuromuscular electrical
stimulation, or electromyostimulation devices, these contraptions use
electrical impulses to directly stimulate motor neurons and cause a
muscular contraction. (A TENS unit, which also uses electrical impulses,
is good for managing pain, especially in the lower back, but stimulates
only surface neurons.)
Your brain sends electrical impulses through your central nervous
system to fire your muscles.
EMS circumvents the brain, allowing for deep, intense muscular
contractions without taxing your nervous system, joints, or tendons. Fact
is, your muscles don’t know the difference between a voluntary
--- END PAGE 446 ---

--- PAGE 447 ---
contraction and an electrically induced one—they just recognize the
stimulus. The contractions can be quick, with longer pauses between
contractions, or they can last as long as seconds and sometimes minutes
at a time.
To use an EMS device, you place the electrodes on your skin at each
end of the target muscle.
A traditional EMS device has four channels with lead wires, and each
wire is connected to two pads. Small amounts of current run from one pad
to the next to complete a circuit, using your muscle tissue as a conduit.
The current runs at specific frequencies and pulse durations (usually
microseconds) that stimulate the motor neurons within the circuit. The
muscle fibers innervated by the motor neurons then contract, and you
start twitching. There are three ranges of EMS frequencies, each of which
activates one of the three types of muscle fibers: slow twitch, intermediate
fast twitch, and fast twitch.
For several years, I recommended EMS only for recovery or injury
management, or for blood flow if you’re on an airplane or in a car and
want a mild muscle stimulus. Devices like the Compex Sport Elite and the
Marc Pro work well for these goals. But now that newer devices with
higher muscle-stimulation settings have hit the market, you can use EMS
for full-body and explosive strength-training sessions.
For example, the Powerdot is a wireless EMS device that syncs to an
app for both muscle training and pain-killing or blood-flow settings. A
more powerful option is the Katalyst EMS suit, also conveniently wireless,
with options for twenty-to-thirty-minute strength and cardio routines that
allow for an extremely difficult and demanding home workout or a simple,
lightweight travel solution. Many physical therapy clinics and gyms offer
the EMSculpt devices, which can be used for everything from a full-body
workout to pelvic floor retraining for issues like incontinence and
prolapse. I even own what I consider to be the “Cadillac” of EMS units:
--- END PAGE 447 ---

--- PAGE 448 ---
the NeuFit, which is a wired EMS system that can retrain muscle
movements, block pain signals, and even simulate a 600-pound squat. As a
word of caution, when done properly, an EMS session delivers rapid gains
in muscle growth but will leave you pretty sore for up to seven days
afterward!
Tricks of the Trade: The Best Portable
Muscle-Building Tools
The fittest folks I know can make training portable and have no excuses for
not staying fit as road warriors, jet-setters, and family-reunion attendees.
Indeed, one of the secrets to maintaining an effective, functional strength
program is the ability to work out any time at any place. Not every hotel is
going to have a good gym (can you say “squeaky elliptical trainer and dusty
dumbbells”?), and not every friend or relative you visit is going to have
equipment. Having a few key items on hand that I can pack into my travel
bag and pull out in a park, airport, basement, or backyard allows me to stay
in professional-athlete shape despite spending up to three weeks of every
month on the road.
--- END PAGE 448 ---

--- PAGE 449 ---
One of my most versatile, portable tools is a suspension trainer. There are
many suspension trainers available, including the ever-popular TRX, and
several of the even cheaper generic models on Amazon come with pulleys,
wheels, and bungee cords that make a suspension trainer workout very
versatile. But I prefer a simple, no-frills model you can attach to a door
frame in a hotel or house, the bars at a playground, or the stairwell of an
airport. You can then do suspended pull-ups, planking exercises, lunging
balance moves, and a host of other movements. This is crucial, because
most portable workouts include plenty of push-up variations, but aside from
lying on your back under your hotel room coffee table and attempting to do
pull-ups on the edge of the table, or trying to deadlift your entire mattress
(yeah, I’ve tried that), there’s a notable lack of pulling options in most travel
scenarios. Sure, you can do push-ups on any floor and box jumps onto a
bed, but you can’t exactly do pull-ups on most objects without breaking
something. I’ll sheepishly admit that I have broken a few hotel desks and
door frames attempting to use them as pull-up and horizontal rowing
devices.
In an era of sitting and hunching with forward neck and shoulder posture
over computers and phones, it is helpful for your shoulder and back health
to pull as much as or more than you push during a workout. The added
benefit of pulling is enhanced grip strength, which is correlated with
longevity, shoulder health, and overall physical brute strength, and a
suspension trainer will allow you to work your grip even in the absence of a
barbell or pull-up bar. In a pinch (pun intended), another trick is to keep a
Captains of Crush hand grip strengthener in your purse, laptop bag, or other
travel gear and train your grip while driving, waiting in line, talking on the
phone, or sitting on an airplane.
Another item you will always find in my travel kit is an elastic band, which I
began using over a decade ago while cycling through Italy with my wife and
simultaneously training for a bodybuilding competition. She would lie in bed
each morning laughing at me as I’d bang away at curls, overhead presses,
triceps extensions, and sideways band walks, but the band helped me
maintain and even build slabs of muscle, fueled by gelato and pasta. I still
use an elastic band to this day and often opt for a fancier banded system
called the X3 Bar (see chapter 11 for more details). Conveniently, these
bands can also be used for the type of joint traction you’ll read more about
in chapter 17.
--- END PAGE 449 ---

--- PAGE 450 ---
Finally, no portable exercise kit would be complete without Kaatsu bands or
their less expensive alternative, blood flow restriction (BFR) bands, long
used as potent training tools by elite athletes, law enforcement agencies,
militaries, and Japanese martial artists.
Much like a tourniquet, a Kaatsu band (the name is a mash-up of the
Japanese words for “additional”—ka—and “pressure”—atsu) places pressure
around your upper arms and legs. This reduces blood flow from your
extremities back to the heart, so that your limbs become engorged with
blood, filling ordinarily unused capillaries and mobilizing extra muscle fibers
while also raising the concentration of lactic acid in the blood. These effects
trick the brain into thinking the body is undergoing a massive workout and
even trigger the pituitary gland to produce GH. (Visit BoundlessBook.com/9
for a few Kaatsu and BFR options.)
When you combine Kaatsu or BFR training with bodyweight exercises, a
suspension strap, or an elastic band, you can create an effective workout
that requires a total of just two to three pounds of gear that easily fits into a
carry-on. A sample travel workout for me goes like this:
• BFR bands wrapped around my arms and legs
• A 2-minute burpee warm-up
• 10 suspension strap pull-ups
• 10 suspension strap push-ups
• 1 minute of jumping jacks
• 10 elastic band sideways shuffles
• 10 elastic band squat-to-overhead presses.
• 1 minute of sitting down on the floor and standing up as many times as
possible (a surprisingly difficult and highly functional exercise)
• 10 elastic band upright rows
• 10 suspension strap lunges for each leg
Repeat three to five times through with minimal rest. Include the burpee
warm-up in each round for an additional challenge.
--- END PAGE 450 ---

--- PAGE 451 ---
Another favorite workout of mine with BFR and elastic bands is an AMRAP
(as many rounds as possible) in 30 minutes of
• 30 squats
• 20 push-ups
• 10 suspension strap pull-ups
• 30 reverse lunges per leg
• 20 chair dips
• 10 elastic band overhead presses
If you have time left over after a workout like this, you can keep the BFR
bands on and go for a quick walk or swim for a cardio finisher.
--- END PAGE 451 ---

--- PAGE 452 ---
2. Heat Stress
You can prevent the loss of muscle strength and mass by using a dry
sauna, wet sauna, infrared sauna, or even a hot bath. This type of heat
stress prevents muscle loss by triggering the release of heat shock proteins
(HSPs), which eliminate free radicals, support antioxidant production, and
repair misfolded, damaged proteins in muscle tissue. Research suggests
that the HSPs rats produce when they experience heat stress are
associated with 30 percent more muscle regrowth compared to a control
group. In fact, one HSP—HSP70—is associated with longevity, suggesting
that heat stress may also have significant antiaging effects.
Proper levels of growth hormone are also crucial for muscle repair and
recovery. Research suggests that two twenty-minute sauna sessions
separated by a thirty-minute cooling-off period can double growth
hormone levels. Two fifteen-minute sauna sessions at an even warmer
temperature separated by a thirty-minute recovery period resulted in a
fivefold increase in growth hormone levels. If you combine heat stress and
exercise, it induces a synergistic increase in growth hormone. This is why I
often do isometrics, yoga, push-ups, and squats in my infrared sauna (on
BoundlessBook.com/9 you’ll find a link to a sample sauna workout that I
perform).
Sauna exposure also increases blood flow to skeletal muscles and helps
fuel them with glucose, amino acids, fatty acids, and oxygen while
removing metabolic by-products like lactic acid and calcium ions. Sauna
exposure can even build new red blood cells at a rate similar to illegal
performance-enhancing drugs like EPO, particularly a twenty-to-thirty-
minute hot sauna sit post-workout.
For muscle growth and maintenance, there is no substitute for
resistance training. But if you don’t have access to exercise equipment or
have movement or injury limitations, you can also build and maintain
--- END PAGE 452 ---

--- PAGE 453 ---
muscle with strategies such as bodyweight or low-weight training, the use
of Kaatsu or BFR bands, EMS, and sauna therapy.
Unlike a long cold soak, which can blunt the hormetic effects of
exercise, you can use a sauna postworkout to get even more benefits out of
your training while also increasing blood flow and decreasing recovery
time.
Can Seniors Get Stronger?
Many fitness enthusiasts and athletes believe that at around fifty to sixty
years old, you lose your ability to get stronger. But the fact is, while you do
lose muscle mass as you age, you can stave off the age-related loss of
strength. According to a study in the Journal of Strength and Conditioning
Research, beyond the age of sixty-five, you can—contrary to popular belief—
make significant strength gains.
The study put a group of men in their midthirties and a group of men in their
midsixties on the same strength-training programs. For ten weeks, twice per
week, the men performed five sets of eight to fourteen repetitions of leg
press and leg extension exercises, with one to two minutes rest between
sets. The researchers measured the leg strength and lean muscle mass of
both groups before and after the training period. While the older men, unlike
the younger men, didn’t gain any muscle mass in their legs, their strength
training did indeed lead to significant strength gains in their one-rep-
maximum leg presses.
So if you are over sixty, don’t worry about losing your ability to get stronger.
Perform a full-body strength-training workout a couple of times a week.
Don’t mess around with light weights and high reps, which don’t seem to be
effective for seniors. Choose a weight that allows you to perform a
maximum of fifteen reps per exercise (but preferably less). For the simplest
solution, just implement the super-slow training routine on here one to two
times per week and stick with it for a few months. You will be surprised by
the results.
--- END PAGE 453 ---

--- PAGE 454 ---
ENTER 6 OF THE FITTEST OLD
PEOPLE ON THE PLANET
Hopefully, by now you are convinced that if you aren’t lifting heavy stuff,
you should be. But when it comes to staying as fit and sexy as possible as
you age, lab-based science is one thing and personal, in-the-trenches, real-
world experience is quite another. I find it fascinating to study and even
exercise with some of the fittest old people on the face of the planet to see
exactly what they are doing.
I recently read an article from Vice entitled “The Healthiest Old Person
on the Planet Explains How to Stay in Shape,” in which we meet a man
named Charles Eugster, who began lifting weights at eighty-five and lived
to be ninety-seven years old.
Charles became a decorated British sprinter in his late eighties and
into his late nineties. He held world records in the 200-meter indoor and
400-meter outdoor sprints, as well as British records in the 60-meter
indoor, 100-meter outdoor, and 200-meter outdoor sprints. This is all
pretty impressive, considering that most guys his age could barely walk
across the street without stumbling over the curb (if they were even still
alive!).
Charles was also a bodybuilder, public speaker, writer, rower,
wakeboarder, entrepreneur, and fashion designer who planned his own
line of elderly couture. He even claimed that some of his white and gray
hairs turned brown! While I am skeptical of that last claim, I do know this:
he certainly seemed to have cracked the code on how to stay fit as you age.
Let’s delve into the secrets of Charles Eugster and five other extremely
fit old people, shall we?
The Rejuvenation Olympics
--- END PAGE 454 ---

--- PAGE 455 ---
In the high-stakes world of tech moguls, competition seems to know no
bounds. Beyond space escapades and battles for the biggest yacht, the
elite’s appetite for outdoing one another is perhaps most extreme when it
comes to self-preservation, age reversal, and longevity. Here, the efforts are
apparently insatiable, including Jack Dorsey’s daily ice baths and Steve
Jobs’s fruitarian escapades. Enter the Rejuvenation Olympics, the brainchild
of longevity enthusiast and biohacker Bryan Johnson, where the game isn’t
just about wealth but about a competition to reverse the hands of time.
Forget physical feats; here, it’s all about slowing your “biological age” as
measured by an epigenetic age clock called the DunedinPACE test, a blood
test that is the current gold standard for measuring a human being’s pace of
biological aging. I had mine done by Tru Diagnostics, which is operated by a
former podcast guest of mine named Ryan Smith.
The DunedinPACE protocol is based on an analysis of chemical tags on the
DNA contained in white blood cells. These tags are called DNA methylation
marks, and you measure them with a test based on the DunedinPACE data.
The test computes aging based on your epigenome, which consists of
chemical compounds that modify your genome in a way that tells it what to
do, where to do it, and when to do it.
The DunedinPACE test measures specific biomarkers based on DNA
methylation that track aging. To measure biological age, aging clocks
predict age-related health issues. What makes DunedinPACE unique is that,
whereas other tests aim to measure how old or young a person is,
DunedinPACE measures the rate at which you are aging.
Tests like this are correlated with studies based on measures of biological
age derived from blood chemistry and DNA methylation data—typically
gathered from a simple blood spot test kit—combined with research
participants’ subjective perceptions of their own health. To create the
original aging clock, six researchers built a database that took an
international team more than fifty years to complete, and they tracked
biological changes in 1,037 New Zealanders who are members of what’s
known as the Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and Development Study. The
study began when the subjects were born, in 1972. As part of this long-term
study, researchers measured a host of parameters, including postural
hypotension, DEXA bone density, auditory tests, physical function, optic
nerves, white matter in the brain, dental imaging, IQ, and several dozen
blood markers. They then used a regression model to calculate the pace of
--- END PAGE 455 ---

--- PAGE 456 ---
aging into a measurement that is obtained from a single blood sample. So
this test is the most powerful biological clock currently available.
For example, in my own blood test results based on my TruAge Diagnostics
measurement, which uses data from the DunedinPACE study, my most
recent rate of aging is 0.73. This means that for every 365 days, I age only
266 days.
This may seem impressive, but it is not the slowest aging rate in the
Rejuvenation Olympics. For over a year, forty-six-year-old Bryan Johnson led
the pack with a lifestyle so extreme it makes your average fitness regimen
look like child’s play—70 pounds of veggies a month, blood transfusions
from his teenage son, massive doses of stem cells, skin-smoothing and
wrinkle-banishing laser treatments on the face and scalp, and red-light
headgear that promises to sprout new hair locks like a garden in spring. He
reports embedding 100 different anti-aging protocols in his day, including
the consumption of a precise 1,977 calories. His breakfast is a mix of
broccoli, cauliflower, black lentils, mushrooms, garlic, and ginger, followed by
a meal of “nutty pudding” with nuts and berries, and finally a midday
“dinner” (he rarely eats after noon) of vegetables, berries, nuts, seeds, dark
chocolate, and exactly 30 milliliters of extra-virgin olive oil. Bryan reportedly
spends at least two million dollars on reducing his biological age!
But ironically, Bryan is no longer at the top of the list; he is now outpaced
(or, in this case, underpaced) by a few individuals whose lifestyles are just a
bit closer to the slightly less elaborate but arguably more natural protocol
you’ve discovered in the fitness chapters of Boundless.
Take Dave Pascoe, a retired systems engineer who, at sixty-one, has the
appearance of a thirtyish-year-old. His epigenetic age is 37.95, and his speed
of aging is 0.66 biological years. Dave engages in more longevity
interventions than the average health enthusiast, but he has a far less strict
and less expensive regimen than Bryan. It includes daily exercise, particularly
running; a diet consisting of whole foods, mainly fruits, vegetables, and
seafood; frequent cold therapy; plasma donations to gradually filter his
blood (a far less expensive and more socially valuable alternative to
spendier options like therapeutic plasma exchange or replacements from
young plasma donors); hyperbaric oxygen therapy; occasional fasting; and
120 supplements daily, most notably rapamycin (which I will discuss in
chapter 19).
--- END PAGE 456 ---

--- PAGE 457 ---
This approach might sound demanding to you, but it’s quite subtle
compared to Bryan’s. Dave doesn’t restrict calories, isn’t vegan, doesn’t use
testosterone replacement therapy, and doesn’t hunt down a dizzying battery
of tests to check up on each of his organs. He estimates that his entire
protocol costs less than $30,000 per year rather than a cool couple million.
His results demonstrate that extending health span and lifespan is possible
using interventions available to many people at a reasonable price.
Perhaps more notable is the regimen of Julie Clark, a fifty-five-year-old
single mom who makes less than $100,000 per year. Julie’s aging rate is
0.665. Unlike the tech billionaires, her routine is somewhat ordinary. She
spends $27 a month on a gym membership and $79 a month on the
longevity supplement NOVOS. She consumes about a pound of a wide
variety of vegetables daily, snacking on carrots, radishes, and peppers
during her workday. She limits the amount of refined sugars and grains she
eats. At least three times a week, she uses the sauna for twenty minutes
before taking a cold shower. At the gym, she does a mix of cardio and
strength workouts: two days of upper body with weights, two days of lower
body with weights, and one day of strength training targeting her core,
along with twenty to thirty minutes of cardio four times a week. On the
weekends, she hikes, kayaks, plays pickleball, or takes a long walk.
The ultimate takeaways from the Rejuvenation Olympics? There’s more than
one way to defy aging. Diets widely vary but are generally comprised of
whole foods close to their natural form, fasting is important, genetics plays a
huge factor, you don’t have to spend tons of money to increase lifespan and
health span, and just about everybody on the leaderboard does some form
of—you guessed it—strength training and muscle maintenance.
Antiaging Tip #1: Eat Real Food (Charles
Eugster)
Sure, Charles lifted weights, which is crucial for maintaining muscle mass
and hormone levels as you age and can reduce the rate at which telomeres
shorten. But regarding his diet, he said in his interview with Vice:
--- END PAGE 457 ---

--- PAGE 458 ---
Variety is key. I start every day with a protein shake because, as you get
older, your protein synthesis no longer functions as well. I avoid sugar and
eat lots of meat, especially fat. I’ve been on a fat trip lately. Fat! Piles of fat.
Yet, I was in a supermarket the other day and was perplexed to find yogurt
with zero fat. What on earth is that? The idea of the nutrition pyramid
where, at the top, is a little fat and meat, and at the bottom a lot of
carbohydrates, is, excuse me, bullshit. Humans are so unbelievably stupid
that we have begun to tinker with food. Our theories of nutrition have
resulted in a pandemic of obesity. Can you imagine a hunter-gatherer
enjoying a low-fat yogurt? Let me tell you this, too: I read a report recently
which said that a fatty diet also increases your drive.
If, like Charles, you have Northern European ancestry, it is highly
unlikely that you can eat modern fat-free and low-fat foods, live a long
time, and look good doing it. There are certain populations who, due to
genetics, salivary amylase production, and hormonal responses to
carbohydrates, may be able to get by on less fat (more on this in chapter
14). But they are still not eating modern “frankenfoods.”
Antiaging Tip #2: Learn New Stuff (Laird
Hamilton)
The last time I hung out in Kauai with sixty-year-old big-wave surfer Laird
Hamilton, who is still just as spry and quick-moving as the
twentysomething surfers he puts to shame on huge waves around the
world, Laird highlighted one of his best antiaging secrets: keep learning
new stuff.
Laird’s garage is a testament to this philosophy. It is chock-full of
unique toys that Laird has invented to attack ocean waves in new ways. It
is also packed with skis, snowboards, Jet Skis, foil boards (one of the most
fun “flying” experiences you will ever have if you can hunt one down),
--- END PAGE 458 ---

--- PAGE 459 ---
balance-training devices, and all manner of different tools to force his
brain and muscles to maintain neurons and build new ones. People often
ask me why I delve into everything from archery to snowboarding to
spearfishing to obstacle course racing to kickboxing to ukulele playing, and
this is one of the biggest reasons why!
Indeed, renowned neuropsychiatrist Daniel Amen has shown that this
concept is key to maintaining youthfulness. He has identified specific
areas of the brain that are challenged by different tasks:
• The prefrontal cortex is improved by meditation, language games like
crossword puzzles and Scrabble, and strategy games like chess.
• The temporal lobes are improved by memory games and learning
musical instruments.
• The parietal lobes are improved by juggling, map reading, and logic
games like sudoku.
• The cerebellum is improved by dancing, yoga, tai chi, and coordination
games like table tennis.
In his book Change Your Brain, Change Your Life, Dr. Amen also
includes breathing techniques to calm inner turmoil, antidepression tips,
antianger diet tips, focus-enhancing strategies, and problem-solving
techniques. I have incorporated one of his recommended meditation
techniques into my custom yoga routine:
1. Touch your thumbs to your index fingers while chanting “saa.”
2. Touch your thumbs to your middle fingers while chanting “taa.”
3. Touch your thumbs to your ring fingers while chanting “naa.”
4. Touch your thumbs to your pinkies while chanting “maa.”
The first time through, repeat the sounds out loud for two minutes,
then whisper them for two minutes, repeat them silently for four minutes,
--- END PAGE 459 ---

--- PAGE 460 ---
whisper them again for two minutes, and finish by repeating them out
loud for another two minutes. Then sit quietly for one to two minutes.
Antiaging Tip #3: Lift, Move, Sprint (Mark
Sisson)
My friend Mark Sisson, aged seventy-one, probably possesses the finest set
of six-pack abs you have ever seen on anyone, much less on a guy his age.
What’s his secret? Rather than engaging in long, slow chronic cardio, he
does short, fast, all-out sprint workouts at least once a week, all year long.
He doesn’t overdo these and recommends performing such workouts
(Ultimate Frisbee, high-intensity treadmill intervals, or hard uphill
cycling) once every seven to ten days.
He also performs intense sessions of heavy, full-body weightlifting one
to three times per week for seven to thirty minutes. Finally, he avoids any
long, unbroken periods of sedentary time by using tactics like treadmill
workstations and relaxing paddleboard sessions.
Lift, move, sprint. Pretty simple concept, eh? The sprinting concept
particularly is related to what you’ve already learned about the importance
of maintaining youthfulness with age by engaging in explosive, powerful
movements. Not only is Pavel Tsatsouline’s protocol described earlier a
good example of this approach, but so is that of Mark’s friend Brad Kearns,
a sixty-year-old speed golfer, sprinter, and competitive athlete. In a
podcast interview, Brad described to me how he regularly incorporates
interval sprint training protocols, such as three to four intervals lasting
twenty to thirty seconds at an intensity of ten—a maximal effort! But
these sprints are separated by a long, luxurious rest or easy walking period
of four to five minutes. Want to try this my way? Simply go for a long walk
and sprint for ten seconds for every two to three telephone poles you pass.
Pro tip: Brad swears by a quick cold plunge prior to this workout to
--- END PAGE 460 ---

--- PAGE 461 ---
enhance adrenaline and norepinephrine excitatory neurotransmitter
release.
Antiaging Tip #4: Do Epic Things (Don
Wildman)
Ten years ago, I read an Esquire magazine article entitled “The Hardest
Workout in the World.” In it, the author outlined then-septuagenarian
Don Wildman’s grueling, intense, multistage weight-training workout,
dubbed the Circuit. The first time I ventured into Don’s home gym in
Malibu to do the Hardest Workout in the World, I thought it would be a
piece of cake. After all, if a seventy-five-year-old could do it three times a
week, I would surely be able to manage it, too!
When I crawled out of the gym almost three hours later with lactic
acid oozing out of my pores, I was thinking a bit differently. My body was
feeling the aftershocks of Don’s challenge for several days.
Don, who passed away at the age of eighty-five, not only performed
this epic workout up until his death but also went mountain biking on
difficult trails for miles every single day and enjoyed stand-up
paddleboarding, big-wave surfing, and even helicopter snowboarding.
These may seem like scary, daunting tasks, but Don still did them, and he
certainly lived life at a much more exciting level than 99 percent of his
peers and stayed incredibly fit doing it. So what epic or scary event or
workout can you add to your calendar this week, this month, or this year?
Antiaging Tip #5: Train Eccentrically (Art
De Vany)
--- END PAGE 461 ---

--- PAGE 462 ---
The ripped, eighty-six-year-old Art De Vany, one of the founders of the
ancestral fitness movement, gets away with extremely short weight-
training episodes of just fifteen minutes per day by using an exercise
strategy called “eccentric training.” This potent workout method results in
not only a significant antiaging effect but also an increase in growth
hormone and testosterone levels. In a podcast episode with Tim Ferriss,
Art explained his approach.
Eccentric training is also known as “negative training” because it
refers to the lengthening or lowering portion of a lift, during which the
muscle tends to become more stressed and stimulated compared to the
concentric, positive, lifting phase of an exercise. To perform a negative
deadlift, for example, you set the bar at a certain height—maybe on
weight-lifting blocks, as if you were already halfway through the
movement—then grab the bar, step back, and lower it to the ground. Since
the human body can handle up to 1.75 times more weight eccentrically
than concentrically, this type of training allows you to load your muscles
with an amount of weight you couldn’t normally lift. This, in turn,
stimulates a more powerful adaptive response to the slight muscle tearing
that occurs with weightlifting. The proven benefits of eccentric training
include improved injury rehabilitation, reduced risk of injury, increased
gains in strength, stronger connective tissue, and improved muscle
function. Research even shows that eccentric training can double stem cell
counts in your muscles without exhausting them. As stem cells divide and
proliferate, some remain in the stem cell niche, which is where stem cells
reside within specific tissues—in this case, the skeletal muscle. But others
exit the niche to assist with tissue healing and the anabolic response to
training. The stem cells that exit, known as “satellite cells” or
“mesenchymal-like stem cells,” are crucial for muscle regrowth after any
exercise. By doubling these counts, eccentric training promotes faster
muscle regrowth.
--- END PAGE 462 ---

--- PAGE 463 ---
Art uses this style of training for about ten to fifteen minutes every
day. Even if he doesn’t have a spotter, he uses different machines and will
load up a weight he can handle with both arms or legs, push through the
first part of the movement, then finish the movement using only one arm
or leg as he slowly lowers back to the starting position. He claims that
every muscle group can reap incredible benefits from this style of training,
especially muscles related to posture, since they need to have the
endurance to keep you upright all day.
One of Art’s other posture exercises involves standing with your back
to a wall, slightly arching your lower back, keeping your head and
shoulders back against the wall, and then walking away from the wall
without collapsing your spine or neck—rather than lowering your head to
look forward, look over your cheekbones while maintaining your posture.
Finally, Art doesn’t work every muscle group every day. He alternates
muscle groups throughout the week, making certain to hit each group a
couple times every seven days. With this training method, he ensures that
he remains injury-free and that his muscles are lean, long, quick, and not
too big.
--- END PAGE 463 ---

--- PAGE 464 ---
Antiaging Tip #6: Stay Supple (Olga
Kotelko)
In the fascinating book What Makes Olga Run? The Mystery of the 90-
Something Track Star and What She Can Teach Us About Living Longer,
Happier Lives, we meet Olga Kotelko, a senior track star who, at the time
the book was published, held over twenty-three world records in track and
field, seventeen of which were in the aged-ninety-to-ninety-five category.
When I read the book, one of the biggest takeaways for me was that
Olga didn’t beat up her body without going out of her way to recover and
stay supple. She instead woke up in the middle of every night, grabbed the
old empty wine bottle that she kept beside her bed, and gave herself a full-
body, foam-roller-style massage on all her fasciae, muscles, and joints.
--- END PAGE 464 ---

--- PAGE 465 ---
Whether you book a weekly or monthly massage or do short, daily
foam-rolling routines like the metabolic mobility routine on my YouTube
channel at BenGreenfieldFitness.com/metabolicmobility (which I do once
or twice per week), you will find that deep tissue work can keep muscle
soreness, cranky joints, poor movement, and other issues we accept as
normal in seniors at bay. And yes, you can do this type of massage even
when you travel, with no more equipment than a hard plastic (e.g.,
Nalgene) or glass water bottle wrapped in a T-shirt or a pillowcase and a
common lacrosse ball (read Kelly Starrett’s Becoming a Supple Leopard to
see what I mean).
What They All Have in Common:
Regularity
Finally, I would be remiss not to note that, when studying the habits of
these fit old people and many others, I have discovered that routine often
trumps novelty.
Mark Sisson paddleboards and plays Ultimate Frisbee every week. Paul
Chek lifts heavy rocks in his homemade rock garden each morning (listen
to my podcast with him to see what I mean—see BoundlessBook.com/9).
Laird Hamilton performs thrice-weekly underwater pool workouts. My
über-fit sixty-six-year-old Finnish friend Vessi swims naked each morning
and hits the sauna each night. Sure, the SAID (“specific adaptation to
imposed demands”) principle does dictate that you must constantly
switch up your workouts to keep getting stronger and faster. But in order
to remain injury-free, establish a sustainable program, and reduce
decision-making fatigue, many of these folks do the same routines day in
and day out. They throw in the occasional gritty adventure, new workout,
or unpredictable sport, but there is always some semblance of routine.
--- END PAGE 465 ---

--- PAGE 466 ---
The True Causes of Heart Attacks
If you are worried that heavy lifting or hard exercise will give you a heart
attack, allow me to introduce you to Thomas Cowan, MD, who is, in my
opinion, one of the most brilliant minds in modern holistic medicine. He
expertly blends ancestral wisdom and modern science to make meaningful
changes in human health.
Dr. Cowan has been a three-peat guest on my podcast and was featured on
an episode entitled “Why Your Heart Is Not a Pump (And What Most
Doctors Don’t Know About the True Cause of Heart Disease).” During the
episode, we discussed the fact that the current understanding of heart
disease as a problem originating in blood vessels is completely wrong.
Rather, heart disease is rooted in sympathetic nervous system overload,
mineral deficiencies, and an unwillingness to treat the vessels in your body
more like the roots and vessels of a plant. Dr. Cowan informed me that one
clue to understanding why bypass grafting and stent placement have not
eliminated cardiovascular problems comes from the work of Italian
pathologist Giorgio Baroldi.
In his groundbreaking book The Etiopathogenesis of Coronary Heart
Disease: A Heretical Theory Based on Morphology, Baroldi, who performed
autopsies on heart attack patients for forty years, observes that only 41
percent of those patients had significant stenosis (plaque buildup) in the
artery leading to the affected area of the heart. In fact, 50 percent of those
stenoses developed after the heart attack occurred. These results suggest
that approximately 80 percent of heart attacks have some other cause than
a blocked artery. It is no wonder that, in most cases, unblocking arteries—no
matter how thoroughly or carefully done—does not resolve the heart
disease.
In his book Human Heart, Cosmic Heart: A Doctor’s Quest to Understand,
Treat, and Prevent Cardiovascular Disease, Dr. Cowan suggests three other
causes of heart attacks—also known as myocardial infarctions, or MIs. He
asserts that we must address these causes not only to prevent and treat
angina, unstable angina, and heart attacks but also to avoid heart attacks
during heavy physical exertion.
--- END PAGE 466 ---

--- PAGE 467 ---
1. Autonomic nervous system imbalance: Heart rate variability testing, which
assesses autonomic nervous system activity, suggests that many patients
who have an MI have reduced parasympathetic nervous system activity in
the days, weeks, and months leading up to the MI—that is, the
parasympathetic nervous system, which is responsible for bodily functions
at rest (what’s often called “rest-and-digest” mode), has been
downregulated. Most MIs result from a combination of chronically low
parasympathetic activity and a temporary stressful event like a hard
workout. Decreased parasympathetic activity (or decreased
parasympathetic tone) is a consequence of chronic stress, diabetes,
hypertension, smoking, and a lack of physical activity. In other words, if
these factors are present in your life, think twice about doing hard physical
activity until you have addressed them and the other issues below.
2. The problem isn’t coronary arteries: Typical anatomical drawings of the
heart suggest that all the blood flow to the myocardium (the middle layer of
the heart muscle) goes through the three major coronary arteries. While
these arteries are certainly important, the heart possesses a rich supply of
blood vessels that make up its microcirculation. So the heart is perfectly well
suited to do its own bypass in the event of chronic disruption of blood flow
through one or more of the coronary arteries. This is why thousands, maybe
millions, of Americans are walking around with coronary arteries greater
than 90 percent occluded and yet have no symptoms whatsoever. The body,
using its robust capillary network, has done its own bypass, and the heart
therefore still has a good blood supply.
It is only in cases of chronic diseases like diabetes that MIs occur. One of Dr.
Cowan’s primary points during our interviews was that an adequate intake
of good, clean water, preferably in the form of structured water, and a high
intake of a full spectrum of minerals (such as calcium, phosphorus, zinc,
magnesium, potassium, and trace minerals) support the heart in its regular
circulatory activity. So, regardless of who you are, and especially if you have
a history of cardiovascular disease or risk of heart attack, be careful with
heavy lifting and hard exercise if you are dehydrated, drink subpar municipal
water, or don’t have an adequate mineral intake.
3. Metabolic acidosis: Perhaps the most important and most overlooked
reason people suffer heart problems is the production and buildup of lactic
acid in heart tissue. When the heart finds itself in a stressful situation and its
mitochondria can’t produce enough energy, it undergoes what is called a
--- END PAGE 467 ---

--- PAGE 468 ---
glycolytic shift and begins to ferment sugar for fuel. Once this shift occurs,
lactic acid accumulates in the surrounding tissues. Lactic acid also
accumulates in your skeletal muscles when you exercise, but, unlike skeletal
muscles, your heart muscles can’t relax, so lactic acid continues to
accumulate, and the buildup eventually leads to angina or chest pain.
The lactic acid also leads to a lower pH in the heart, which prevents calcium
from entering myocardial cells and inhibits the contraction of heart muscle
fibers. Eventually, cell death occurs in the surrounding tissue, and this is
called an MI. Perhaps Pavel Tsatsouline was on to something when he titled
his minimal-lactic-acid-training-approach book The Quick & The Dead.
To address this issue, Dr. Cowan highly recommends a little-known
medication called strophanthus (also known as ouabain), commonly called
“the insulin of the heart.” Research suggests that strophanthus improves
parasympathetic nervous system function and cardiac microcirculation and
converts lactic acid to pyruvate, the heart’s preferred fuel. (If you are
interested in learning more about strophanthus, check out “The Insulin of
the Heart” on my website—there’s a link at BoundlessBook.com/9—which
includes an article Dr. Cowan wrote about this fascinating plant.)
Finally, no discussion of the true causes of heart attacks would be complete
without a mention of takotsubo cardiomyopathy. The idea behind this
phenomenon is that you are far more likely to die of a heart attack caused
by chronic anxiety or a poor relationship than a heart attack caused by
squatting, deadlifting, or running a marathon.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, also known as stress cardiomyopathy, occurs
due to a sudden and temporary weakening of the heart muscle, often
triggered by emotional stress, such as the death of a loved one or a breakup.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is often referred to as “broken heart syndrome”
and is a well-known cause of lethal ventricular arrhythmias, ventricular
rupture, and heart failure.
So what’s the final verdict when it comes to heart attacks and exercise?
Eliminate chronic stress, keep yourself well hydrated, consume adequate
minerals, ensure your heart is not constantly burning glucose as fuel, and fix
any weak or broken relationships in your life. Your heart will then be far
more likely to respond well to a difficult workout. If you have been living a
lifestyle conducive to an unhealthy heart, I recommend that you consider a
CT angiography scan or Prevencia HART blood test to look for evidence of
--- END PAGE 468 ---

--- PAGE 469 ---
plaque accumulation, which can be a more insightful measurement of
cardiovascular risk than a standard lipid panel.
THE LAST WORD
I dig the idea of playing football with my grandkids when I’m ninety,
freediving when I’m ninety-five, and hunting an elk when I’m one
hundred. By implementing the muscle-building tactics in this chapter,
along with the antiaging secrets of some of the fittest old people on the
face of the planet, you can equip yourself with a body that will allow you to
do the same. After all, if you want to live a long time, I suspect you want to
look as good as possible, even if modern society thinks you should be
sitting in a rocking chair at a nursing home watching Seinfeld reruns.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Take an upper-body bodyweight exercise, such as a push-up or pull-up,
and a lower-body bodyweight exercise, such as a lunge or squat, and
perform the movements as slowly as you can—it should take at least thirty
to sixty seconds to get to the top of one rep and thirty to sixty seconds to
return. Repeat to total exhaustion. This technique, known as eccentric,
negative, or super-slow training, is a fast-track method to build strength
and mass. For an additional bonus, do this workout with BFR bands or a
Kaatsu training device.
--- END PAGE 469 ---

--- PAGE 470 ---
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/9. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 470 ---

--- PAGE 471 ---
10
FITNESS DECODED
THE ULTIMATE BLUEPRINT FOR A
PERFECT BODY
“You ready?”
I nodded and gulped. The guy in the polo shirt and glasses standing next to
me flipped the green switch in his hands, and suddenly my abs—covered in a
Christmas-light-esque array of blinking electrodes—exploded into an intense
contraction that shook my body from head to toe.
--- END PAGE 471 ---

--- PAGE 472 ---
For a painfully long two minutes, he continued the stimulation with a
fringe Russian-training-inspired electrical muscle recruitment device
called the Neubie, then finally switched it off and, smiling, stepped away. I
wiped the beads of sweat from my forehead and stared down at my
quivering ab muscles, now forming a neat, tight six-pack.
“Dang.”
“Yeah, and tomorrow you’re going to feel like you did a thousand
crunches.”
When it comes to extreme exercise efficiency, this machine—which
can simulate a 600-pound squat with just a few flimsy electrode pads—
ranks right up there with the altitude simulation device Live02 in my
home gym, the whisper-soft Walkolution foam treadmill at my office desk,
my full-body cryotherapy, cardio, and blood flow restriction VASPER
(promising to give the equivalent of a three-hour run in twenty-one short
minutes), the industrial-size vibration Powerplate next to my kettlebells,
the wearable Katalyst electrical muscle stimulation suit, and the enormous
pulley-piston-driven ARX machine that basically simulates fighting a giant
2-horsepower robot.
Sure, all this may sound quite fancy and complex, and while chapter 11
will certainly teach the voracious go-getter or budding biohacker how to
find the coolest exercise tools that exist, the truth is that you don’t need to
empty your wallet or spend oodles of time cracking the code on getting
the body you want.
Suppose you want to live as long as possible. Suppose you also want to
look as good as possible doing it. Suppose you want to maximize your
hormone balance, drive, fertility, strength, power, and cardiovascular
capacity. Suppose you want to step back, investigate every shred of
exercise research, and inject only the most effective strategies into your
life—not to prepare for masochistic suffer-fests like triathlons, marathons,
--- END PAGE 472 ---

--- PAGE 473 ---
obstacle races, or other feats of physical endurance, but rather to
maximize longevity and look good naked.
Whether we’re looking at total caloric intake, exercise, sunlight
exposure, protein consumption, or work habits, we often think we have to
do way more than we need to in order to get the results we want. Why
crank out those extra reps or put in those extra hours if you don’t have to?
After all, failing to heed the minimum effective dose can often cost you
money, time, and mental real estate.
Sure, if you want to do an Ironman triathlon or a multihour obstacle
race or compete at the CrossFit Games, you need to put some extra work
into sport-specific, occasionally soul-crushing training. But all that volume
isn’t necessarily good for you, and it certainly isn’t necessary for extending
your lifespan.
The first section of this chapter will reveal the minimum effective dose
of exercise. You will discover the truth about how much exercise you
really need to live a long time, with the approach that traditional Chinese
medicine considers to be the ultimate way to be boundless: a balance of
easygoing yin and hard-charging yang. You will also find a done-for-you
exercise program you can do for the rest of your life at any time and in any
place while maintaining the sweet spot between health, performance, and
longevity.
THE MINIMUM EFFECTIVE DOSE
OF EXERCISE
In 2015, the New York Times published an article entitled “The Right Dose
of Exercise for a Longer Life.” The article discusses the results of two
studies that investigated how much exercise is needed to get longevity
benefits. But before jumping into those results, it is important to note that
--- END PAGE 473 ---

--- PAGE 474 ---
rather than being controlled or randomized, these studies relied upon the
participants’ memory recall of their exercise habits. Like diet studies that
rely on memory recall of meals, these kinds of studies can be prone to
human error. But they can still give us important information.
The first study found that people who did not exercise at all faced the
highest risk of early death. Those who exercised a little—not meeting the
current American Heart Association guidelines of 150 minutes per week,
but at least doing something—reduced their risk of premature death by 20
percent. Those who performed 150 minutes of moderate exercise per week
enjoyed a 31 percent lower risk of dying than those who never exercised.
But the greatest benefits came to those who exercised moderately,
mostly by walking, for 450 minutes per week—a little more than an hour
per day. These people were up to 39 percent less likely to die prematurely
than those who never exercised.
Even more interesting is the fact that after 450 minutes per week, the
longevity benefits of exercise plateaued but never significantly declined.
Those who performed ten times or more the recommended exercise dose
never really got any extra benefits than those who exercised at a dose
closer to the recommended guidelines. While their risk of dying young did
not increase, they also did not get significantly healthier from a longevity
standpoint, suggesting that an excess of easy, aerobic exercise isn’t going
to hurt you, but it also isn’t going to provide any further decrease in
mortality risk.
The second study reached a similar conclusion but focused more on
exercise intensity. The results stand in stark contrast to studies that
suggest frequent strenuous exercise might contribute to early mortality.
Not surprisingly, this study found that meeting exercise guidelines
significantly reduced the risk of early death, even if that exercise was as
moderate as walking.
--- END PAGE 474 ---

--- PAGE 475 ---
But those who engaged in occasional vigorous, high-intensity exercise
saw an additional reduction in mortality risk. People who spent up to 30
percent of their weekly exercise time in vigorous activities were 9 percent
less likely to die prematurely than people who exercised at a moderate
intensity for the same amount of time. People who spent more than 30
percent of their exercise time doing strenuous workouts gained an extra 13
percent reduction in early mortality risk compared to those who never
broke through that intensity barrier. Even the few people in the study who
engaged in the greatest amounts of intense exercise had no increase in
mortality risk.
At this point, you may be wondering what qualifies as moderate and
what qualifies as vigorous. Moderate-intensity aerobic exercise raises your
heart rate and makes you sweat. You’ll know if you’re working at a
moderate intensity if you can’t sing a song during a workout but you can
still talk. Vigorous-intensity aerobic exercise makes you breathe hard and
fast, makes your muscles burn, and significantly increases your heart rate.
If you are working at this level, you won’t be able to say more than a few
words without pausing for a breath.
What’s the ultimate takeaway from these two studies? Researcher
Klaus Gebel, who led the second study, said, “Try to reach at least 150
minutes of physical activity per week and have around 20 to 30 minutes of
that be vigorous activity.” He also noted that a larger dose of exercise, for
those who are so inclined, did not seem to be unsafe, although I’ve seen
enough additional data, which I alluded to in chapters 3 and 9 when
describing the “Goldilocks zone” of exercise, that suggests hard weight
training more than three times or more than 130 minutes per week or
exceeding 75 minutes per week of vigorous-intensity cardio exercise (like
HIIT training or metcon workouts) could have an increased association
with mortality.
--- END PAGE 475 ---

--- PAGE 476 ---
Ultimately, all this research suggests that you need at least twenty
minutes of structured exercise per day if you want to live a long time—
assuming, of course, that you’re engaged in low-intensity physical activity
for much of the rest of the day (taking standing and stretching breaks,
walking, using the stairs, etc.), a topic I addressed thoroughly in chapter 8.
But it is one thing to live a long time and another thing entirely to look as
good as possible doing it. Frankly, no matter what “looking good naked”
means to you, you are going to need a bit more than a blanket
recommendation to perform at least 150 minutes of physical activity per
week and have 20 to 30 minutes of that be vigorous activity.
If you want low-enough body fat levels to be cut, yet high-enough
levels to optimize hormones and fertility, enough muscle mass to be
strong and aesthetic but not so much that you become a cancer-prone
bodybuilder, and enough cardiovascular fitness to be venous and vibrant
but not so much that you are overtrained, you need the minimum effective
dose of exercise to achieve cardiovascular fitness, muscular endurance,
strength, mitochondrial density, metabolic efficiency, and stamina.
GET FIT, LIVE A LONG TIME, AND
LOOK GOOD NAKED
Probably due to my graduate studies in exercise physiology and
biomechanics, I tend to be systematic when it comes to my approach for a
complete fitness program, meaning I step back and look at the body as a
series of metabolic systems. If each of these systems is effectively targeted
in any given week, you’ve checked off what you need for the best possible
approach to building and maintaining fitness, very similar to how a
nutritional approach should ideally guarantee a weekly adequate intake of
vitamins, minerals, sugars, fatty acids, and amino acids. The following are
--- END PAGE 476 ---

--- PAGE 477 ---
the six major aspects of training that you need to incorporate into your
longevity protocol to balance aesthetics, fitness, and longevity.
1. Cardiovascular Fitness
Cardiovascular fitness is defined as the maximum amount of oxygen you
can utilize, an amount called VO₂ max (also known as maximal oxygen
consumption, maximal oxygen uptake, peak oxygen uptake, or maximal
aerobic capacity). This is simply your maximum rate of oxygen
consumption during intense exercise, and it is heavily correlated with
overall fitness, health, and longevity.
Studies show that the minimum effective dose for maintenance of
cardiovascular fitness is five four-minute high-intensity rounds at 87 to 97
percent of your maximum heart rate, with four minutes of rest or low
--- END PAGE 477 ---

--- PAGE 478 ---
activity after each round to allow you to recover sufficiently (a 1:1
work:rest ratio).
For the minimum effective dose of cardiovascular fitness, perform five
intense four-minute interval training sessions with full rest periods, such
as five four-minute efforts on a bicycle, with each effort followed by four
minutes of easy pedaling. Do a session like this once every one to two
weeks. Interestingly, research shows that combining aerobic training
(concurrent training) with resistance training can provide further VO₂
max benefits, making a good case for adopting this workout to the style of
VO₂ max training I prefer: a four-minute maximum sustainable effort of
cardio, then one set of a major lift to failure such as chest press, then back
to cardio, and repeated for a few other lifts, like the shoulder press, squat,
pull-down, deadlift, or row. The added bonus is that this strategy beats the
boredom of being on a treadmill or bike for thirty-plus minutes.
--- END PAGE 478 ---

--- PAGE 479 ---
2. Maximum Muscular Endurance and
Aerobic Capacity
Your maximum muscular endurance is, as the name suggests, the
maximum amount of work your muscles can endure, and it is related to
your mitochondrial health, your muscular resistance to fatigue, and your
ability to buffer lactic acid.
For muscular endurance and aerobic capacity, nothing beats Tabata
sets, which deliver a perfect 2:1 work:rest ratio that results in lactic acid
accumulation, but not for so long that you risk the type of excess acidosis
described in chapter 9. A Tabata requires four minutes of going all-out at
absolute maximum intensity for twenty seconds, resting for ten seconds,
and repeating for a total of eight rounds. Your set doesn’t have to be on a
cardio machine or during a run. For example, in one study, participants
performed a Tabata session with a single exercise four times a week for
four weeks. Exercise choices included burpees, mountain climbers,
jumping jacks, and squat thrusts, but you could also engage in treadmill or
outdoor running, rowing, kettlebell swings, or indoor or outdoor cycling.
Compared to four thirty-minute steady-state treadmill exercise
protocols per week in the control group, the Tabata group (which, if you
do the math, was performing just sixteen minutes of exercise per week)
saw significant gains in both aerobic capacity and muscle endurance.
Most studies use two to four Tabata sessions per week. I recommend
performing two sessions per week, and it’s fine to do them as a warm-up
or finisher to any strength-training or mobility routine.
--- END PAGE 479 ---

--- PAGE 480 ---
3. Ideal Strength-to-Muscle-Mass Ratio
If you can muster massive amounts of power in small, tightly packed
groups of muscle fibers and maintain wiry and explosive muscle like a
powerlifter, you’ll have the type of muscle most correlated to longevity.
Bigger muscles aren’t necessarily better, although a certain amount of
muscle mass allows you to experience all the metabolic, neural, and
immune benefits of muscle championed by my friend, the “muscle-centric
medicine” physician Dr. Gabrielle Lyon. For example, a healthy lean
muscle percentage range is 70 to 90 percent, so if your ideal body weight
is 180 pounds, your total amount of necessary muscle is 126 to 144 pounds,
and that muscle should be as functional and strong as possible.
The best way to achieve the ideal strength-to-muscle-mass ratio with a
minimum effective dose of exercise was detailed in chapter 9 and involves
just two to four short workouts per week to target both muscle mass and
power.
--- END PAGE 480 ---

--- PAGE 481 ---
The first workout is a super-slow lifting protocol. Hit each muscle
group with one multijoint exercise performed with extremely slow,
controlled lifting (thirty to sixty seconds per rep, or a total of around two
minutes of time under tension for each set) and relatively high weights.
The protocol should include
• An upper-body push (e.g., overhead press, push-ups, chest press)
• An upper-body pull (e.g., bent or upright rows, lat pull-downs, pull-
ups)
• A lower-body push (e.g., leg press, squats)
• A lower-body pull (e.g., deadlifts, Romanian deadlifts, lower back
extensions, reverse hyperextensions)
This workout should take only twenty to thirty minutes, and the
maximum frequency you need is twice per week, though once will suffice
if you are truly going to failure.
The second workout is a high-intensity, powerful bodyweight or low-
load workout, such as a kettlebell swinging routine, or the scientific seven-
minute workout designed by a pair of researchers to maintain strength and
muscle in as little time as possible. To do the latter, perform each of the
following exercises for thirty seconds, with ten seconds of rest between
exercises. Do each exercise as explosively as possible, trying to perform as
many reps as possible in the thirty seconds (aside from an exercise like the
plank, which is an isometric hold). You only need to do this workout once
or twice per week, assuming you’re checking off everything else on the list
in this chapter.
Do two to four strength workouts per week—one or two with slow,
controlled heavy lifting and one or two with high-intensity bodyweight or
low-load movements.
--- END PAGE 481 ---

--- PAGE 482 ---

--- END PAGE 482 ---

--- PAGE 483 ---
4. Maximum Mitochondrial Density
Mitochondria are the power plants of your cells. They are responsible for
producing ATP, your body’s primary form of cellular energy. Mitochondrial
biogenesis is the creation of new mitochondria, and increasing
mitochondrial density means packing the maximum number of
mitochondria into your muscles so you can metabolize more fat and
glucose.
Research suggests that a workout consisting of four thirty-second all-
out cycling sprints with long, luxurious rest periods at an approximate 1:4
work:rest ratio significantly activates mitochondrial biogenesis in the
skeletal muscle of humans. Three sets of five four-second treadmill sprints
with twenty seconds of rest between sprints performed three times per
week has the same effect. Similarly, workouts of four to six thirty-second
bouts of all-out sprint cycling with four minutes of rest in between, done
two or three times a week, also improves important components of
mitochondrial health.
When it comes to maximizing mitochondrial density, all you need are
short, intense sprints. Tabata sets will cover most of your mitochondrial
bases. But if you have time to spare after your strength or endurance
workouts, or you have room for a quick additional workout once per week,
perform a few brief, intense sets of sprints, such as five four-to-thirty-
second sprints. Yes, you read that right: these sprints can be as short as
four seconds.
Alternatively, once every one to two weeks, perform four to six thirty-
second rounds of all-out sprint cycling with four minutes of rest after each
round. One useful tool for these types of workouts is the CAROL Bike,
which is conveniently behind the desk in my office. It uses reduced-
exertion HIIT (REHIT) and AI personalization to deliver a powerful
mitochondrial stimulus with just a few ten-to-twenty-second sweat-free
sprints.
--- END PAGE 483 ---

--- PAGE 484 ---
VO Max and Aging2 
In 1965, a group of researchers in Dallas enlisted five healthy twenty-year-
old men to spend three straight weeks in bed for what would become one of
the most well-known studies ever performed: the Dallas Bed Rest and
Training Study. The five participants had lost their physical fitness by the end
of the study, with their VO₂ maxes plummeting by 27 percent.
Thirty years later, the men had gained an average of 50 pounds, and their
body fat percentages had doubled. But when researchers tested their VO₂
max, they had dropped by only 11 percent from their healthy twenty-year-old
levels! In other words, a few weeks of bed rest was far worse than aging
when it came to a crucial marker of fitness.
These findings are backed by research from Norway that has shown, with
robust statistical evidence, that someone in their fifties can have the same
level of fitness as someone in their twenties. The key, of course, is exercise—
specifically how much and how intense.
--- END PAGE 484 ---

--- PAGE 485 ---
The study analyzed data on 4,631 men and women pulled from Norway’s
biggest health database. These individuals had undergone laboratory tests
to check their VO₂ maxes (the results represent the world’s largest database
of objective VO₂ max measurements). The database allowed researchers to
compare fitness markers with cardiovascular risk factors and other
assessments of overall health. This gave them the statistical data to back up
what prior studies have suggested: age isn’t everything when it comes to
fitness.
The researchers found that exercise intensity was far more important than
exercise duration when measuring VO₂ max. They also examined the
benefits of high-intensity exercise, specifically interval training. During
interval training, you perform four or more short periods (usually about four
minutes long) of high-intensity exercise and engage in active rest between
bursts of activity. This kind of interval training is especially effective and
efficient for staying fit as you age.
The researchers also found that women whose VO₂ max measurement was
below the median were five times more likely to have a cluster of
cardiovascular risk factors than those with the highest VO₂ max scores. For
men below the median, the risk was even higher: they were eight times more
likely to have a cluster of cardiovascular risk factors than those with the
highest VO₂ max scores.
In addition, the researchers discovered that women whose VO₂ maxes were
below the median had a fivefold increase in cardiovascular risk factors over
the women who had the highest VO₂ max scores.
The study concluded, “Even if you were highly active at a young age, you
have to keep being active to get the health benefits from it.” Turns out one
of the best ways to do that is to perform at least one VO₂ max–boosting
workout every one to two weeks.
For this reason, I do a single VO₂ max session each week, using the
approach outlined in this chapter. While I don’t relish the experience of
exercising at maximum sustainable pace for four minutes (multiple times!), I
know it’s one of the best strategies for maximizing cardiovascular fitness
with age. Based on my experiences in bowhunting and wilderness survival, I
suspect that four minutes is a hardwired, ancestrally appropriate amount of
time to, say, charge four hundred meters up to the top of a hill to take a
good shot, or to run and hide from a predator spotted across a field. In the
--- END PAGE 485 ---

--- PAGE 486 ---
modern era, you can think of it this way: keep yourself in good enough
shape to boogie from an airplane to a nearby terminal before you miss your
next flight.
--- END PAGE 486 ---

--- PAGE 487 ---
5. Optimized Fat Burning, Metabolic
Efficiency, and Blood Sugar Control
Optimizing these aspects of your health means maximizing your body’s
ability to generate ketones and burn fatty acids for fuel while avoiding
frequent fluctuations in blood sugar.
Turning yourself into a fat-burning machine comes down to
implementing the following tactics:
• Perform a short aerobic workout as many mornings during the week as
possible, preferably in an overnight fasted state.
• Avoid frequent snacking.
• Save all your carbohydrates for the end of the day, and until then eat
high amounts of healthy fats with moderate amounts of protein.
• Stay physically active all day long—use a standing workstation and
take jumping jack or walking breaks.
--- END PAGE 487 ---

--- PAGE 488 ---
• Become more resilient by engaging in cold thermogenesis and sauna
therapy.
Start each day with ten to thirty minutes of light, fasted-state activity
(such as yoga, walking the dog, or doing yard work), take at least one cold
shower per day, visit the sauna at least once per week, consume only
nutrient-dense carbohydrates like sweet potatoes and dark, leafy greens,
and be as active as possible all day long. You can even control blood
glucose fluctuations with a simple fifteen-minute walk after the day’s main
meal. And, of course, go back and review chapter 8 if necessary.
6. Maximum Stamina
Stamina is the ability to move at low to moderate intensity for ninety
minutes or longer. Around the ninety-minute mark, your muscle and liver
glycogen stores run out, and your body has to burn fat for fuel.
Stamina isn’t necessary for looking good naked or living a long time,
but it’s nice to know that if you had to, you could hunt down an animal,
--- END PAGE 488 ---

--- PAGE 489 ---
ride your bicycle to a nearby city, hike over a mountain range, or survive a
zombie apocalypse—similar to how our ancestors were able to engage in
persistence hunting for many hours or days, often with limited food and
water. But contrary to popular belief among marathoners and triathletes,
building stamina does not require an intensive two-to-three-hour death
march every weekend. With adequate fuel, the human body is pretty
capable of moving for long periods of time at a moderate pace, even with
relatively low-frequency stamina-training forays.
To increase your stamina, once or twice per month, take on a challenge
such as a multi-hour backpacking trip, long bike ride, big hike, swim-bike-
run session, or anything else that combines endurance, mental focus, and
low-to-moderate-intensity physical activity. To amp up your fat-burning
capacity, try to do it in a fasted state or with minimal fuel on board, such
as ketones, amino acids, and electrolytes.
Unless you are signed up for something like an obstacle race, triathlon,
or marathon, stamina training is not entirely necessary. But if you want to
add the ability to go long—preferably with minimal fuel—to your cap, get
out and do something that takes a couple hours or more once or twice per
month. If you want to challenge yourself, you could even make that
session an actual competition, like a triathlon, half-marathon, obstacle
course race, or some other crazy fitness adventure, like rafting or rock
climbing. Meanwhile, the rest of your physical endurance will be built not
by regularly scheduled stamina training but simply by avoiding long
periods of sedentary time and engaging in low-intensity movement and
physical activity on as many days of the week as possible.
The Bottom Line
That’s it! Once you put all these tactics together, combining fitness,
longevity, and aesthetics is not too daunting. Your program to optimize
--- END PAGE 489 ---

--- PAGE 490 ---
your physique and lifespan should include something like the following:
• For VO₂, four to six intense four-minute intervals with full recoveries,
performed as one session every one to two weeks
• For muscular endurance, two or three quick four-minute Tabata sets
per week, such as before or after a workout
• For strength, one or two twelve-to-twenty-minute super-slow strength
sessions per week
• For power, one or two seven-to-fourteen-minute high-intensity
bodyweight workouts per week
• For mitochondria, a short series of sprint bursts one to three times per
week, such as five four-second all-out sprints broken up by twenty-
second rest periods (also can be done pre- or post-workout)
• For fat burning, some kind of a fasting protocol (check out chapter 19
for more information) and limited snacking, along with low-level
physical activity throughout the day
• For stamina, one multi-hour endurance session once or twice per
month
When you do the math, this program requires no more than sixty
minutes per day to look, feel, and perform amazingly with optimized
lifespan and health span.
THE LAST WORD
For our coaching clients at BenGreenfieldCoaching.com, we weave all
these tactics together in done-for-you programs that provide videos,
exercise instructions, and daily workout routines, along with all the
support, accountability, and Q&A you need—changing things up as the
--- END PAGE 490 ---

--- PAGE 491 ---
year progresses to eliminate boredom, avoid overtraining, keep injuries at
bay, and ensure good neuromuscular repair and recovery. But with the
right amount of dedication and advance planning, you can do much of this
yourself. Here’s what a sample week would look like, based on the bottom
line above (and there are plenty more examples and routines later in this
chapter and in chapter 21!):
Monday: Super-slow strength with Tabata finisher
Tuesday: Explosive bodyweight calisthenics and/or kettlebells
Wednesday: VO₂ max cardio workout
Thursday: Super-slow strength with Tabata finisher
Friday: Explosive bodyweight calisthenics and/or kettlebells
Saturday: Mitochondria sprint workout
Sunday: Fasted hike
Every day: 10,000+ steps achieved by moving as much as possible all
day long, taking phone calls while walking, taking the stairs instead of the
elevator, parking far away from stores and restaurants, etc.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
As you have discovered in this chapter, your body gets very fit very fast
with brief resistance-training sets close to failure combined with short, all-
out bursts of cardio and long, luxurious rest periods. So try this quick
routine the next time you’re at the gym wondering what to do and wanting
to experience what a true Boundless workout feels like.
Warm up on the cardio apparatus of your choice, such as a bike,
rowing machine, ski erg, elliptical, or treadmill, then turn up the intensity
--- END PAGE 491 ---

--- PAGE 492 ---
and go as hard as you possibly can for twenty seconds. Recover for ten
seconds by moving slowly. Then hit it again hard. Do this eight times
through. Cool down briefly, then move on to do one single, super-slow set
(taking about two minutes per set as you move as slowly as you can
through full range of motion) for chest press, pull-down or pull-up, squat
or leg press, shoulder press, and row. This entire routine will take less
than an hour and will give you a very good taste of a workout that
implements all the exercise science in this chapter.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/10.
Two Weeks of Time-Hacked Boundless
Training
WEEK 1
COLD THERMOGENESIS
Choose 5–7 days this week and complete the following 5-minute showering
protocol in a fasted state: 10 seconds of warm water followed by 20 seconds
of cold water, 10 times through.
In addition, choose 1–2 days and do 2–5 minutes of full-body cold-water
immersion 55°F or less.
DAY
1
--- END PAGE 492 ---

--- PAGE 493 ---
Foundation Training
Use the book True to Form: How to Use Foundation Training for Sustained
Pain Relief and Everyday Fitness by Dr. Eric Goodman. Go through each
of the 10 foundation exercises in the book just once (it will take you about
10–15 minutes) with a focus on good biomechanics and form.
Tabata Sets
Perform a 10-to-15-minute warm-up, then complete 8 rounds of 20
seconds of a single exercise (burpees, jumping jacks, mountain climbers,
kettlebell swings, squats, treadmill, cycling, rowing machine—you choose)
with 10 seconds of rest between rounds. Go at an all-out, maximum-
intensity pace each round. Cool down with nasal breathing and easy
aerobic movement for 5–10 minutes.
DAY
2
Workout 1: Morning Fasted Fat Burning
Before breakfast, perform 20–30 minutes of light cardio: yoga, fast
walking, cycling, elliptical, swimming, or hiking. The goal is to burn fat and
lean up. You can drink a cup of black coffee or tea beforehand, but don’t
consume any calories until you are done. If you can’t perform this cardio
in the morning, do it after dinner and don’t eat anything afterward.
Workout 2: Swim Hypoxic Sets (optional)
Perform a 4-to-8-lap warm-up. Then swim 10–12 rounds of 25 meters
each, preferably using freestyle stroke. During each round, keep breathing
to a minimum. Recover for 10 seconds, then repeat. Swim as smoothly as
you can—you don’t need to sprint. Experiment with changes in technique
and efficiency to conserve energy and oxygen.
Workout 3: The 7-Minute Workout
Perform each exercise with good form for 30 seconds with 10 seconds of
rest between exercises. One round takes about 7 minutes, but if time
allows, I recommend doing 2 or 3 rounds.
• Jumping jacks
• Wall sits
--- END PAGE 493 ---

--- PAGE 494 ---
• Push-ups
• Crunches
• Step-ups
• Squats
• Dips
• Planks
• Running in place with high knees
• Lunges
• Push-ups with rotation
• Side planks
DAY
3
Workout 1: Metabolic Mobility (The Ultimate Foam Roller Routine)
At each station, make 20–30 passes with the foam roller. Making one pass
means you go up the muscle group and back down.•

Station 1: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the Achilles tendon and calf
on your right leg.•

Station 2: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the Achilles tendon and calf
on your left leg.•

Station 3: Foam-roll your right hamstring. Perform 20 forward and
backward high leg swings with your right leg.•

Station 4: Foam-roll your left hamstring. Perform 20 forward and
backward high leg swings with your left leg.•

Station 5: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the outside of your right hip.•

Station 6: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the outside of your left hip.•

Station 7: Foam-roll the IT band on your right leg (located on the
outside of your thigh). Perform 20 side-to-side leg swings with your
right leg.•

Station 8: Foam-roll the IT band on your left leg. Perform 20 side-to-
side leg swings with your left leg.
--- END PAGE 494 ---

--- PAGE 495 ---
•

Station 9: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the adductors (on the inside
of your thigh) on your right leg.•

Station 10: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the adductors on your left
leg.•

Station 11: Perform 50 jumping jacks. Foam-roll your back from
bottom to top.•

Station 12: Perform 50 jumping jacks. Foam-roll your entire right
shoulder complex.•

Station 13: Perform 50 jumping jacks. Foam-roll your entire left
shoulder complex.•

Station 14: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll your neck (back, left side,
right side).• 
Station 15: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the front of both quads.
Workout 2: Tabata Sets
Perform a 10-to-15-minute warm-up, then complete 8 rounds of 20
seconds of a single exercise (burpees, jumping jacks, mountain climbers,
kettlebell swings, squats, treadmill running, cycling, rowing machine—you
choose) with 10 seconds of rest between rounds. Go at an all-out,
maximum-intensity pace each round. Cool down for 5–10 minutes.
DAY
4
Workout 1: Morning Fasted Fat Burning
Before breakfast, perform 20–30 minutes of light cardio: yoga, fast
walking, cycling, elliptical, swimming, or hiking. The goal is to burn fat and
lean up. You can drink a cup of black coffee or tea beforehand, but don’t
consume any calories until you are done. If you can’t perform this cardio
in the morning, do it after dinner and don’t eat anything afterward.
Workout 2: Super-Slow Routine
For this workout, view the video on BoundlessBook.com/10, which lays
out the exact routine.
--- END PAGE 495 ---

--- PAGE 496 ---
DAY
5
Workout 1: Tabata Sets
Perform a 10-to-15-minute warm-up, then complete 8 rounds of 20
seconds of a single exercise (burpees, jumping jacks, mountain climbers,
kettlebell swings, squats, treadmill, cycling, rowing machine—you choose)
with 10 seconds of rest between rounds. Go at an all-out, maximum-
intensity pace each round. Cool down with nasal breathing and easy
aerobic movement for 5–10 minutes.
Workout 2: Sauna
Spend 20–40 minutes (as long as you can tolerate) in a dry sauna. Focus
on deep breathing, box breathing (4 count in, 4 count hold, 4 count out,
4 count hold), occasional yoga moves, and stretches.
Drink water in moderation (as little as you can get away with). Finish with
a cold shower. It’s fine for your heart rate to get high during this session
and for it to feel a bit uncomfortable.
DAY
6
Workout 1: Morning Fasted Fat Burning
Before breakfast, perform 20–30 minutes of light cardio: yoga, fast
walking, cycling, elliptical, swimming, or hiking. The goal is to burn fat and
lean up. You can drink a cup of black coffee or tea beforehand, but don’t
consume any calories until you are done. If you can’t perform this cardio
in the morning, do it after dinner and don’t eat anything afterward.
Workout 2: Mitochondrial and Metabolic Sprints
Do an all-out, maximum-intensity sprint on a rowing machine, bike, or
elliptical (kettlebell swings, lunge jumps, or squat jumps can be used as a
substitute if necessary) for 4 rounds of 30 seconds with 4 minutes of
active rest between rounds. Active rest can be walking, easy jogging, or
easy cycling. Finish with five 4-second all-out sprints, with 20 seconds of
--- END PAGE 496 ---

--- PAGE 497 ---
rest between sprints. (For more on the science behind these two forms of
sprinting, visit BoundlessBook.com/10.)
DAY
7
Workout 1: Deep Breathing and Yoga
Engage in deep, nasal belly breathing during a morning yoga routine,
which, for this day, should ideally last 45–60 minutes. New to yoga or
mobility? Look for a beginner Hatha, slow flow, or restorative class in your
area. If you’re more experienced or want a challenge, try Ashtanga, hot
yoga, or power yoga. Or try my personal favorite: Man Flow Yoga by Dean
Pohlman, or any of the mobility programs from Elastaboy on Instagram
and YouTube. There are also many good, free yoga routines on platforms
like YouTube and Gaia TV. Try to do this routine outside, barefoot in the
sunshine if you can. Alternatively, do a 20-to-60-minute breathwork
session from an app such as Othership or The Breath Source.
Workout 2: Morning Fasted Fat Burning
Before breakfast, perform 20–30 minutes of light cardio: brisk walking,
cycling, the elliptical, swimming, hiking, or anything else you can perform
while maintaining an easy, conversational, aerobic pace. The goal is to
burn fat and lean up. You can drink a cup of black coffee or tea before
this, but don’t consume any calories until you are done. If you can’t
perform this cardio in the morning, do it after dinner and don’t eat
anything afterward.
Hot-Cold Contrast
Alternate between a 5-minute cold shower, cold soak, or easy cold-water
swim (the water must be 55 degrees Fahrenheit or less) and a 10-minute
dry sauna or wet sauna session. Cycle between these for as long as
possible, preferably for 30–45 minutes, which would allow you to perform
2 or 3 cycles.
--- END PAGE 497 ---

--- PAGE 498 ---
Two Weeks of Boundless-Style Training
WEEK 2
COLD THERMOGENESIS
Choose 5–7 days this week and complete the following 5-minute showering
protocol in a fasted state: 10 seconds of warm water followed by 20 seconds
of cold water, 10 times through.
In addition, choose 1 or 2 days and do 2–5 minutes of full-body cold-water
immersion 55°F or less.
DAY
1
Workout 1: Tabata Sets
Perform a 10-to-15-minute warm-up, then complete 8 rounds of 20
seconds of a single exercise (burpees, mountain climbers, kettlebell
swings, squats, jumping jacks, mountain climbers, kettlebell swings,
squats, treadmill, cycling, rowing machine—you choose) with 10 seconds
of rest between rounds. Go at an all-out, maximum-intensity pace each
round. Cool down with nasal breathing and easy aerobic movement for 5–
10 minutes.
Workout 2: Foundation Training
Go through each of the 10 Foundation exercises in the book True to Form
by Dr. Eric Goodman just once with a focus on good biomechanics and
form.
DAY
2
Workout 1: The 7-Minute Workout
--- END PAGE 498 ---

--- PAGE 499 ---
Perform each exercise with good form for 30 seconds with 10 seconds of
rest between exercises. If time permits, attempt to do 2 or 3 rounds.
• Jumping jacks
• Wall sits
• Push-ups
• Crunches
• Step-ups
• Squats
• Dips
• Planks
• Running in place with high knees
• Lunges
• Push-ups with rotation
• Side planks
Workout 2: Morning Fasted Fat Burning
Before breakfast, perform 20–30 minutes of light cardio: brisk walking,
cycling, the elliptical, swimming, hiking, or anything else you can perform
while maintaining an easy, conversational, aerobic pace. The goal is to
burn fat and lean up. You can drink a cup of black coffee or tea
beforehand, but don’t consume any calories until you are done. If you
can’t perform this cardio in the morning, do it after dinner and don’t eat
anything afterward.
Workout 3: Swim Hypoxic Sets (optional)
Perform a 4-to-8-lap warm-up. Then swim 10–12 rounds of 25 meters
each, preferably using freestyle stroke. During each round, keep breathing
to a minimum. Recover for 10 seconds, then repeat. Swim as smoothly as
you can—you don’t need to sprint. Experiment with changes in technique
and efficiency to conserve energy and oxygen.
DAY
3
Workout 1: Tabata Sets
--- END PAGE 499 ---

--- PAGE 500 ---
Perform a 10-to-15-minute warm-up, then complete 8 rounds of 20
seconds of a single exercise (burpees, jumping jacks, mountain climbers,
kettlebell swings, squats, treadmill, cycling, rowing machine—you choose)
with 10 seconds of rest between rounds. Go at an all-out, maximum-
intensity pace each round. Cool down with nasal breathing and easy
aerobic movement for 5–10 minutes.
Workout 2: Metabolic Mobility (The Ultimate Foam Roller Routine)
At each station, make 20–30 passes with the foam roller. Making one pass
means you go up the muscle group and back down.•

Station 1: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the Achilles tendon and calf
on your right leg.•

Station 2: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the Achilles tendon and calf
on your left leg.•

Station 3: Foam-roll your right hamstring. Perform 20 forward and
backward high leg swings with your right leg.•

Station 4: Foam-roll your left hamstring. Perform 20 forward and
backward high leg swings with your left leg.•

Station 5: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the outside of your right hip.•

Station 6: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the outside of your left hip.•

Station 7: Foam-roll the IT band on your right leg (located on the
outside of your thigh). Perform 20 side-to-side leg swings with your
right leg.•

Station 8: Foam-roll the IT band on your left leg. Perform 20 side-to-
side leg swings with your left leg.•

Station 9: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the adductors (on the inside
of your thigh) on your right leg.•

Station 10: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the adductors on your left
leg.•

Station 11: Perform 50 jumping jacks. Foam-roll your back from
bottom to top.•

Station 12: Perform 50 jumping jacks. Foam-roll your entire right
shoulder complex.•

Station 13: Perform 50 jumping jacks. Foam-roll your entire left
shoulder complex.
--- END PAGE 500 ---

--- PAGE 501 ---
•

Station 14: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll your neck (back, left side,
right side).• 
Station 15: Perform 10 burpees. Foam-roll the front of both quads.
DAY
4
Workout 1: Super-Slow Routine
For this workout, view the video on BoundlessBook.com/10, which lays
out the exact routine.
Workout 2: Morning Fasted Fat Burning
Before breakfast, perform 20–30 minutes of light cardio: brisk walking,
cycling, elliptical, swimming, hiking, or anything else you can perform
while maintaining an easy, conversational, aerobic pace. The goal is to
burn fat and lean up. You can drink a cup of black coffee or tea
beforehand, but don’t consume any calories until you are done. If you
can’t perform this cardio in the morning, do it after dinner and don’t eat
anything afterward.
DAY
5
Workout 1: Tabata Sets
Perform a 10-to-15-minute warm-up, then complete 8 rounds of 20
seconds of a single exercise (burpees, jumping jacks, mountain climbers,
kettlebell swings, squats, treadmill, cycling, rowing machine—you choose)
with 10 seconds of rest between rounds. Go at an all-out, maximum-
intensity pace each round. Cool down with nasal breathing and easy
aerobic movement for 5–10 minutes.
Workout 2: Sauna
Spend 20–40 minutes (as long as you can tolerate) in a dry sauna. Focus
on deep breathing, box breathing (4 count in, 4 count hold, 4 count out,
4 count hold), occasional yoga moves, and stretches.
--- END PAGE 501 ---

--- PAGE 502 ---
Drink water in moderation (as little as you can get away with). Finish with
a cold shower. It’s fine for your heart rate to get high during this session
and for it to feel a bit uncomfortable.
Workout 3: Foundation Training
Go through each of the 10 Foundation exercises in the book True to Form
by Dr. Eric Goodman just once with a focus on good biomechanics and
form.
DAY
6
Workout 1: 4-Minute HIIT with 4-Minute Rest Periods for VO2 Max
Complete 4–5 rounds of intense 4-minute intervals. Go at the maximum
pace you can maintain without compromising on form. Take a 4-minute
easy, aerobic, active rest period after each round. You can run, bike, swim,
use the elliptical, or row. You’ll find more information on the effectiveness
of this routine on BoundlessBook.com/10.
Workout 2: Morning Fasted Fat Burning
Before breakfast, perform 20–30 minutes of light cardio: brisk walking,
cycling, elliptical, swimming, hiking, or anything else you can perform
while maintaining an easy, conversational, aerobic pace. The goal is to
burn fat and lean up. You can drink a cup of black coffee or tea
beforehand, but don’t consume any calories until you are done. If you
can’t perform this cardio in the morning, do it after dinner and don’t eat
anything afterward.
DAY
7
Workout 1: Hot-Cold Contrast
Alternate between a 5-minute cold shower, cold soak, or easy cold-water
swim (the water must be 55 degrees Fahrenheit or less) and a 10-minute
dry sauna or wet sauna session. Cycle between these for as long as
--- END PAGE 502 ---

--- PAGE 503 ---
possible, preferably for 30–45 minutes, which would allow you to perform
2 or 3 cycles.
Workout 2: Morning Fasted Fat Burning
Before breakfast, perform 20–30 minutes of light cardio: brisk walking,
cycling, elliptical, swimming, hiking, or anything else you can perform
while maintaining an easy, conversational, aerobic pace. The goal is to
burn fat and lean up. You can drink a cup of black coffee or tea
beforehand, but don’t consume any calories until you are done. If you
can’t perform this cardio in the morning, do it after dinner and don’t eat
anything afterward.
Workout 3: Deep Breathing and Yoga
Engage in deep, nasal belly breathing during a morning yoga routine,
which, for this day, should ideally last 45–60 minutes. New to yoga or
mobility? Look for a beginner Hatha, slow flow, or restorative class in your
area. If you’re more experienced or want a challenge, try Ashtanga, hot
yoga, or power yoga. Or try my personal favorite: Man Flow Yoga by Dean
Pohlman, or any of the mobility programs from Elastaboy on Instagram
and YouTube. There are also many good, free yoga routines on platforms
like YouTube and Gaia TV. Try to do this routine outside, barefoot in the
sunshine if you can. Alternatively, do a 20-to-60-minute breathwork
session from an app such as Othership or The Breath Source.
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 503 ---

--- PAGE 504 ---
11
BIOHACK YOUR BODY
SCIENCE, GEAR, AND TOOLS FOR
BUILDING THE PERFECT HUMAN
--- END PAGE 504 ---

--- PAGE 505 ---
Standing at my basement office desk, I reached for my phone and texted my
friend David, who was upstairs at the kitchen table.
“Dude, come downstairs if you want to see my morning writing routine.”
Within a minute, David appeared at the open door to the office and
immediately stepped back in shock, nearly dropping the French press in
his hand.
“What on earth?”
I flashed a sheepish grin. I was bare-ass naked in front of my computer
keyboard, legs spread wide next to a giant panel of infrared light bulbs that
promised to stimulate growth hormone, collagen production, and (hence
the nakedness) testosterone and sperm cell production in the testes. A
long tube attached to a nasal cannula was blasting my respiratory system
with oxidized water for “DNA repair.” Perched atop my skull was
photobiomodulation headgear, designed to enhance blood flow to the
brain while reducing inflammation and growing neurons. Beneath my feet
was a balance-challenging mat patterned after the rice paddy fields in
Korea, and attached to both knees were two tiny electrodes to stimulate
my muscles as I worked in a standing position—keeping my legs light as a
feather and perhaps free of unsightly varicose veins in the future.
David, one of my clients and a guest at my home for the weekend,
raised an eyebrow. I continued to grin. “Nothing you haven’t seen before,
right, man?” In this case, I was likely wrong.
Admittedly, as a self-experimenting immersive journalist, guinea pig,
and supremely curious adventure seeker, I realize that my morning writing
routine may seem a bit elaborate. But when it comes to sculpting my mind
and body into an optimized human machine, I sometimes keep things
simple, such as skipping the biohacking machine and opting for a morning
walk in the sunshine, spending an afternoon playing pickleball instead of
using a vibration platform for squats and push-ups, and often swinging an
old, slightly rusty kettlebell instead of crawling into a hyperbaric chamber
--- END PAGE 505 ---

--- PAGE 506 ---
while wearing a weighted vest. This chapter will give you the ultimate
blend of ancestral wisdom and modern science to transform your body
into a tool that can accomplish any feat you desire.
The fact is, you can drop me just about anywhere on the face of the
planet and I’ll figure out a way to not just maintain muscle but also build
muscle, burn fat, and develop power, strength, stamina, and balance.
Sometimes the tools I use for these objectives are simple—such as a
full-body-workout lightweight travel kit of just three portable devices—
and sometimes the tools are more complex, fringe biohacks that fly under
the radar. But from the simple to the complex, every tactic I’ve discovered
to mold the body anytime, anyplace is described in this chapter, which will
serve as your ultimate guide to biohacking and building your body using
commonsense and easy-to-find tools along with underground and little-
known methods, each with plenty of my own highly practical tips from the
trenches.
Why We Hit the Gym
Exercise—at least the way most modern gym junkies think of it—is not a
prevailing characteristic of any of the Blue Zones of longevity, where people
live longer than anywhere else on earth. Despite the prevalence of lean,
muscular, strong, and fit populations in the Blue Zones, as well as in hunter-
gatherer tribes, many Indigenous populations, and our ancestors, there’s
little evidence that they enjoy CrossFit boxes, Planet Fitness clubs, fancy
health spas, or kettlebell classes.
In fact, the need to hit the gym is largely a fabrication of a postindustrial
society in which engines and computers do much of our manual labor for us,
and we humans are now expected to be at a desk or in a largely sedentary
environment for eight or more hours each day. The unfortunate
consequence is that the manual labor our bodies are designed to do no
longer needs to be done, and we don’t get the all-day movement our bodies
--- END PAGE 506 ---

--- PAGE 507 ---
crave—unless, that is, you’re lucky enough to have a career as a gardener,
construction worker, or lawn-mowing specialist.
To scratch our ancestral itch to move, it only makes sense that at the
beginning or end of the day, we’d have a deep-rooted desire to lace up our
running shoes or lift heavy stuff at the gym. Unless we’re going out of our
way to hack our environment with treadmill workstations, Pomodoro breaks
for movement, and brief exercise forays throughout the day, most of us
simply don’t experience the same natural nudge into movement that people
in the Blue Zones have as they collect water from springs, till the fields, walk
everywhere, weed the garden, push wheelbarrows, lift rocks, build fences,
hunt, and fish. Heck, I remember when I was a painter in college and was up
and down ladders the entire day, power-washing walls, hauling heavy paint
buckets, and brushing until my shoulders were sore. The last thing I felt like
doing at the end of the day was dumbbell curls in front of a mirror at some
gym.
So it’s only natural that unless you have a relatively physically active job,
you’re going to want to insert formal, planned exercise sessions into your
week. It’s also natural that in our relatively coddled, overprotected, safe lives,
you’ll experience an urge to climb a mountain or slay a dragon, whether
those mountains and dragons are marathons, triathlons, obstacle course
races, fitness competitions, sporting events, or some other physical
challenge. But don’t fool yourself into thinking that it’s necessary or natural
for optimal health to be working on your bench press or training for a
marathon, because it isn’t. In an ideal scenario, you’d be moving all day long
at a low intensity, lifting heavy things, sprinting occasionally, and perhaps
engaging in a longer stamina-challenging effort once every one to two
weeks, not crushing yourself at the gym for forty-five to sixty minutes a day
and then staying sedentary the rest of the time.
The gym-based exercise that was once the realm of gymnasts, warriors,
bodybuilders, and athletes has now trickled down to the general population.
It’s not what our bodies are meant for, but in a sedentary society, when it
comes to health outcomes, the pros outweigh the cons.
--- END PAGE 507 ---

--- PAGE 508 ---
The “Family Reunion with No Gym”
Workout
I recently packed up my wife and twin boys and embarked on our annual
family vacation to the tiny, sleepy coastal town of Seaside, Oregon. A
somewhat touristy town with far more arcades, candy stores, and ice cream
shops than gyms, Seaside wouldn’t be my ideal choice for an active, healthy
hot spot. But vacationing in Seaside is a long-standing tradition in my wife’s
family, so I joined in.
As I tend to do for road trips, into the back of the car I threw my kettlebell,
my suspension trainer, an elastic band, and a couple of light sliders (tiny
plastic plates the size of dinner plates that can be used for a host of
different exercises). With no access to a gym or any other workout
equipment, but armed with these five simple and easy-to-transport tools
and a few basic exercises for each tool, every day I was able to perform a
variety of exercises, including the following (you can view any of these
exercises at YouTube.com/BenGreenfieldFitness or ExRx.net):
KETTLEBELL•

Swings
• Around the world
• Single-arm clean to overhead press
• Goblet squat
• Bent row
SLIDERS•

Mountain climbers
• Lateral slides
• Pikes
• Bridges
• Crocodile walks
BODY WEIGHT
--- END PAGE 508 ---

--- PAGE 509 ---
• Burpees
• Jumping jacks
• Skipping in place
• Sit to stand
• Plank to push-up
SUSPENSION STRAP•

Pull-ups
• Suspended push-ups with knee-to-chest
• Left and right leg suspended lunges
• Plank rotations
ELASTIC BAND•

Front raises
• Side raises
• Lateral shuffles
• Squat to press
• Kickouts
--- END PAGE 509 ---

--- PAGE 510 ---
As you can imagine, when completed with little to no rest between sets, this
workout simulates what I’d get at a highfalutin health club—all performed in
the backyard of a beach house.
THE BASICS
Let’s begin with the simple and easy-to-use tools that are indispensable to
have in your suitcase, car, home office, park, basement, backyard, or
anywhere else a “pop-up gym” or minimalist exercise approach is
required, including the best choices, workouts, and how-tos.
Kettlebell
One of the best ways to achieve a minimum effective dose of exercise is to
toss around a kettlebell. As a matter of fact, a study that appeared in the
--- END PAGE 510 ---

--- PAGE 511 ---
Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research showed that the acute
hormonal response to the kettlebell swing exercise (one of the most
popular and easy-to-learn kettlebell moves) consisted of an extremely
significant rise in growth hormone and testosterone.
A kettlebell is a cast-iron weight that looks like a cannonball with a
handle. Originally a tool used by Russian strongmen for training and
competition, multicolored, vinyl-coated kettlebells are now a popular
fitness device that you can find at many gyms. Kettlebells range from 4
pounds to 175 pounds, but because a kettlebell is shaped differently than a
dumbbell, a 4-pound kettlebell can actually feel a bit heavy or awkward.
This is because the kettlebell’s center of mass is extended farther out from
your body, so it can be tougher to handle and maneuver—which is one
reason why kettlebells can be so effective for improving strength, balance,
and explosiveness. In most situations, kettlebells are used for increasing
grip strength or performing movements that are designed to build
strength and endurance in the lower back, legs, and shoulders. These
movements include full-body exercises like the swing, snatch, and clean
and jerk.
I own nearly a dozen kettlebells, littered across my garage, office, and
home gym, and nearly every explosive or calisthenic-style workout I
perform involves at least one kettlebell move. Should you want to take
your kettlebell skills to the next level, I highly recommend any of the RKC
or Strongfirst courses. I’ve done both and appreciate the confidence and
knowledge skill set they provide around the often-intimidating kettlebell.
Jump Rope
While many fitness enthusiasts prefer a speed-rope-style jump rope, I’m a
bigger fan of a weighted jump rope because it does a better job of
strengthening the grip and shoulders. When space is limited, you don’t
--- END PAGE 511 ---

--- PAGE 512 ---
have access to a treadmill or good running terrain, or you’re doing quick
intervals that make it inconvenient to step outside to run or fire up a
treadmill, a jump rope is a perfect option. Sure, you could run in place, but
the coordination requirements of a jump rope offer a better challenge for
your brain. In addition, if you have any type of injury that leaves you
unable to load one side unilaterally, as you would when running or
jumping rope with alternate legs, jumping rope with both legs is often
pain-free and can still train your knees, ankles, and lower-leg tendons for
the eccentric motion of running.
For an added challenge, you can purchase a short “battle rope,” tie an
elastic band around your ankles, and do jump rope intervals. This is a well-
known obstacle challenge in most Spartan stadium races. Incidentally,
Muay Thai fighters, some of the best-conditioned athletes in the world,
make jumping rope a major part of their training because it combines a
full-body workout and endurance training.
Weighted Backpack
On most hunting and hiking retail websites, you can find rugged
backpacks designed for packing meat from large animals out of the
mountains or designed for many miles of hard-core rucking with heavy
weight. These same packs can be filled with sandbags, kettlebells, or rocks
and used for hiking, uphill treadmill walks, or long rucks through the
neighborhood. When my boys were young, long before GORUCK began
hosting global ruck-racing competitions, I’d take my sons on hikes or walk
them to the bus stop with my “handicap” being 80 to 100 pounds stuffed
into my Kifaru Timberline backpack, which sports a biomechanically
friendly carbon frame and holds 7,800 cubic inches, or an approximate elk.
I discovered the muscle, cardio, and grit-training benefits of rucking when
I was training for the SEALFit Kokoro, and I still use it as a strategy to amp
--- END PAGE 512 ---

--- PAGE 513 ---
up the intensity of my walks. The GORUCK website has plenty of ruck-
supporting gear. Finally, for his hunt training, Joe Rogan uses and
recommends the Atlas Trainer, which is a special type of weighted
backpack with an attachment option for a standard weight plate.
Weighted Vest
A weighted vest is simply a vest that is either made from a heavy material
or equipped with small pockets that can be filled with tiny sandbags, small
steel bars, or other weighted objects (these usually accompany your vest
order). The purpose of a weighted vest is to add extra weight for
bodyweight exercises, walking, distance running, or speed, power, and
agility drills. When it comes to performance, research has shown that
using this type of extra load during sprinting or speedwork requires your
lower-body muscles to generate more force against the ground and can
lead to improvements in strength, power, and acceleration during running,
as well as increased strength and efficiency during speed, power, and
agility drills.
It’s simple to turn a bodyweight workout into a difficult routine by
simply putting on a weighted vest. For example, here’s a treadmill routine
that I do while wearing my weighted vest:
• Two-minute treadmill run (bicycling in a standing position is another
option)
• Twenty weighted vest push-ups
• Twenty weighted vest squats
• Twenty weighted vest get-ups (simply lie on your back on the ground,
then do a sit-up motion and stand up to your feet)
• Twenty weighted vest reverse lunges
--- END PAGE 513 ---

--- PAGE 514 ---
Repeat these five stations as a circuit four to six times through.
Because you’ll be running, this routine works best with a 10-to-20-pound
vest. For an even more advanced version, throw in a round of pull-ups,
too.
You can also wear a weighted vest during hikes, walks around the
neighborhood, at the park, or when doing stair repeats in a stadium or at a
hotel. The sky’s the limit—I’ve even worn my vest through airport security
and walked around airports with it on! The useful part about a weighted
vest is that no matter where or how you move, it’s going to make any
aspect of getting from point A to point B just a little bit more difficult. You
can add an intense twist to just about any weight-training routine by
putting on a weighted vest.
For example, you can try a “5x5” routine while wearing a vest. This
routine—five sets of five deadlifts, squats, bench presses, barbell rows, and
barbell cleans—gets seriously amplified when it’s performed while
wearing a weighted vest. The main thing you’ll notice is that your core,
low back, and inspiratory and expiratory muscles are forced to work far
harder, which gives you an added calorie burn and challenges your small
postural and core muscles.
Medicine Ball
The medicine ball is a simple and versatile way to weave powerful,
explosive exercises into your routine—and as you learned in chapter 9,
these exercises are essential for slowing aging and gaining compact
muscle. Take the example of a medicine ball cannonball toss, in which you
drop into a deep squat position with both hands wrapped around the ball,
then explode up and toss the ball as high into the air as possible. If you are
focused on the height the ball reaches (if you are trying to hit the ceiling),
you are suddenly forced into producing maximum acceleration, full-body
--- END PAGE 514 ---

--- PAGE 515 ---
extension, and power, with no risk of injury from the eccentric lowering of
the weight. The same can be said for some of my other favorite medicine
ball exercises, including side tosses, overhead throws, slams, and the
classic power squat-to-press move: the medicine ball thruster.
If you add 10-, 20-, 30-, and 40-pound medicine balls to your fitness
arsenal, the range of power-development, coordination, and functional
fitness exercises you can perform is nearly limitless, and if you’re training
for any type of sport, the addition of medicine ball exercises to your
routine is a no-brainer. I’m a fan of the durable, vintage leather medicine
balls made by companies such as Champion Sports and Rogue Fitness. For
added difficulty and explosive training potential, try the Suples ball
(picture a medicine ball attached to ropes).
Stability Ball
Also known as a Swiss ball, the giant exercise stability ball seems to have
been bastardized of late as a “core-activating chair” for use at a desk. I
don’t recommend this. Hunched-forward shoulders and a collapsed spine
notoriously accompany the use of a ball for a seated position, and you
must be hyper-aware of your posture if you are sitting on a stability ball.
But a stability ball does have a host of beneficial uses. Functional
movement guru Paul Chek is a huge fan, and when he began showing up at
Gold’s Gym in San Diego, bodybuilders would stand around and make
jokes about how ridiculous he looked while using it. But they were
impressed when Paul began performing deep squats on the ball, crunches
on the ball with 180-pound dumbbells, and chest-presses on the ball with
110-pound dumbbells ( just Google “Paul Chek Swiss ball” to see what I
mean).
There are a few reasons the stability ball is a beneficial addition to your
exercise gear. When properly inflated, it provides a firm but wobbly
--- END PAGE 515 ---

--- PAGE 516 ---
surface that requires you to react quickly to every tiny movement of the
ball caused by a change in your center of gravity. This activates your core
and planted leg or arm muscles as stabilizers. At the same time, your
body’s proprioceptive mechanisms, such as joint mechanoreceptors,
spindle cells, your inner ear, and your ocular proprioception, must all stay
active, which can improve your sensory perception and spatial awareness.
Because of its shape, the ball is also excellent as a stretching tool for the
abdominals and spine.
So what do you do if you’re not going to sit on the ball while hunched
over a keyboard? For starters, try the supine lateral ball roll, an exercise
that develops the spinal stabilizers, foot and ankle complex, hip, pelvis,
shoulder girdle, and neck. This is what Paul Chek calls a “Big Bang
exercise” because it conditions the body in all planes of motion at once
and activates all the weak muscles responsible for stabilizing all body
segments involved with the exercise. (For a video demonstration, visit
BoundlessBook.com/11.)
Resisted Breathing Devices
Pick up a straw. Breathe in and out through the straw. That’s resisted
breathing. Consider it weight training for your lungs. Resisted breathing
enhances your endurance by strengthening your inspiratory and
expiratory muscles, which increases your ventilatory capacity (lung size).
For example, although they are often scoffed at as a marketing
gimmick that makes you look like the villain Bane from Batman, training
masks (originally called “elevation training masks”) actually do work to
increase fitness by acting as a resistance breath-training device—just not
the way most people think. These masks do not simulate altitude, nor do
they change the atmospheric pressure you’re training in. You need a far
more expensive oxygen-scrubbing device designed for intermittent
--- END PAGE 516 ---

--- PAGE 517 ---
hypoxic training (IHT) or exercise with oxygen therapy (EWOT) in order
to truly simulate altitude or increase or decrease the partial pressure of
the oxygen in the air you’re breathing. So, when you’re charging down the
treadmill sporting your scary-looking altitude-training mask, you’re still
breathing air that is approximately 21 percent oxygen, with the same
partial oxygen pressure of whatever altitude you happen to be at.
But these masks do make it harder to breathe, and high amounts of
carbon dioxide build up in the air that collects in the space directly in
front of your mouth, which may increase your carbon dioxide tolerance to
the extent that it kicks in an anti-anxiety effect later when you’ve taken
the mask off. Training masks have been studied with respect to their effect
on respiratory compensation threshold (RCT). RCT is the boundary
between high-intensity activity and much higher-intensity exertion, when
you begin to breathe hard and lactic acid begins to accumulate. Under
normal conditions, your body’s drive to breathe is based on carbon dioxide
levels in the blood. But when RCT is reached, a significant portion of the
drive to breathe is based on accumulating lactic acid levels. This results in
heavier respiration, inspiratory and expiratory muscle fatigue, and an
overall inability to sustain high-intensity exercise. In studies, training
masks act by increasing RCT, which helps you develop the ability to
sustain high-intensity exercise for a longer period.
One of my preferred ways to use a training mask is to simulate the
high-oxygen to low-oxygen environment you’d experience with a spendier
EWOT device. I warm up on a bicycle or treadmill with the mask hung
around my neck, then pull it over my face and sprint for thirty to sixty
seconds, then lower the mask again and recover for thirty to sixty seconds,
for ten rounds total. On BoundlessBook.com/11, you can find plenty more
protocols, including some good diaphragmatic training sessions that you
can do while simply resting on your back in a sauna or your living room,
along with a discount code for the mask.
--- END PAGE 517 ---

--- PAGE 518 ---
Then there are handheld devices, like the PowerLung. Similar to a
training mask, the PowerLung is a small resistance-training device for the
lungs. You may wonder why you wouldn’t just save some money and
breathe through a straw to create this effect. It comes down to the concept
of threshold resistance: when you breathe in and out through a
PowerLung, you are working against a threshold of resistance that is the
same for every breath. You are not breathing through a restricted orifice
where the load can be reduced just by changing the way you breathe. The
PowerLung has two control dials, one to train your inhale breathing and
the other to train your exhale breathing. Both are adjustable to set your
level (threshold) of resistance, exactly the way you add weight for strength
training. A sample training session you can do with the PowerLung is to
simply inhale and exhale through it (that’s one repetition) for a count of
ten seconds, then recover for thirty seconds to one minute, and repeat for
ten rounds.
A portable device like the Relaxator can be easier to use hands-free
than a PowerLung while on, say, a walk. The Relaxator is a small, no-frills
device that you hang around your neck like a necklace. You then place the
mouthpiece in your mouth, and when you exhale, you experience an
adjustable level of resistance to mouth-based exhalation while being able
to breathe through your nose as you normally would. This helps you
maintain elevated levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide simultaneously, a
health strategy explored in chapter 3.
In addition to making your breathing more rhythmic, slow, and
relaxed, the Relaxator stimulates your diaphragm to work more efficiently,
thereby ensuring that the air you inhale reaches the lower part of your
lungs. Because you’re forced to have a lower respiratory rate while using it,
it also activates the parasympathetic nervous system, which comes in
handy if you decide to use it while, say, checking messages or stuck in
traffic. You can also use it as a subtle way to train your breath while
--- END PAGE 518 ---

--- PAGE 519 ---
cooking, mowing the lawn, cleaning the garage, or doing any other activity.
For more on resisted-breathing devices, check out here to here.
Handgrip Trainer
Grip strength is highly correlated with both full-body strength and,
surprisingly, longevity. I recommend you add a high-quality handgrip
trainer, such as the aircraft-grade aluminum Captains of Crush device, to
your briefcase, book bag, or glove compartment. Between a Captains of
Crush and a PowerLung or Relaxator stowed in my car or bag, I can train
my grip and my lungs during any road trip or flight. My preferred training
method with the Captains of Crush is to squeeze ten times as hard as
possible, then hold the last squeeze for as long as possible before
switching hands, and to repeat for three rounds. Subjectively, it seems to
have a good stress-relieving effect, which makes sense because one
clinically approved treatment for high blood pressure is the Zona, which is
a digital device that delivers brief daily workouts to strengthen your grip,
specifically designed to reduce blood pressure.
Neuro-Grips
Jon Bruney, author of the training book Neuro-Mass, is known for creating
body-blitzing workouts with special combinations of super-slow grinds,
isometric holds, and explosive repetitions, in that order. Jon calls these
“Neuro-Sets.” When performed with proper intensity and in the correct
sequence, Neuro-Sets can put your system into neural overdrive and
effectively cause your strength to explode. A sample of a Neuro-Set for the
upper body would be a set of super-slow push-ups, a push-up hold at the
bottom of the push-up for as long as possible, and then a final set of
explosive push-ups to failure.
--- END PAGE 519 ---

--- PAGE 520 ---
When Jon was seeking a way to intensify exercises like the push-up, he
found a suitably primitive device that was up to the task: a nail welded to a
piece of pipe. Attempting to stabilize the core while performing a push-up
with this T-shaped tool proved incredibly challenging. He eventually
turned this crude device into a durable, heavy industrial steel set of what
he named Neuro-Grips and published a training manual to accompany the
invention. Normally, I can bang out over sixty push-ups without much
trouble, but with Neuro-Grips I struggle to perform anything close to
twenty reps and can develop a viselike grip in the process. The portability
is a nice feature, too.
Elastic Bands
In chapter 9, I talked about using elastic bands as my portable gym when I
was a bodybuilder on a cycling trip in Italy. Although I’ve since upgraded
to a fancier band system called the X3 bar (which you’ll learn more about
later in this chapter), I still often travel with elastic bands for on-the-go
workouts, and they’re a good budget-friendly alternative to a fancier
system. Problem is, most folks do single-joint movements such as arm
--- END PAGE 520 ---

--- PAGE 521 ---
curls and side raises with the bands. Instead, I recommend full-body
moves such as these:
• Squat to overhead press
• Side shuffles
• Banded push-ups
• Torso twists
• Rows
You can easily do those five exercises as a circuit—you’ll find video
demos at BoundlessBook.com/11.
Suspension Strap
When a pull-up bar is nowhere to be found, there’s nothing like a
suspension strap to create a pulling and grip-strengthening station
anywhere you can find a crossbar or door or even a tree branch or
swingset. It’s also a simple, portable method for balance training, lunges,
push-ups, and a nearly unlimited number of challenging exercises. You’ll
usually find this strap, some elastic bands, and a Kaatsu or BFR device in
the giant 60L backpack I travel with (I usually squeeze my luggage into the
overhead compartment on the plane and check zero gear, so for travel it’s
nice to have a full gym that weighs just two to three pounds). I prefer a
relatively minimalist suspension strap without all the fancy elastic and
pulleys built into the newer models; Amazon has a host of cheap, generic
models.
Slider Plates
--- END PAGE 521 ---

--- PAGE 522 ---
Slider plates are yet another travel-friendly option. If you’ve ever noticed
those small discs in the stretching area at the gym and wondered what the
heck they are, you’re not alone. I discovered these no-frills training tools
when celebrity trainer Valerie Waters introduced me to her Valslides
version at a fitness conference in the early 2000s. The concept is simple:
you place both feet or both hands on the sliders and slide them around in
varying directions. They give you the same kind of core workout you’d
experience if you wore socks on your feet and put paper plates under your
hands on a wooden floor. Here are a few of the best moves:•

Knee tuck: Start in high plank position with both feet on sliders. Pull
your knees in to touch your chest. Focus on keeping your core tight,
and don’t hike your hips up too high. Push your feet back to extend
into a high plank. Repeat.•

Mountain climber: Start in high plank position with both feet on
sliders. Slide your right knee forward to your chest. Push your knee
back to return to high plank. Repeat with your left knee.•

Skater: Stand with both feet on sliders. Slide your left foot behind
your right as far as possible while bending your right leg and touching
the fingertips of your right hand to the floor. Pull your left foot back as
you return to standing position. Repeat on the other side.•

Reaching reverse lunge: Start in a seated position with your knees
bent, palms on the ground with fingertips pointing forward, and both
feet on sliders. Lift your hips until your knees are at a ninety-degree
angle, your arms are straight, and your hips are level, like a tabletop.
From there, flex your right ankle so that only your right heel rests on
the slider. Send your right foot forward, engaging your glutes and
hamstrings, then pull back to tabletop. Lower your right foot and flex
your left ankle, then send your left foot forward and pull back to
tabletop. Repeat.
--- END PAGE 522 ---

--- PAGE 523 ---
• Alligator walks: Get into a push-up position with a slider under each
foot. Walk your hands across the room while keeping your stomach
and back tight. For an added challenge, to further strengthen your
core, you can do this move with a 25-, 35-, or 45-pound weight plate
tucked under your toes.
The slider models I like are the original Valslides, the SKLZ Slidez, and
Gliding Discs, though there are tons of brands on Amazon. Even thick
paper plates will do the trick if you’re cheap.
Rings
One of my fittest times of life was when I was a spin instructor,
bodybuilder, and water polo player in college. Another time that comes to
mind is when I interviewed Olympic gymnast Stephen McCain, who
proceeded to design me a six-month gymnastics training program that
included ring work, calisthenics, handstands, pikes, and a host of other
surprisingly difficult moves with a potent result of strength, body
awareness, and balance. Though I don’t do gymnastics training much
anymore, there are sets of gymnastics rings hanging above our family’s
backyard patio, in the gym, and even above the cold pool (there’s nothing
quite like a set of ring muscle-ups followed by a drop into ice-cold water).
The unique nature of gymnastic rings and the exercises that can be
performed with them provide benefits far beyond those of a pull-up bar.
The primary benefit of rings, in addition to their low space
requirement and portability, is their inherent instability. Because they
independently swing from long straps, the rings move at the slightest
touch, forcing you to concentrate every second that you are holding them
to keep from swaying and resulting in the significant use of core and
stabilizing muscles. Moving your body around rings in a variety of
positions requires a surprising amount of upper-body strength and
--- END PAGE 523 ---

--- PAGE 524 ---
control. Just take a look at the average gymnast’s rippling shoulders and
biceps to see what I mean.
I recommend wooden rings. Plastic and metal rings are far more
slippery and more difficult to grip properly. The added expense of wood is
worth it if you plan on training with the rings for a long time. Both Onnit
and Rogue have good models. To get started, simply secure the straps over
a bar, through mounted hooks, or from playground monkey bars, and
you’re set. Once you have your rings, head to the website gmb.io for some
excellent ring-training instructions and a host of gymnastics and
functional bodyweight ring exercises.
Hex Bar
Deadlifts and squats are two of the best movements to utilize in a workout
routine, primarily because of the significant amount of functional
athleticism they produce. They also generate a significant hormonal and
neuromuscular response, especially compared to single-joint exercises
such as a biceps curl or triceps extension, and even compared to
multijoint exercises such as an overhead press, bench press, or lunge.
However, both conventional squats and deadlifts performed with a
standard barbell are associated with increased risk of back and knee
injuries. Enter the hex bar.
A hex bar is a modified barbell with an open center that allows you to
stand in the middle of the bar while holding a handle on each side of the
bar. It allows people with back pain or limited range of motion to get all
the benefits of a deadlift or squat in a far safer manner, with the added
bonus of significant quad activation for stronger legs. Research has even
shown that a hex bar deadlift is not only safer than a standard barbell
deadlift, but even more effective at building maximum power! I can lift far
more weight with far less risk with my hex bar than with a barbell, and for
--- END PAGE 524 ---

--- PAGE 525 ---
anyone who wants to maintain or build strength, especially with age, I
consider this apparatus to be a crucial addition to a home or garage gym
setup.
Blood Flow Restriction (BFR) Bands
In chapter 9, I filled you in on the concept of blood flow restriction (BFR)
training, which stimulates muscle hypertrophy under low loads or body
weight via an accumulation of metabolites in muscle tissue and increased
mechanical tension, with supplemental benefits to cardiovascular fitness
and pain management.
Although I have one of the expensive digitally controlled Kaatsu
devices for BFR training, which uses a sensor-monitored pneumatic air
band that allows you to set a precise pressure, I often (for the mere fact
that I’m lazy and like to save myself a couple minutes setting the screen
parameters) opt for a cheapo pair of BFR bands for the arms and legs,
since a host of inexpensive options can be found on Amazon and
elsewhere. Technically, non-Kaatsu BFR options are based on the principle
of occluding (cutting off temporarily) the arterial flow from the torso to
the limbs, a bit like a tourniquet. In contrast, Kaatsu bands use narrow
elastic tubes that enable the arterial blood flow to continue and slightly
and safely reduce the venous blood flow from the limb back to the torso.
Both Kaatsu devices and BFR bands can be combined with most of the
training tools in this chapter and are particularly effective when used with
suspension straps, kettlebells, any form of isometric training, and all the
cardio machines, such as the rower and Assault AirBike ( just try a Tabata
set with BFR straps on your arms and legs!), or even to increase the
difficulty and cardiovascular demand of an aerobic walk or swim.
--- END PAGE 525 ---

--- PAGE 526 ---
Underwater Audio Player
If you’re anything like me, you sometimes get a bit bored during a five-
minute cold shower, an hour-long paddleboard session, or a lap-swimming
workout at the pool—or at least feel as though the experience could be
enhanced with a good podcast, audiobook, or music set. Problem is, if you
carry your phone in a waterproof case, you (1) run a pretty high risk of
losing or damaging your phone and (2) are distracted or tempted by the
fact that your phone is there should you want to check Facebook or shoot
off a quick text message as you rest between swim repeats or wait on your
surfboard for the next set. Enter underwater audio players, most of which
function by vibrating the bones near your ears with surprisingly high-
quality sound. H2O Audio and Shokz are a couple good brands.
THE UPGRADES
Let’s move on to more complex or less well-known pieces of exercise
equipment that can be added to those previously listed to create the
ultimate studio or home gym for molding your body. Admittedly, these are
slightly spendier upgrades, but they will allow you to get even more out of
your training. In a world of “as-seen-on-TV” contraptions, these are the
solutions that—of the hundreds I have tried over decades—will give you
the best bang for your buck during your workout.
Keg
In his book The Encyclopedia of Underground Strength and Conditioning, my
friend and strength-training coach Zach Even-Esh includes workouts that
feature keg carries, lifts, tosses, and all manner of exercises using an
apparatus you’re probably more accustomed to drinking beer from. Most
--- END PAGE 526 ---

--- PAGE 527 ---
breweries, bars, and pubs will cut you a fantastic deal on an empty keg or
give you one for free. Simply fill it one-quarter to three-quarters full of
water and prepare for one of the best core and full-body workouts you’ll
ever experience. Another book, The History of Physical Fitness by James
Pieratt, presents many fun old-timey strength workouts borrowed from
tactics used by the ancient Chinese, the Spartans, the Inuit, the Aztecs,
and others. If you dig the idea of using kegs, tires, sandbags, gymnastics,
and the like, it’s a good book to add to your library.
Tire
In his book, Zach also teaches tire flips, sledgehammer slams against a tire,
tire sled drags, and other brutal workouts that pair perfectly with a keg
and sandbag (see the next page) for the ultimate garage or backyard
workout. If you pull a pickup truck around to the back of most tire stores,
they’ll hook you up with an old, worn tractor tire for free (I recommend
calling first to see if they have any available). I own one large tractor tire, a
couple of medium-size tires, and a few smaller ones for my kids and wife.
We flip ’em, drag ’em, and push ’em all around the Greenfield driveway.
Sandbag
I made my sandbag in about thirty minutes by purchasing a couple of
military duffel bags on Amazon, putting pea gravel in plastic contractor
bags, and putting the gravel-filled plastic bags into the duffel bags. (You’ll
find detailed DIY sandbag instructions on BoundlessBook.com/11, but it’s
easier to just buy a sandbag from a website such as Rogue Fitness and then
fill it with sand or small gravel rocks when it arrives.) In addition to my
homemade version, I own two types of sandbags: one with handles that’s
designed for the same types of exercises you’d do with a barbell, such as
--- END PAGE 527 ---

--- PAGE 528 ---
cleans or clean and jerks, and a pancake-style sandbag similar to what
you’d find in an obstacle course race, which works for exercises such as
deadlifts, farmer’s walks, throws and tosses, sit-ups, and slams.
Yoga Trapeze
Everyone who comes to my house raises a curious eyebrow when they
walk in the front door to see, hanging beside the dining room table from
the upstairs railing, a bright-purple parachute-like device: a yoga trapeze.
Those brave enough to attempt hanging from or playing with this device
immediately want to own one. The trapeze operates on the concepts of
traction and inversion.
Traction refers to any treatment or technique that pulls or lengthens
joints. Take the spine, for example. A healthy spine has full, firm, and
resilient disk tissues that allow for complete range of motion. But after
sitting all day in an office or car or after exercising and rotating the spine
—combined with years of bad posture, improper footwear, and poorly
designed chairs—these disks can bulge, herniate, thin, and become
compressed. Your lumbar spine is particularly susceptible; the L4 and L5
vertebrae at the lower back are commonly affected trouble areas that can
cause radiated pain along the entire spine, as low down as the sacroiliac
joint and as high up as the cervical spine and neck.
Inverted positions, such as those assumed in yoga or while hanging
upside down from gravity boots or an inversion table, not only provide
this traction but also alter the flow of blood and cerebrospinal fluid and
can increase capillarization to the brain. Inversion is a fantastic recovery
technique too, especially for runners and cyclists.
A yoga trapeze allows for simultaneous inversion and traction and is
made from the same material as a parachute. The seams are quad-stitched
and rock-solid, the hooks are pure steel, and there’s no chance that
--- END PAGE 528 ---

--- PAGE 529 ---
anything is going to break while you hang upside down (unless you happen
to weigh over 600 pounds). You can hang a trapeze in a doorway or
outside from a beam, bar, or swingset. It is easy to learn how to use, and I
hang from mine every day for two to five minutes, usually during a quick
break from work to drain my legs after standing at my desk for a long time.
It also works well after a long road trip or period of airline travel.
Inversion Table
Chapter 12 will teach what you need to know about inversion tables—long,
flat tables that can rotate backward to put your entire body in an upside-
down position. Though I’m a bigger fan of a yoga trapeze, an inversion
table can be easier to use, especially for anyone who can’t hoist their body
into a trapeze (or strap on a pair of gravity boots). Teeter makes good
inversion tables that include special plugs that allow you to do trigger-
point therapy on your low back while hanging. If you find hanging too
difficult or experience pain with the traction, look into a yoga headstand
bench; I keep one in my office for occasional upside-down breaks.
Inversion is said to help grow your hair an extra inch or two per month,
but there’s no scientific evidence behind that claim. A research-based
claim is that inversion can help with issues like incontinence and prolapse
with age due to the gravitational pull of the pelvic organs upward. This
inversion strategy, kegels, reverse kegels, breathwork, meditation, and
even toilet yoga (yes, toilet yoga!) can all help with these pesky pelvic
problems that many deal with and even assist with orgasm strength and
sexual function. For more, I recommend the books The Empowered Flower
and Toilet Yoga.
Rebounder
--- END PAGE 529 ---

--- PAGE 530 ---
A recent study conducted by the American Council on Exercise (ACE)
showed that, when it comes to heart rate and oxygen expenditure,
bouncing on a mini trampoline for less than twenty minutes a day is just
as beneficial as running, and participants reported that it made them feel
better and was a lot more fun than running. The G-forces you experience
while bouncing up and down far outweigh what you experience during
activities such as running, walking, and lifting, which is why this technique
can be so great for lymph circulation (especially if you do Perry
Nickelston’s “Big 6” lymph drainage moves while bouncing—I’ll link to an
instructional video on the resources page at BoundlessBook.com/11).
In the study, researchers gave a group of twenty-four participants a
mini-trampoline workout in the form of a nineteen-minute exercise video
(available online at BenGreenfieldFitness.com/JumpSportWorkout). They
then measured the jumpers’ heart rates and oxygen expenditure at every
minute.
They found that trampolining is a “moderate-to-vigorous intensity”
exercise that produces the same physiological benefits as running at six
miles per hour, cycling, or playing football, basketball, or Ultimate Frisbee.
But when the participants were asked to rate how they felt during the
trampoline workout, they reported that the workout felt far easier than it
should have based on their cardiovascular response and calorie burn.
This isn’t groundbreaking news. Trampoline-based exercise, also
known as rebounding, has a colorful history as both a recreational sport
and an exercise modality. For example, during World War II, trampolines
were used to help increase pilots’ spatial awareness and balance abilities.
NASA has studied trampoline training for astronauts and found it to be
just as effective as running, with no significant differences in maximal
heart rate, maximal oxygen uptake, or energy expenditure.
For these reasons, I’m a fan of having a mini trampoline tucked away
somewhere in the home or office. You’ll find that when you feel like doing
--- END PAGE 530 ---

--- PAGE 531 ---
absolutely nothing, and definitely don’t feel like exercising, just two
minutes of jumping on a trampoline can give you a burst of energy. It’s a
wonderful tool to have on hand for a recovery day, too. You don’t just have
to “bounce.” You can do jumping jacks, high-knee running, squats, planks,
and plenty more. The best rebounder models are made by JumpSport. I
keep my rebounder sandwiched between a Biocharger device for red-light
therapy, sound therapy, negative ions, and healthy radio frequencies and
an incredibly bright Beacon40 light for jump-starting my circadian rhythm
in the mornings.
Plyometric Boxes or Bench
Single-leg and double-leg jumping and fast, explosive stepping on a raised
surface are efficient ways to create or maintain high-quality muscle fibers
and boost testosterone. If you’re short on space, get a bench that can
double as a surface for activities such as chest presses and dumbbell rows.
If space permits, I recommend having a few plyometric boxes of varying
heights. Rogue Fitness and Titan Fitness have good models.
Barbell Rack
A good barbell rack includes an Olympic-style weight-lifting bar, a pull-up
bar, plenty of plates (preferably rubber), and sturdy extensions to rack a
lift before and after a set. Rogue Fitness has excellent options, and there
are several racks that have a small footprint and even fold up against a wall
to take up less space, such as the PRx Performance, originally featured on
Shark Tank.
Electrical Muscle Stimulator
--- END PAGE 531 ---

--- PAGE 532 ---
Flip to chapters 9 and 12 to learn more about electrical muscle stimulation
(EMS). I own the Katalyst full-body wireless EMS suit (a portable solution
for an incredible workout), a Marc Pro (good for recovery, soreness, and
injuries), a NeuFit (not very portable but extremely powerful for full-body
training, injuries, and retraining muscles), and a Powerdot, which is a
surprisingly strong minimalist solution for activities like road trips and
airplane travel.
X3 Bar
In 2015, my friend John Jaquish authored a research protocol for a
London-based hospital to perform a study on human performance and
bone. In that study, it was found that individuals could create tremendous
forces through the body when exercising using a form of variable
resistance, in which a form of training called isokinetic training is used to
push back against your body just as hard as you push against it. Other
studies have shown that this type of variable resistance training creates
muscle gains three times faster than conventional weight training, with
double to triple the gains in one-rep max and triple the gains in average
power. Variable resistance has also been shown to produce greater
anabolic hormone responses and a higher increase in serum testosterone
and growth hormone than conventional weightlifting.
Jaquish designed the X3 Bar for isokinetic, variable resistance training,
and while using an elastic band–based prototype, he gained 30 pounds of
muscle while simultaneously losing body fat. With a series of elastic bands
at varying resistances, a small bar that simulates an Olympic weight-
training bar, and a rugged footplate to stabilize the band, the X3 Bar
replicates the style of training used in these studies, in a portable workout
system. It allows you to perform any exercise at over 500 pounds of force,
without the elastic bands twisting your ankles or applying excessive
--- END PAGE 532 ---

--- PAGE 533 ---
torsion to your wrists. This system can be used for portable training, low-
impact training, or heavy weightlifting without the weights. (For a
discount code, visit BoundlessBook.com/11.)
Rowing Machine
Research has shown that a rowing machine is one of the best tools for
burning calories. A water- or fan-based rowing machine provides upper-
body and lower-body utilization, grip strengthening, and a low-impact
training environment, and it can be used for long cardiovascular
endurance workouts or high-intensity intervals. I often use a 500-meter
row to warm up or cool down, or I’ll include bouts of rowing to keep my
heart rate boosted during a strength-training workout. Rowing is also a
handy fitness option if you have ankle, knee, or shoulder injuries that
restrict your range of motion. I recommend the Concept2 model. If you
don’t have the space for a rowing machine, consider a Ski Erg, which gives
you a similar workout but stands vertically against a wall.
VersaClimber
While using a VersaClimber is a fitness trend that has been adopted by
athlete celebrities such as LeBron James and Peyton Manning, the
machine itself is decades old. The first VersaClimber was built by a
mechanical engineer in 1981, but as fitness fads came and went over the
years, the VersaClimber was mostly forgotten—until recently, when
personal trainers and strength coaches started to recognize its extreme
efficiency as a training tool.
The seven-foot-tall VersaClimber mimics the natural motion of
climbing and consists of a vertical rail with pedals and handles. To use it,
you get into an upright position by inserting your feet into the straps on
--- END PAGE 533 ---

--- PAGE 534 ---
the pedals and grabbing the handles. From there, you can adjust handle
height, stroke length, and resistance. The longer the stroke length and
range of motion you cover with each climbing step, the greater the muscle
recruitment, making this a cardiovascular version of variable resistance
training. A higher resistance setting allows for a slower-paced strength-
building workout, while minimal resistance makes it more cardio-focused.
Exercising on the VersaClimber requires a motion of “alternating
reciprocal movement,” which means when you move one arm up or down,
the opposite knee does the same. Performing this motion in an upright
position forces your entire body to work at once. Since it’s manually
powered, you can control the pace of your movements and go as fast or
slow as you want with little impact. Although it’s a large machine, it has a
relatively small footprint because, like a SkiErg, it can be tightly stacked
against the wall of a gym or garage.
Incline Treadmill
Most treadmills allow for a maximum incline of 15 percent. But an incline
treadmill (NordicTrack is a good brand), introduced to me by famed
obstacle course racer Matt Novakovich and his coach, Yancy Culp, allows
you to set a maximum incline of 40 percent. This means you can simulate
hiking up just about the steepest mountain you’d ever find, making it a
fantastic tool for training uphill without needing to expose your ankles,
knees, and hips to the rigors of running back downhill, which can be tough
on the joints. Walking at speeds as low as 2.0 mph at an incline of 40
percent can metabolically feel as though you’re sprinting on a track. This
is great news for those who like to run for fitness but can’t due to joint
issues and want a similar metabolic stimulus. You can even keep a
sandbag, weighted vest, or weighted backpack next to the treadmill for an
added challenge.
--- END PAGE 534 ---

--- PAGE 535 ---
Curved Manual Treadmill
On a manual treadmill, the belt is driven by your own power and curves
upward at either end so that you accelerate when you’re closer to the front
and decelerate when you back up. On a normal treadmill, the motorized
belt cuts out some of the workload by assisting your leg turnover and
decreasing the ground reaction forces that would normally require the use
of more leg musculature. But the only way to walk or run on a curved
manual treadmill is to use your legs to power the belt. This results in
overall better walking biomechanics and greater glute activation compared
to a standard-shaped treadmill. Your core must work harder to stabilize
your body on an unstable belt, requiring a strong upright posture, a high
cadence without an overstriding heel-strike, and a slight forward lean to
maintain your center of gravity for forward momentum. The handrails are
lower than on the average treadmill, giving your arms more freedom to
pump and assist you. This can cause you to burn up to 44 percent more
calories compared to walking or running on a regular treadmill.
I often walk up to ten thousand steps a day without leaving my office
due to the curved manual treadmill at my standing workstation. The
model I use—the Walkolution—has a whisper-soft foam surface that
offers the added advantage of simultaneously massaging and recruiting
small muscles and ligaments in the feet while producing far less impact for
the knees and hips. The lack of a motor means it is low in dirty electricity,
so I’m not subjected to the hefty amount of electrical pollution that a
motorized treadmill puts out (I’m OK with that for a quick trip to the gym,
but not all day long in my office), and the lack of motorized sounds allows
me to podcast and do phone calls while walking. The speed of a good
manual treadmill will allow you to alternate between walking, jogging, or
sprinting whenever you desire without pushing any buttons and to move
faster than the standard rinky-dink office “treadmills,” which often top out
at a walking pace of 3.0 mph.
--- END PAGE 535 ---

--- PAGE 536 ---
Assault AirBike
An upgraded version of the old-school fan bike, with handles for pumping
with the arms and pedals for pumping with the legs, an Assault AirBike is a
low-impact way to quickly get your heart rate high. The newer models
have a built-in computer dashboard that allows you to select, say, a Tabata
set (or program in any other interval time and recovery time you desire),
and the bike will then beep every time you are to switch from twenty
seconds hard to ten seconds easy. My Assault AirBike is an indispensable
tool for maintaining cardiovascular endurance even when my body is too
beat up to go for a run or do any type of impact training. It pairs well with
any of the resisted breathing devices I mentioned earlier.
Stand-Up Desk
Why the heck would I include a desk as a piece of exercise equipment?
Frankly, a standing desk, especially one that you can keep a treadmill or
bicycle in front of or a desk ergometer underneath, allows you to engage in
fat-burning, blood-sugar-stabilizing low-level physical activity throughout
the day. On a typical day of work, I alternate between walking on my
manual treadmill and standing at my desk, usually propped up by a
biomechanically friendly stand-up stool, such as those made by Uplift and
Varidesk. Throw in a few challenging surfaces to stand on, such as a Topo
mat, Kybun mat, or FluidStance, and you can keep your body in excellent
shape during a day of desk work. For a stand-up desk, look into models by
Varidesk, Uplift, and Flexispot. If you must sit during the day, I
recommend a pelvic-supporting Salli saddle chair or a fancier ergonomic
support chair like the Anthros.
--- END PAGE 536 ---

--- PAGE 537 ---
THE GUILTY PLEASURES
If you like to own nice things and love the concept of better living through
science, these fancier, more expensive add-ons will allow you to create the
ultimate body-upgrading environment.
Vibration Platform
In a corner of my gym is a slick black vibration platform called a Power
Plate, which I occasionally use for moving lymph in the morning (as an
alternative to rebounding), for bodyweight workouts and isometric squat
and push-up holds, as a preworkout warm-up, and even as a potent way to
induce a morning bowel movement when I need help “moving things
along.”
Most vibration platforms are either oscillating or tri-planar. Oscillating
platforms have a fulcrum in the center, and the platform rises on one end
and lowers on the other. This seesaw motion mimics the motion of
walking. Tri-planar platforms rise up and down continuously, imitating the
motion of performing tiny jumps over and over again. Tri-planar platforms
have a smaller range of motion than oscillating platforms, operate at
higher speeds, and are pricier because they are larger and heavier, but they
are also more effective at vibrating the entire body rapidly.
A vibration trainer’s intensity varies depending on the frequency of
vibration, which is measured by the number of oscillations per second
expressed in hertz (Hz). Most research regarding whole-body vibration
training has used frequencies between 25 and 40 Hz, so look for a model
that can operate at least within this range (most good tri-planar vibration
trainers have a frequency between 15 and 60 Hz, while cheaper models
operate within a limited frequency range, such as 15 to 30 Hz or 30 to 50
Hz). I recommend the Power Plate, which is a tri-planar platform with a
--- END PAGE 537 ---

--- PAGE 538 ---
wide frequency range. For a simple workout, try five rounds of one minute
of push-ups with your hands on the vibration platform, with a one-minute
isometric squat on the platform after each round.
The research on so-called whole body vibration (WBV) is solid. WBV
has been shown in numerous scientific studies to reduce visceral
abdominal fat more than aerobic exercise alone; increase strength and
bone mineral density, reverse bone loss, eliminate osteoporosis, prevent
falls and fractures, and improve balance and equilibrium; improve blood
pressure; produce more powerful effects on hormonal balance than
regular exercise; improve perception of pain, balance, gait quality, and
inflammatory markers; increase circulation blood flow and oxygenation;
and decrease arterial stiffness.
Vasper
The Vasper is a fancy training device that can be used for just twenty-one
minutes as a form of high-intensity cardio training combined with
cryotherapy, blood flow restriction, and grounding, all in one unit. It
includes features such as ice sleeves that are wrapped around all your
appendages prior to and during training, grounded pads on the pedals that
you place your bare feet on to get an earthing effect, and pressurized cuffs
to increase blood pressure in your arms and legs, all in a full-body
elliptical-style workout.
Compression on the arm and leg muscles while exercising at a low
intensity has been shown to create the physiological effect of high-
intensity exercise, even if your intensity isn’t quite as high, and also safely
compresses the muscle to quickly build up lactic acid, mimicking the
physiology of an intense workout that would typically require more
extensive time and effort. This brief exposure to significant lactic acid
accumulation triggers a systemic recovery response, including the natural
--- END PAGE 538 ---

--- PAGE 539 ---
release of anabolic hormones such as growth hormone and testosterone
and healthy brain compounds like BDNF and VEGF.
As your body temperature increases while training, blood vessels near
the surface of the skin dilate, increasing blood flow to the skin and leaving
less blood and oxygen available for the muscles. When there is not enough
blood to remove lactic acid from the muscles, physiological fatigue begins
to set in. Remaining cool during exercise allows blood oxygen levels to
remain high throughout the body, which makes exercising even at higher
intensities much more efficient and pleasant. The ice-cold water that
circulates through the Vasper’s compression sleeves allows for this cooling
effect to occur during the exercise session.
Each Vasper protocol that is already built into the software that
accompanies the device is a twenty-one-minute interval training session,
delivered on a tablet that is fully integrated with the recumbent bicycle-
size machine. Each section of the interval training protocol is
customizable in duration, intensity, resistance, and speed, and the
pressure and cooling can also be modified for ability, comfort level, and
performance. There are even heart rate monitors with graphs of power
output displayed on the screens to track performance. The Vasper isn’t
cheap (close to $50K), but for busy folks—including well-known health,
longevity, business, and fitness gurus, like Tony Robbins and Peter
Diamandis; research institutions like NASA, Stanford’s Sports Medicine
Center, and UCSF; and pro teams like the San Jose Sharks and Texas
Rangers—this is the ultimate solution to interval training with science.
For the ultimate at-home workout that covers all aspects of cardio and
strength, I begin with my Vasper plugged into a LiveO2 for oxygen
training, then move on to the ARX for strength training with a minimum
effective dose.
ARX
--- END PAGE 539 ---

--- PAGE 540 ---
Single-set-to-failure training and super-slow training are training
strategies outlined in chapters 10 and 12, and the ARX is a mash-up of both
that can get you very strong, very fast. In the same way that the Vasper
“biohacks” cardiovascular interval training, ARX technology “biohacks”
strength training with a computer-controlled motorized resistance driven
by a two-horsepower engine that is capable of matching any force you
produce, giving you a perfect rep with every rep. Most of my friends who
try mine tell me it’s like “fighting a giant robot.”
Unlike a traditional weight-training machine that requires you to
adjust the weight with pins or plates, there is no need to set the resistance
while using the ARX. Instead, the machine applies opposing resistance in
direct proportion to what you are producing at each moment in time
throughout an entire rep. The entire effort for that one single set to failure
is then measured and displayed by the software in real time. It allows for
over a dozen motions, including my big six favorites: squat, deadlift, pull-
down, row, overhead press, and chest press.
Using the ARX works for any of the super-slow workouts in this book
but amplifies their benefits to an entirely new level, especially from an
eccentric training standpoint (the strategy outlined by Art De Vany in
chapter 9). Like the Vasper, this is one of the spendier devices in this
section, but it can be used as little as once per week with significant
results for building strength, bone density, and muscle. People often say
there is no shortcut to hard work, but I’d argue that a Vasper combined
with an ARX accomplishes in a brief forty-five minutes what you’d
normally need to be at the gym for three hours to accomplish, with the
only downside being the dent in your pocketbook.
EWOT
--- END PAGE 540 ---

--- PAGE 541 ---
Exercise with oxygen therapy (EWOT) is a method of breathing varying
levels of oxygen during exercise in order to increase the amount of oxygen
in your blood plasma. It often involves switching from a hypoxic setting,
similar to what you’d experience during altitude training, with bursts of
high oxygen, resulting in tissue oxygenation much like what you’d get
when using a hyperbaric chamber—except with EWOT, you’re exercising.
An EWOT unit sits in my gym next to the Vasper and allows me to
complete my EWOT while simultaneously getting all the benefits of the
cold, BFR, and grounding from the Vasper.
EWOT was pioneered in the 1960s by a German researcher named
Manfred von Ardenne. He wrote the book Oxygen Multistep Therapy, a
thorough reference on oxygen therapy, should you want to take a deeper
dive. In the book, he describes how stress triggers inflammation—and how
inflammation compromises health, a concept I’ve addressed in previous
chapters. He shows how plasma hypoxia (low levels of oxygen in the fluid
that carries red blood cells) triggers inflammation in the endothelial
tissues, which sets up restriction to blood flow in capillaries. But, more
importantly, he developed a method to quickly and durably fix this
problem of hypoxia by elevating plasma concentrations, increasing oxygen
levels to lower capillary inflammation, and restoring circulation.
A substantial body of research has since demonstrated that the
administration of oxygen while exercising promotes an expansion of
constricted capillaries, which enhances blood perfusion of congested
capillary beds. The squamous cells making up the endothelium of
capillaries tend to swell when deprived of oxygen, creating a vicious cycle,
as this swelling prevents further oxygenation.
Exercise in the presence of high amounts of oxygen opens the
arterioles (branches of an artery leading into capillaries), and the
oxygenated blood can then reduce any swelling in the capillary
endothelium. This creates a positive cycle of lower inflammation and
--- END PAGE 541 ---

--- PAGE 542 ---
better oxygenation. Repeated administration of EWOT can lead to a
lasting reduction of endothelial swelling and an increase in peripheral
circulation. It’s good for improving performance, strengthening
inspiratory muscles, ameliorating asthma, accelerating wound healing,
enhancing immune function, decreasing incidence of migraines, and
increasing mitochondrial density, among other benefits.
Some EWOT units, such as the LiveO2, allow you to upgrade the
effects with the flip of a switch during your exercise session so that you
alternate between hypoxia and hyperoxia (this is called “adaptive
contrast”). Most EWOT systems take at least one nine-hour workout to
deliver therapeutic oxygenation, but with adaptive contrast, you can
deliver oxygen flow rates that meet or exceed the levels required and reach
a therapeutic result in just fifteen minutes. With adaptive contrast, it is as
if you are instantly switching between sea level and elevations of ten
thousand feet. These switches make your heart and lungs work harder, so
the oxygen does a lot more.
A similar device, the Cellgym IHHT, is a system for intermittent
hypoxia-hyperoxia training (IHHT). By alternating between periods of
inhaling low-oxygen and high-oxygen air, IHHT initiates similar effects as
traditional altitude training, but the Cellgym is typically used while seated
or sedentary, such as during a meditation session, and not paired with
exercise. The results from either strategy can be enhanced with any blood-
dilating or nitric oxide–supporting supplement, such as beetroot,
cordyceps, echinacea, beta-alanine, or niacin.
If you have access to EWOT or IHHT or a hyperbaric chamber
(HBOT), along with red light and either PEMF or a grounding/earthing
mat, you can do the popular “Superhuman” protocol for cellular health
(the company 10X sells a complete Superhuman package that includes
PEMF, an oxygen concentrator, and full-body red-light therapy). This
protocol begins with lying on a PEMF or grounding mat for ten to twenty
--- END PAGE 542 ---

--- PAGE 543 ---
minutes, which allows your red blood cells to separate into free-flowing
cells and enhances blood flow. Once you’re done with the first step, your
blood cells are optimized for more oxygen absorption, so step two is a ten-
to-twenty-minute EWOT, IHHT, or HBOT session, allowing for the
creation of an oxygen-rich environment, effectively delivering oxygen to
healthy cells. The third step is ten to twenty minutes of
photobiomodulation (PBM) therapy, achieved by lying on a red-light
therapy bed, using an infrared sauna, or using a full-body red-light panel.
This stack can improve soft-tissue healing, reduce inflammation, and aid
in acute and chronic pain relief without negative side effects. It is based on
the ideas that 1) PEMF can enhance cellular oxygen uptake, which allows
for even more tissue oxygenation with the post-PEMF oxygen breathing;
and 2) highly oxygenated cells can produce even more ATP when targeted
with red-light therapy post-oxygen breathing. If this all sounds too
complex or expensive, you can opt for the simple, cheap option: go outside
barefoot or lie on your back on the ground, then do a breathwork session,
and finish with sunlight exposure. You’ll get many similar benefits.
PEMF
Chapters 6, 7, and 12 contain most of what you need to know about pulsed
electromagnetic field therapy, a form of “exercise for your cells.” I am
writing this very chapter while seated on a rocking chair version of the
Pulse Centers Pulse XL Pro unit. There is no better way to deliver high-
intensity PEMF to your entire body all at once than one of these types of
full-body systems, which include wraparound coils for any joint size, a
massage table, a flat mat, and a chair. Originally used by the horse-racing
industry, Pulse Centers products are now available to general consumers,
but admittedly, these units are expensive. Other more affordable options
(such as the BioBalance mat and the portable FlexPulse device) are
--- END PAGE 543 ---

--- PAGE 544 ---
offered at Dr. William Pawluk’s website and by vendors such as 10X,
Celler8, Centropix, EarthPulse, and IcesM1.
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy (HBOT)
Chamber
Your body’s ability to absorb oxygen or exhale carbon dioxide is all about
pressure gradients. Gases move from high pressure and concentration to
lower pressure and concentration. As long as the pressure and
concentration of oxygen in your environment and outside your body (in
the air you breathe) is higher than the oxygen pressure and concentration
inside your body, oxygen will move down that gradient into your body
from your lungs, into your bloodstream, and eventually into your cells.
The amount of oxygen moving down this gradient and the speed at
which it moves depend on the amount of pressure that exists. This is why
training at altitude works, and it’s also why hyperbaric oxygen works. See,
there is 21 percent oxygen in the air no matter the altitude. The pressure
of the atmosphere is what changes. At sea level, the pressure of air is 760
mmHg and the pressure of oxygen is 159 mmHg. At 8,000 feet above sea
level, the pressure of air is 564 mmHg and the pressure of oxygen is 118
mmHg. That difference in pressure is what makes the air “thinner” at
altitude.
The same but opposite phenomenon occurs below sea level. As you
descend below sea level, the pressure increases and therefore the ability to
absorb air and oxygen also increases. The deeper you go, the more
pressure, and the more your body can absorb.
In a hyperbaric environment, the amount of pressure exerted and the
amount of time spent in this pressurized environment can be controlled,
enabling you to regulate the amount of increased oxygen that can be taken
into your cells. Once absorbed, this extra oxygen can be used for making
--- END PAGE 544 ---

--- PAGE 545 ---
ATP and energy, increasing the capacity for working tissues to perform, or
increasing the capacity of healing and recovery. It’s important to
understand that you cannot achieve this effect by simply breathing a
higher amount of oxygen, parking yourself at one of those popular
“oxygen” bars, or taking a shot of liquid oxygen; unless you combine this
added oxygen with pressure, you’re not going to absorb any extra oxygen!
While HBOT does not treat disease, it has been shown to help many
people suffering from a wide range of chronic illnesses. These conditions
include autoimmune diseases, dementia, neuropathy, TBI and concussion,
PTSD, chronic fatigue, fibromyalgia, cancer, tissue damage and trauma,
autism, Lyme disease and other co-infections, post-stroke recovery, and
many more.
HBOT is not a cure-all, nor is it meant to be applied as a therapy on its
own. There is a strong synergy when this therapy is combined with other
functional medicine therapies, and the results are greater than the sum of
their parts. Some of these other therapies include peptides, red light,
supplements that enhance blood flow, breathing techniques, IV drips,
meditation, physical rehab, sauna, and neurofeedback.
There are many chamber types and configurations offering different
amounts of pressure and oxygen. Some chambers are for use in a clinical
environment only, while others can be utilized at home. I own the Vitaeris
320, a softshell, at-home HBOT unit by HBOTUSA, and although it doesn’t
reach as high a pressure as a hardshell unit you might find in a hospital or
health clinic, it fits all my needs and is one of my favorite spots for a
private, sensory-deprived meditation session or nap, or simply to catch up
on some reading or research. I’m typically in my HBOT for thirty to sixty
minutes, four or five times per week, and feel like a three-lunged, oxygen-
rich mutant every time I get out of it.
Infrared Sauna
--- END PAGE 545 ---

--- PAGE 546 ---
I’ll talk in more detail about infrared saunas in chapter 12. They essentially
use light to create heat, which means they can heat your body directly
without significantly warming the air around you, and the light waves from
the infrared sauna penetrate deep (two to six inches) into your body for a
heating effect that allows more activation of your sweat glands than a dry
sauna. So an infrared sauna doesn’t feel as hot as a dry sauna, but you
sweat as much or more.
For years, many folks in the alternative health community have sworn
by infrared heat lamps as a source of far-infrared heat, but these lamps can
be cumbersome, they can get extremely hot to the touch, and they can be
difficult to maintain at a constant temperature.
The temperature inside a typical infrared sauna is adjustable and
averages about 100 to 140 degrees Fahrenheit, depending on how long you
warm up the sauna before getting in.
Several studies have investigated the use of infrared saunas in the
treatment of chronic health problems, such as high blood pressure,
congestive heart failure, and rheumatoid arthritis, and these studies have
indeed found some evidence of benefit. For athletes using a sauna
postexercise for thirty minutes, the blood-building benefits can be as
powerful as performance-enhancing drugs.
No adverse effects have ever been reported with infrared saunas, and I
used infrared therapy with a heating mat called a Biomat for two years
before switching to an infrared sauna, without any ill effects.
Choose your sauna carefully. For most people, it’s not the slightly
lower levels of heat that tend to be the problem. Instead, it’s the fact that
most infrared saunas are concentrated hothouses chock-full of
electromagnetic fields, turning what is supposed to be a detoxification and
longevity-enhancing experience into the equivalent of hanging out in a
microwave or inside a giant WiFi router, leaving you with cell damage,
brain fog, and inflammation. In chapter 20, you’ll learn plenty more about
--- END PAGE 546 ---

--- PAGE 547 ---
EMFs and how to mitigate their damage, but for now, the takeaway
message is that it can be difficult for a sauna manufacturer to generate
infrared light without also generating EMF.
So, for my own infrared sauna, I chose a model that has a type of
heater called a True Wave II, which contains a carbon-based infrared
heater with virtually no EMF. It’s made by a company called Clearlight
using a manufacturing process that allows them to cancel out EMF to
levels that are nearly undetectable. All the heaters inside a Clearlight
sauna are tested to ensure low and safe levels of EMF, which is uncommon
in the sauna industry.
Since I like to move around, exercise, do Bikram yoga, and occasionally
drag an exercise bike (a trick I learned from pro big-wave surfer Laird
Hamilton) or a kettlebell into my sauna, I chose the Sanctuary Y model,
which is a combination of a personal hot yoga room and an infrared sauna.
You can leave in the two thirty-five-inch benches and have a state-of-the-
art full-spectrum infrared sauna for lounging and reading, or remove the
benches and have your own private hot yoga room with a built-in heated
yoga mat floor. (Find discount codes at BoundlessBook.com/11.) Sauna
pairs perfectly with any of the cold-plunge strategies discussed in chapter
3, and four or five times per week I do a twenty-to-forty-five-minute sauna
session followed by a one-to-five-minute cold plunge.
THE LAST WORD
So let’s say you’re overwhelmed by the number of tools in this chapter, but
you still want to build the ultimate home gym that incorporates a few key
biohacks or upgraded pieces of exercise technology. In other words, you
want the minimal effective dose and the 80/20 of everything you’ve just
discovered. The following list is a perfect example of what an ultimate
biohacker’s gym or home health space would look like if it was designed to
--- END PAGE 547 ---

--- PAGE 548 ---
be as simple as possible. If you were to walk into my home gym, you would
find a setup similar to this:
• Yoga mat
• Bench
• Foam roller and massage ball
• Kettlebells
• A couple sets of heavy dumbbells
• Weighted vest
• Resistance bands or X3 Bar
• Hex bar
• Squat rack with pull-up bar
• Stability ball
• Medicine ball
• Battle rope
• Assault AirBike (or a VersaClimber, rowing machine, or treadmill, or, if
budget permits, a few of these)
• Electrical muscle stimulator (optional)
• Vibration platform (optional)
• Large infrared sauna (optional)
For the icing on the cake, you can throw in a few of the spendier
options in this chapter, like an EWOT or IHHT unit, a VASPER, or an ARX.
If you wandered into my garage and backyard, you’d find a few other
random fitness tools, such as a keg half filled with water, a large tire for
flipping, and a pile of sandbags. With this setup, you can do just about any
workout on the face of the planet and will have enough exercise variety to
last a lifetime. Finally, should you not want to break the budget, rest
--- END PAGE 548 ---

--- PAGE 549 ---
assured that you can find many of these items on Craigslist, Facebook
Marketplace, or eBay, and you’ll find plenty of discount codes on
BoundlessBook.com/11.
The fact is, by blending ancestral living with modern technology, you
can not only make exercising and molding the body that you desire
incredibly fun, but you can also engage in better living through science
with a minimum effective dose of exercise, using everything that modern
science has taught us about efficient exercise to shortcut your way to
muscle gain and fat loss and save hours for boundless energy in the
process.
You now know how to design the ultimate combination of both simple
and complex fitness tools to biohack the body and stay fit in a
postindustrial era of airline travel, long car trips, and sedentary, office-
based lifestyles.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
This week, begin to build your own travel exercise kit. Find some elastic
tubing or elastic bands with handles, some BFR bands, and a suspension
trainer or similar. It’s that easy, and that’s exactly what you’ll find in my
own lightweight travel fitness kit.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/11. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 549 ---

--- PAGE 550 ---
12
WOLVERINE
A COMPLETE TOOLBOX FOR
RECOVERING WITH LIGHTNING SPEED
I was splayed out on the bed in a hotel room in Seattle, my entire body
throbbing and aching from having just surged across the finish line of a Spartan
Super obstacle race—9.8 miles of stumbling through Pacific Northwest rainforest
while hoisting sandbags, clambering over logs and rocks, swinging from monkey
bars, hauling weighted buckets, crawling through barbed wire, and high-
stepping through mud and bogs.
--- END PAGE 550 ---

--- PAGE 551 ---
On the hotel room TV was the first movie I’d watched in a long time:
Logan, from the Marvel Comics X-Men series—which features the fastest-
recovering superhero on the face of the planet. While you certainly can’t
expect to get punched ten times in the face by a muscle-bound cyborg and
have your broken and smashed cheekbones and nose regenerate magically,
you certainly can bounce back from many workouts, races, injuries, and
surgeries far faster than modern sports medicine and orthopedics would
have you believe.
I’ll admit it: I used to be pretty old-school when it came to recovery: a
postworkout shake, maybe a little stretching or time with the foam roller,
and (if things got really bad) a massage or cold soak. Not that there’s
anything wrong with simplicity. After all, it is easy to get so carried away
with new gadgets, toys, and recovery tools that you forget to take time to
enjoy a glass of wine while soaking in the sunset at the end of the day.
But I remember when I shared an office with a sports medicine
physician named P. Z. Pearce. My job was Director of Sports Performance,
which meant I often worked with healthier folks who were ready to train
or race. But because of the medical nature of the clinic, it seemed that all
day long, marathoners, triathletes, cyclists, and weekend warriors hobbled
through the door complaining of aches, pains, and injuries that they had
been fighting for weeks, months, and even years. As a result, I learned a lot
from the physicians, chiropractors, and physical therapists there, and I
often wound up working with these injured athletes myself to implement
rehabilitation and injury-management protocols. With just a few of the
recovery tips I am about to share with you, those folks easily could have
saved themselves a lot of pain and frustration, not to mention boatloads of
cash on doctor visits and operations.
So I would be remiss if I didn’t equip you with every technique I know
to keep your body in pristine shape, especially if you are laying down some
serious damage by being more than a weekend warrior.
--- END PAGE 551 ---

--- PAGE 552 ---
In this chapter, I will give you the complete download of my favorite
potent but often little-known recovery techniques, assembled into one
mighty resource that will have you bouncing back from muscle and body
damage—just like Wolverine. In the same way that fitness biohacks and
tools can speed up the efficiency of training and allow for a precise
minimum effective dose of exercise, the recovery biohacks and tools in
this chapter can help you get better faster than what you might hear is the
average predicted bounce-back time from a workout or an injury.
HOW—AND HOW FAST—DOES
YOUR BODY RECOVER?
I realize that not everybody is a marathoner, but marathon running and
other endurance sports are good examples of popular training regimens,
and the lessons we learn about recovery from them can help us
understand how long the process takes in many other cases. So how fast
should you recover from, say, a marathon? Research indicates that the
muscle damage from running a marathon can last up to two weeks and
that the mere absence of soreness is not a good indicator of muscular
healing. In other words, just because you aren’t sore anymore doesn’t
mean you are fully healed. Post-marathon muscle soreness fades after a
few days, but microscopic damage within the muscle cells lasts for at least
a couple weeks, and hormone and nervous system repair can take just as
long, or longer.
How about an Ironman? Probably because the non-weight-bearing
nature of cycling and swimming allows for faster healing, recovery from an
Ironman is not much different than recovery from a marathon and ranges
anywhere from eight to nineteen days, depending on the athlete.
--- END PAGE 552 ---

--- PAGE 553 ---
A CrossFit Workout of the Day or similar metabolic conditioning
(MetCon)–style workout? Most folks need at least two to three days of
recovery to bounce back from the muscular, immune, and nervous system
damage that can occur from a single hard-core twenty-to-sixty-minute
session (although, tragically, many gym junkies do similar back-to-back
sessions four to six days a week!). Heart rate variability testing data has
shown that some people bounce back in as little as a day while others take
several days, so it can vary quite a bit from person to person, often due to
genetics but also to lifestyle and nutrition factors, along with whether an
individual applies the tips and tricks in this chapter.
A hike? Now we’re getting more reasonable. It really only takes a day
or so to bounce back from a multi-hour afternoon hike, assuming you
aren’t wearing an eighty-pound rucksack. But even a smattering of the
recovery tactics you are about to discover can speed that up, too, allowing
you to, say, go for a hard run or hit the gym the day after a big hike.
Sure, your body is already a finely tuned self-repairing machine. There
are entire branches of medicine built around the fact that the human body
has some impressive built-in repair mechanisms that modern medicine
seems to have forgotten. You know, of course, that a cut on your finger can
turn into a scab and then heal over completely, but all tissues contain
similar regenerative processes, and every one of your body’s cells and
organs has its own regeneration cycle. Intestinal bacteria regenerate
within several days, the intestinal wall within a couple weeks, and immune
cells within four weeks. Even the liver possesses the capacity to regenerate
—25 percent of a liver can fully regenerate within six months! The default
state of the body is one of regeneration, especially in the proper healing
environment, and books such as Bioregulatory Medicine by Dr. Dickson
Thom, Regenerate by Sayer Ji, and The Healing Process by Dr. Rudolf Steiner
are good deep-dive treatises on multi-organ regeneration and recovery.
--- END PAGE 553 ---

--- PAGE 554 ---
But let’s say you don’t immediately need to regenerate a lobe of your
liver, and you are more interested in bouncing back as fast as possible
from a workout, adventure, or stressful day so that you can move on to
your next task without feeling like you have bricks tied to your shoes, legs
like concrete, or a bout of dizziness every time you stand up. In this case,
most human performance specialists define recovery as “the ability to
meet or exceed performance in a particular activity.”
This ability necessitates important physiological functions that can be
sped up or enhanced using the strategies in this chapter, including
• Repletion of creatine phosphate and ATP stores
• Rebuilding of muscle and liver glycogen
• Conversion of lactate into glycogen or removal of blood lactate
• Removal of carbon dioxide via reaction of CO and H O to form
2 2carbonic acid for subsequent removal via exhalation
• Clearance of acetylcholine and other neurotransmitters from skeletal
muscle
• Removal of calcium ions from areas surrounding muscle fibers
• Repayment of oxygen debt postexercise via respiration
• Downregulation of the sympathetic nervous system, blood pressure,
heart rate, respiratory rate, and other acute responses to exercise or
stress
• Restoration of enzymes that play a crucial role in metabolism, such as
phosphofructokinase, a key enzyme in carbohydrate metabolism
Some of these functions, such as the replenishment of ATP and
creatine or conversion of lactate into usable fuel, occur during exercise
and are referred to as “immediate recovery”; they happen between strides
while running or between reps in a set while weight training. Other
functions, such as repayment of oxygen debt or removal of carbon dioxide,
--- END PAGE 554 ---

--- PAGE 555 ---
occur within minutes and are referred to as “short-term recovery”; they
happen between sets of a weight training session, for example. Full
recovery, including restoration of enzymes and stored glycogen, removal
of calcium ions, and a nervous system reset, requires more time. These
functions occur in the hours and days between workouts or competitions.
Perhaps one of the most important aspects of recovery, and one that is
often neglected among hard-charging high achievers, is central nervous
system recovery. If you overtax your CNS, then your muscular
performance suffers, even after musculoskeletal soreness has subsided.
Critical recovery processes related to the CNS include the replenishment
of neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine (crucial for CNS function
during periods of acute stress) and the removal of chemicals such as
ammonia (which is produced by skeletal muscle and is believed to play a
role in modulating CNS fatigue).
Then there’s the immune system. Exercise increases circulating
neutrophil and monocyte counts and reduces circulating lymphocyte
counts during recovery. This deployment of white blood cells is an integral
part of the physiological stress response to exercise. Given the large
changes in the distribution of immune cells among blood and peripheral
tissues during and after exercise, it is important to support the restoration
of white blood cell counts. Interestingly, of the many nutritional strategies
and physical therapies that active individuals turn to for recovery,
consuming adequate carbohydrates and getting a lot of deep sleep seem to
be the best tactics for supporting immune system recovery.
You are about to discover a comprehensive list of tactics you can use
to enhance the healing process, from replenishing white and red blood
cells to repairing muscle fibers to restoring hormones and
neurotransmitters to refilling mineral stores to healing tiny nerves and
blood vessels. Many of these tactics may seem fringe, strange, or even
extreme, but they all work by a precise biological mechanism.
--- END PAGE 555 ---

--- PAGE 556 ---
Take acupuncture, for example. For over five thousand years, Eastern
medicine practitioners have used acupuncture to adjust the body’s flow of
energy (often referred to as chi) to improve health and eliminate disease.
While Western medicine practitioners may not agree with traditional
explanations of acupuncture’s mechanism of action, they have finally
come to recognize that acupuncture does indeed work for conditions like
depression, chronic pain, allergies, and headaches. An acupuncture
procedure involves inserting hair-thin needles into certain points along
your meridian, the path through which your energy runs. Needling these
points stimulates the body’s natural healing mechanisms by (according to
Western medicine practitioners) stimulating blood flow, the release of
endorphins, and other physiological processes that temporarily relieve
pain.
I confess that it may seem odd to include acupuncture as a recovery
method, but as a coach and athlete, I have found the occasional
acupuncture session to be efficacious for healing nagging aches and pains,
staving off or speeding up recovery from central nervous system fatigue,
or addressing full-blown “adrenal fatigue” (whose symptoms, you’ll recall
from chapter 3, are more likely due to inflammation or overtraining than
the blanket term of adrenal dysfunction). You also don’t have to duck
down back alleys to get treatments in a dank massage parlor. You can find
licensed, well-credentialed acupuncturists operating out of pristine
medical clinics throughout the United States through the National
Certification Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine
(NCCAOM.org).
But acupuncture is just one example of the recovery methods you
should have in your toolbox. Let’s delve into twenty-six additional tactics
for comic book–level recovery, shall we?
--- END PAGE 556 ---

--- PAGE 557 ---
26 RECOVERY-ENHANCING
TACTICS
I realize that not everybody has full access to the types of healing
strategies and biohacks I’m about to describe just sitting in their
basement. But it would be fantastic to see more progressive-minded
practitioners incorporating these types of therapies and technologies into
a traditional physical therapy or sports medicine practice so that they
might be available for anybody who wants to heal from an injury or
recover more quickly without medications or surgical interventions.
Organizations like CognitiveFX and ReviveCenters have done this for
concussions and Apollo Health for Alzheimer’s: they have formulated a
multimodal approach that attacks a debilitating condition from multiple
angles. Using the information in this chapter, you or your practitioner can
do the same for your own injuries and recovery, and it’s getting easier to
find these tools as the number of biohacking facilities worldwide,
including NextHealth, Upgrade Labs, Revive, Restore, and many others,
continues to increase.
1. Stem Cell Therapy
My first experience with stem cells was a bit out of the ordinary. Men’s
Health magazine convinced me to inject my penis with stem cells
extracted from my back fat for an article on male sexual performance
enhancement. After the article (titled “New Year, New Dick”) went viral, I
wrote several follow-up pieces for my website and other publications—
stories detailing edgy, experimental procedures like self-administering a
mixture of mannitol (a sugar alcohol) and my stem cells into my
bloodstream to enhance neural function (mannitol causes the blood-brain
barrier to temporarily become more permeable and allow stem cells into
--- END PAGE 557 ---

--- PAGE 558 ---
the brain), getting bone stem cells extracted from my hips and sent
overseas to be kept in cold storage, nebulizing stem cell–signaling
molecules into my lungs, and even undergoing a “full-body stem cell
makeover.”
A type of stem cell is the single most important cell for life: the single-
cell fertilized egg, called a zygote, from which all our trillions of cells are
formed. The zygote is known as a totipotent cell, which means that it can
transform into every other kind of cell. The zygote divides into a cluster of
multiple cells known as a blastocyst, which contains pluripotent stem
cells, which can turn into almost every other kind of cell. These totipotent
and pluripotent stem cells are all embryonic stem cells. The umbilical cord
also has embryonic stem cells, but because these are from later stages of
fetal development, they are multipotent, which means the types of cells
they can develop into are limited.
The Full-Body Stem Cell Makeover
On May 14, 2018, I was sedated and underwent a full-body stem cell
makeover (FBSCMO) at Docere Clinic in Park City, Utah. The procedure,
administered by Dr. Harry Adelson and Dr. Amy Killen, is exactly what it
sounds like: the injection of stem cells into literally every joint in the body,
along with a special signaling molecule called an “exosome” that carries cell-
to-cell messages throughout your entire body.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) possess a broad range of healing abilities.
They are directly responsible for healing damaged tissues after an injury:
upon encountering damaged tissue, they release proteins that decrease
inflammation, kill invading microbes, and trigger the growth of new
connective tissue and blood vessels. In the event of severe damage or cell
death, MSCs can turn themselves into healthy versions of damaged or
destroyed cells and replace them. Combining them with exosomes
“upgrades” MSCs with the ability to travel quickly and efficiently to the areas
--- END PAGE 558 ---

--- PAGE 559 ---
of the body where stem cells are needed most, including the brain, joints,
and other organs.
Here’s how it works: A lab harvests MSCs from placenta. Then, using a
process called culture expansion, they expand this stem cell population by
hundreds of millions and then they place the cells in a “stressful” culture
medium to trick them into thinking that their host is under duress. In
preparation for lean times, the MSCs sprout vesicles filled with exosomes.
These exosomes are, in fact, the active ingredient of stem cells. One of the
reasons our stem cells grow old as we age is that they lose the ability to
produce exosomes.
The lab then destroys the MSCs, discards the genetic material, and harvests
only the exosomes. At this point, they have the active ingredient of placental
stem cells, without the stem cells. They add these exosomes to a person’s
own stem cells, harvested from bone marrow or fat (or both). Because the
membrane of exosomes is identical to the membrane of MSCs, your old stem
cells absorb the exosomes into themselves, thereby functionally making
them the stem cells of a younger person. This is how adding exosomes to
your own stem cells effectively upgrades them.
With a needle nearly a foot long, Dr. Adelson harvested some of the bone
marrow from the bones in my hips. My bone marrow was then passed
through an ozone machine, which ozonates the bone marrow stem cells to
create even more available cells. Then the stem cells were concentrated into
bone marrow aspirate concentrate (BMAC), which was supplemented with a
large volume of exosomes. Then every major musculoskeletal structure in
my body was injected with BMAC and exosomes. This means my entire
spine, from the base of my skull to my tailbone, and all major joints
(shoulders, elbows, wrists, hands, hips, knees, ankles, feet) were filled to the
brim with everything necessary to enhance healing for the rest of my life. Dr.
Killen then stepped in and injected the skin of my face, neck, hands, and
scalp, along with my penis, with a blend of platelet-rich plasma, exosomes,
and stem cells for cosmetic and sexual enhancement.
How does this work? According to the stem cell theory of aging, your
tissues age because your body’s stem cell populations either fall or cease to
function entirely. The full-body stem cell makeover is for people interested in
proactively keeping this decline at bay and repopulating the entire
musculoskeletal system with turbocharged stem cells.
--- END PAGE 559 ---

--- PAGE 560 ---
As you have probably guessed, the procedure is not inexpensive, but when
it comes to recovery and body-upgrading therapies, especially in aging
individuals, this one beats out the others in my experience. Old injuries melt
away, new injuries heal faster, and the cosmetic and sexual effects are pretty
handy, too. Since that initial treatment, Docere has expanded to include a
range of treatment options. For example, for people who do not want to use
their own cells (autologous), they now offer the option of receiving the
exact same injections using umbilical cord cells (allogenic). Because this
eliminates the need for tissue harvest from the patient (fat and/or bone
marrow aspiration), it dramatically decreases recovery time and is a good
choice for those who cannot afford much downtime. Docere also introduced
advanced injections of the spinal cord and brain for nervous system
regeneration. In chapter 19, I will revisit stem cell therapy in far greater
detail.
In addition to embryonic stem cells, there are adult stem cells, which
are found throughout the body. Adult stem cells, like umbilical cord stem
cells, are multipotent. One kind of adult stem cell that is currently the
focus of the majority of stem cell research is the mesenchymal stem cell
(MSC), which can differentiate into osteoblasts (bone), chondrocytes
(cartilage), and adipocytes (fat). Another important adult stem cell is the
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) which develops into all kinds of blood cells
--- END PAGE 560 ---

--- PAGE 561 ---
and can be found in bone marrow, peripheral blood, umbilical cords, and
the lungs.
Physicians, researchers, and stem cell scientists are now changing the
potency of many types of stem cells with different forms of culture
expansion or by combining them with signaling molecules like exosomes
and very small embryonic-like (VSEL) cells. The chart below gives a quick
summary of the types of cells and their potency.
TOTIPOTENT PLURIPOTENT MULTIPOTENT
Cell types

Differentiate into
Differentiate into
Differentiate into
capable of
any cell type
most cell types
a limited range of
cell typesgenerating
Found in Early cells of
Inner mass cells
Many adult
fertilized egg
of the blastocyst
tissues (fat, bone,
etc.)
Research pros Easy to isolate
Easy to isolate
Fewer ethical
and grow
and grow
issues, less
chance of
immune rejection
if taken from
same patient
Research cons Ethical issues Ethical issues,
Hard to isolate,
possible tumor
limited
formation
differentiation,
scarce
Source: Anna MacDonald, “Cell Potency: Totipotent vs Pluripotent vs Multipotent
Stem Cells,” Cell Science, Technology Networks, May 29, 2018,
www.technologynetworks.com/cell-science/articles/cell-potency-totipotent-vs-
pluripotent-vs-multipotent-stem-cells-303218
Most of the ethical controversy surrounding stem cell research and
therapy, especially in the US, surrounds the use of embryonic cells taken
directly from fetuses. When a lab wants to harvest embryonic stem cells,
--- END PAGE 561 ---

--- PAGE 562 ---
scientists wait until the embryo is about three to five days old, when it is a
blastocyst containing about a hundred cells, and then harvest the
blastocyst and remove the stem cells. The stem cells are then cultured in
petri dishes. Another way to harvest embryonic stem cells is via umbilical
cord banking, although these cells are only multipotent.
Although adult stem cells are less potent than pluripotent cells, they
can still be highly beneficial. For example, HSCs are found in red bone
marrow and can differentiate into different blood cells. MSCs are also
found in bone marrow and become bone, cartilage, fat, and connective
tissue located in bone. Other tissues, like brain, skeletal muscle, skin, and
liver, also contain MSCs. New research has indicated that multipotent
adult stem cells may be transdifferentiated into other cell types as well.
Differentiated adult cells like skin cells could be turned into powerful
body-repairing, embryonic-like stem cells that are capable of becoming
almost any of the two hundred cell types in the human body.
Another rising branch of stem cell research focuses on the harvesting
of stem cells from amniotic fluid, which is the protective fluid surrounding
the fetus in the womb. The current protocol for harvesting amniotic fluid
during C-section deliveries adds only about ninety seconds to the
operation, is completely safe for both mother and child, and yields about a
liter of amniotic fluid containing MSCs. Although I endorse and am a fan
of home births and the avoidance of C-sections whenever possible,
amniotic fluid can be an effective alternative to bone, fat, and umbilical
cord blood as a source of stem cells. A new form of stem cells, induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, can be derived from adult somatic cells, such
as from the skin or blood. iPS cells are created by reprogramming these
somatic cells to behave like embryonic stem cells. iPS cells have similar
properties to human embryonic stem cells and are pluripotent, which
means that they have the ability to form all adult cell types.
--- END PAGE 562 ---

--- PAGE 563 ---
Then there’s the pioneering work of Dr. Todd Ovokaitys, who invented
a new type of laser technology that combines laser waves with stem cells
to produce a signal that strongly attracts stem cell–like cells to wherever
the laser beam is targeted, almost like a magnet. Dr. Ovokaitys has
developed a method to awaken and activate stem cells from your own
peripheral blood, allowing them to be used anywhere in the body and turn
back the clock in that area with cells that are more like newborn cells.
Stem cell therapy is a powerful recovery method that has flown under
the radar for quite some time but is finally becoming mainstream. This is
because stem cells’ ability to transform into neurons, muscle cells, and
several different types of connective tissue can lead to rapid joint
regeneration and even the reversal of frailty related to aging, especially
when combined with other treatments, like exosomes (much more on that
in chapter 19). Stem cell therapy goes beyond just recovering faster or
living longer—for example, intravenous stem cell therapy, where stem
cells derived from umbilical cord tissue are grown in a lab and then
infused into the body, produces immunomodulatory benefits, increased
energy, and improved sleep.
In the United States, companies like the US Stem Cell Clinic in
Weston, Florida (where I had my fat sucked out to concentrate and store
my adipose-derived stem cells), Forever Labs in Berkeley, California
(where I had my bone marrow removed to save for future longevity-
enhancing injections), and Docere Clinics in Park City, Utah (where I
underwent a full-body stem cell makeover) are on the cutting edge of
developing injectable stem cell treatments to do everything from
regrowing spinal cord cells to eradicating cartilage pain. Clinics such as
the Institute of Regenerative Medicine and Orthopedics in Tampa, Florida,
inject non-embryonic stem cells into injury sites to stimulate rapid healing
or to permanently fix chronic aches and pains. Finally, physicians like Dr.
Harry Adelson of Park City, Utah, Dr. Matt Cook of San Jose, California,
--- END PAGE 563 ---

--- PAGE 564 ---
and Dr. Halland Chen of New York City are now using advanced
compounds, such as MUSE cells (a new stem cell with very good tissue
repair effects), exosomes, and VSELs, to simulate or upgrade the effects of
bone- and fat-derived stem cells, often without the time and hassle of
harvesting your own stem cells.
How to get started: Read chapter 19 thoroughly. Even one series of
stem cell injections into a joint or throughout the body, or delivered
intravenously, can have a profound impact on an entire lifetime of
recovery.
2. Cryotherapy
Cryotherapy, just one form of the broader category of cold thermogenesis,
is the treatment of injuries or inflammation via exposure to cold
temperatures. In medical settings, for treating injury and pain, localized
therapy is usually performed with a very cold wand. While some forms of
cryotherapy can get extreme and spendy (whole-body cryotherapy
chambers can plummet to −200 degrees Fahrenheit and cost a cool $75 to
$100 per treatment), there are simpler and less expensive ways to engage
in cold exposure for recovery. I favor cold-water immersion over
cryotherapy or cold air because it is easier to do in my home or backyard,
triggers the mammalian dive reflex (in which sensory receptors and
cranial nerves stimulated by cold water produce a drop in heart rate and a
rush of oxygen to the heart and brain), and provides hydrostatic pressure
from the water, which can also aid in pain management and recovery. On
the flip side, a cryotherapy chamber does allow you to get really cold,
really fast, without having to get wet and redo your hair and makeup.
I use some form of cold every day: cold showers or quick cold dips in
the morning and evening, a weekly swim in the cold pool behind my
house, and plenty of hot-cold contrast with a sauna, hot tub, cold pool,
--- END PAGE 564 ---

--- PAGE 565 ---
and cold plunge. I also have a long history of competitive open-water
swimming and triathlons in frigid lakes, rivers, and seas and always felt a
muscular and nervous system reboot and soothing of aches after a training
swim. Anecdotes abound of so-called “Polar Bear” swimmers who
developed a fondness for long, cold swims because it quickly solved an old
injury, a nagging ache or pain, or even a metabolic condition. The benefits
of cryotherapy include an enhanced immune system, increased cell
longevity, reduced levels of inflammatory molecules, and, of course, an
incredible tolerance for running outdoors in the cold and performing
snow angels in your underwear. Like many things in life, it doesn’t exactly
feel fantastic while you’re doing it, but the payoff afterward is worth the
discomfort.
Cold exposure stimulates the sympathetic branch of the autonomic
nervous system by inducing a hormetic stress response. A hormetic
stressor, you’ll recall, is a light or mild stressor (like exercise) that
stimulates a beneficial adaptive response, so you come out stronger than
you were before. Cold kicks the sympathetic nervous system (your “fight-
or-flight” system) into gear to preserve your core body temperature. Blood
vessels in your extremities constrict, restricting blood flow so that the
temperature of your internal organs doesn’t drop, your heart rate
increases to pump blood where it needs to go, and your lungs breathe
powerfully and deeply. The result is a boost in blood and lymph flow,
increased cellular resilience, and an improved recovery process.
How to get started: There are many ways to get the benefits of
cryotherapy. One way to maximize the effects of cold and heat exposure is
to use hot-cold contrast therapy, alternating exposure to hot and cold
water or temperatures. Once a week, regardless of my training load or
recovery status, I enjoy a classic hot-cold contrast session: five minutes in
the hot tub, five minutes in the cold pool, then four/four, three/three,
two/two, one/one, and sometimes back up the ladder. Try it sometime.
--- END PAGE 565 ---

--- PAGE 566 ---
You’ll feel like a million bucks. There are a few ways you can simulate a
session like this:
• Take a five-minute shower in which you alternate between twenty
seconds of cold water and ten seconds of hot water ten times through.
• Sit in a sauna for five to ten minutes, then jump into a cold shower or
cold plunge for two minutes; repeating for twenty to thirty minutes
total.
• Take a twenty-minute hot magnesium salt bath followed by a five-
minute icy-cold shower (I even do this at hotels with a cheap bag of
Epsom salts and a filled ice bucket hanging from the showerhead!).
The simplest way to get started? Just take a quick one-to-two-minute
cold shower at the beginning and end of each day.
3. Prolotherapy
Prolotherapy is a nonsurgical regenerative technique that involves
injecting small amounts of irritant solution into painful tendon and
ligament insertions. The goal is to promote the growth of healthy cells and
tissues. Think of prolotherapy as spot welding for an ache or pain. It
involves the precise, nonsurgical injection of a natural irritant solution
into areas where tendons and ligaments attach to bone and places where
cartilage is worn or damaged. When a prolotherapy solution—which can
be anything from hyperosmolar dextrose (basically glorified sugar water)
to glycerin, lidocaine, or even cod liver oil extract—is injected, it creates a
localized, controlled inflammatory response that stimulates the body’s
own repair mechanisms to heal the damaged tissue. If you have a
chronically inflamed joint with built-up scar tissue, prolotherapy can be a
good option to reinitiate inflammation and heal the injury for good.
--- END PAGE 566 ---

--- PAGE 567 ---
Although pain relief can be achieved with something as simple as a
saline and dextrose prolotherapy injection, a more powerful form of
prolotherapy is the injection of platelet-rich plasma (PRP). Platelets,
which are small cell fragments, are involved in halting blood flow,
antimicrobial defense, cytokine secretion, and tissue-growth-factor
production. Using PRP to treat ligament, tendon, and connective-tissue
damage is like taking the little particles in your body that are responsible
for repairing damaged tissue, concentrating them, and then injecting them
into the injured area to accelerate tissue repair and regeneration.
When an inflammatory reaction begins, cytokines mediate a process
called chemomodulation. Chemomodulation leads to the growth and
strengthening of new connective tissue, increased joint stability, and a
reduction in pain and dysfunction. Since cartilage and ligaments have
particularly poor circulation compared to tissues like skin and muscle,
prolotherapy in these areas results in targeted repair in an area where
recovery would normally take much longer to occur.
How to get started: Since it’s expensive and involves visiting a clinic
for multiple courses of injections over several weeks, prolotherapy is
something to consider when you need to bring out the “big guns” because
a joint or muscle injury won’t go away. Many regenerative medicine
doctors and pain management clinics offer prolotherapy, in many cases
combined with more advanced treatments like stem cell and exosome
injections.
4. Vibration Therapy
Whole-body vibration (WBV) therapy involves standing or moving on a
vibration platform and has been shown not only to increase strength,
power, and speed but also to generate hormonal, immunological, and anti-
inflammatory responses that can accelerate recovery. Vibration therapy
--- END PAGE 567 ---

--- PAGE 568 ---
works by triggering reflexive muscle contractions, causing changes in the
length of the muscle-tendon complex (a unit of muscles and tendons that
work together) and triggering various physiological adaptive responses.
Some research has also suggested that the increased gravitational forces
experienced during WBV elicit an anabolic hormonal response
(testosterone is an example of an anabolic hormone). Vibration therapy
also has a side benefit: it can enhance the peristaltic motion of the
intestines, making it a great way to induce a morning bowel movement.
Because there is an element of friction when you are standing on a
vibration platform, in the early stages of healing, you need to be careful of
ankle, knee, or hip injuries that may be irritated by the rubbing of
ligaments on bone (such as IT band friction syndrome). I once
experimented with vibration for recovery hours after sustaining a knee
injury from stepping the wrong way during a trail run, and, unfortunately,
the vibration left me reeling in pain for several hours, which probably
slowed my recovery. If it hurts, don’t do it.
But in the later stages of healing, and for any injured body part not
bothered by vibration, a WBV platform can be a handy training and
recovery tool to keep in your home gym, garage, or office. You can stand
on one for a few minutes in the morning or evening or implement it into
your workout routine. The company Power Plate makes a good vibration
platform. There are also handheld percussive devices such as the
Myobuddy, Hypervolt, and Theragun, which can achieve similar effects but
in a more targeted manner—think of them as vibrating power tools for
specific body parts, with the added advantage of deep tissue massage.
Newer models even have options for heating and cooling during the
vibration treatment and interchangeable heads in a variety of shapes for
different parts of your anatomy. Percussive massage with such a device is
usually self-administered or, if you’re like me, administered by your kids or
--- END PAGE 568 ---

--- PAGE 569 ---
spouse after you slip them ten bucks to work on your sore area for ten
minutes.
How to get started: The Myobuddy is a cool entry-level device that can
be used like a vibrating car buffer for your entire body, including your gut
and your head, and comes in handy for stimulating a bowel movement if
you’re stuck in the bathroom for too long and haven’t installed a vibration
platform next to your toilet yet. Power Plate also makes a handy, tiny
travel massage gun that I take just about everywhere, allowing me to
massage my IT bands while waiting at an airport or save myself from
having to pay for a massage at the hotel spa.
5. Compression
Research suggests that wearing compression gear during a hard workout
may improve your performance in subsequent workouts, possibly because
the increased blood flow resulting from compression helps restore muscle
glycogen levels and clear metabolic waste. When you wear compression
gear, usually in the form of tight-fitting, specially designed socks, shirts, or
pants, you may also experience less muscle damage from tissue
“bouncing” up and down while you exercise. If you sleep, rest, or travel
wearing compression gear, you will find that the improvements in support
and blood flow leave you less stiff and sore.
Although I find compression gear a bit annoying and time-consuming
to pull on for a daily workout, I do wear compression socks or tights while
at my standing workstation, I sleep in compression gear after particularly
tough workout days, I wear compression gear on airplanes and during long
car rides, and a couple times a week, I take an afternoon nap or catch up
on some reading or laptop work while wearing a special style of space-
agey, motorized compression boots (mine are made by Therabody), which
--- END PAGE 569 ---

--- PAGE 570 ---
combine the following three massage techniques to speed the body’s
normal recovery process:•

Pulsing: Instead of using static compression (squeezing) to transport
fluid out of the limbs, pulsing uses dynamic compression, which
mimics the muscle pump of the legs and arms, enhancing the
movement of fluid and metabolic waste out of the limbs after a
workout.•

Gradients: Your veins and lymphatic vessels have one-way valves that
prevent the backflow of fluid. Via a similar action, a gradient holds
pressures to keep your body’s fluids from being forced down toward
your feet by the pulsing action in the proximal zones of the
compression boots. This compression gradient can deliver maximum
pressure throughout the entire limb, and the effectiveness of the
pulsing action is not diminished near the top of the limb.•

Distal release: Because sustained static pressure can be detrimental to
the body’s normal circulatory flow, sequential pulsing releases the hold
pressures once they are no longer needed to prevent backflow. By
releasing the hold pressure in each zone as soon as possible, each
portion of the limb gains maximum rest time without a significant
pause between compression cycles.
How to get started: Get yourself a decent set of compression socks or
tights and wear them during a day of work or for several hours after a
tough workout. Look for graduated compression gear, which ensures it’s
designed to do a good job of moving blood flow from the far limbs back
toward the heart. Compression gear also pairs well with cold soaks and
cryotherapy, as it reduces some of the lymphatic fluid backflow that can
occur during long immersion in cold water, making cold thermogenesis
even more effective.
--- END PAGE 570 ---

--- PAGE 571 ---
6. Magnets
Although there is a relative lack of research on the therapeutic use of
magnets to help reduce pain or accelerate recovery, there have been some
promising studies on their ability to improve nervous tissue regeneration
and wound healing. The theory is that magnets increase blood flow,
change the migration of calcium ions, alter the pH balance of muscles, and
have a positive effect on hormone production and enzyme activity. For
example, if a magnetic field is strong enough to attract or repel ions like
sodium and chloride in the blood, these ions may eventually encounter the
walls of the blood vessels, move more rapidly, and increase tissue
temperature or blood flow. PEMF acts similarly and is more powerful, but
magnets are a decent blood-flow-enhancing option when you’re on the go.
Companies such as MagnetRx and QMagnet make thin, light, flexible
magnets that you can apply with adhesive and wear while sleeping,
exercising, or working. Aside from occasional experimentation with
magnets and magnetic wraps for tennis elbow or a sore knee, magnets
have not been a huge part of my recovery routine. But many folks swear by
slapping them on an injured joint or wrapping sore muscles with a
magnetic wrap, and PubMed contains several research studies on magnets
for purposes such as inflammation or blood flow.
How to get started: Surround an area that is hypoxic or injured with
two to four adhesive magnets. If it’s annoying to wear a magnet during
physical activity, you can wear it at night while you sleep.
7. HBOT
If you wander into my basement and open a super-secret door at the end
of the hallway, you’ll discover a large infrared sauna with salt therapy and
red light inside; a PEMF chair with graduated compression recovery boots;
--- END PAGE 571 ---

--- PAGE 572 ---
a 33 degrees Fahrenheit cold plunge; a Biocharger for the generation of
healing electrical frequencies; and one of my favorite recovery toys: a soft-
shell hyperbaric oxygen therapy chamber. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
(HBOT) involves breathing pure oxygen in a pressurized room or, in this
case, a human-sized tube. HBOT has been used in clinical settings to heal
wounds, treat carbon monoxide poisoning and smoke inhalation, fix
altitude sickness, and even assist with healing from conditions such as
Lyme disease, head injuries, stroke, anemia, and dementia. However,
HBOT can also be used to maximize performance and recovery. For
example, it can facilitate speedier return to activity after a soft-tissue
injury or the type of microinjuries and muscle tearing that occur during a
hard workout or competition. It can also increase oxygen supply to
muscles, increase ATP production, cause new capillary growth and
regeneration of nerves, and even mobilize stem cells in a manner very
similar to a stem cell infusion.
How to get started: Although HBOT can be supervised by a medical
professional your first few times, especially if you’re nervous about the
slight ear-popping that occurs from pressurizing yourself with oxygen,
doing your own HBOT treatment (as I do) is simple: you flip on an O2
generator, climb inside the tube, zip it up from the inside, turn the
decompression valve, and lie back for thirty to ninety minutes to read,
meditate, experiment with some newfangled neurofeedback or light-sound
therapy machine, or simply nap (I’ll link to some of my deeper methods
for biohacking meditation and napping on the resources page). For the full
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory response, consecutive treatments of up
to forty sessions are recommended, but I began to notice better
performance and recovery after just two or three sessions, and my “blah”
feeling after heavy airline travel disappears within just an hour. The model
I use is the Vitaeris 320 by HBOTUSA.
--- END PAGE 572 ---

--- PAGE 573 ---
8. Deep-Tissue Work
Deep-tissue work, massage therapy, and self-inflicted trigger-point therapy
are all methods for increasing blood flow, reducing fascial adhesions,
working out knots, recovering faster, and maintaining what my friend and
former podcast guest Joel Greene calls “young muscle.” Having a few
decent deep-tissue work tools around can save you plenty of money on
massage therapy and goes way beyond merely stretching. Stretching can
actually force knots in your muscles to become tighter in the same way
that if you tie a knot in a rubber band and pull the ends of the rubber
band, the knot gets tighter. Stretching is also often less effective than a
deep-tissue massage at restoring blood flow to a particular muscle. So save
stretching for after you’ve done some deep-tissue and mobility work with
a foam roller, lacrosse ball, tennis ball, golf ball, or percussive massage
gun, as the massaging will release muscle knots and suffuse the tissue with
fresh blood and nutrients. Ideally, your workout recovery should go in this
order: foam roll, warm-up, exercise, then stretch. If you want to use my
method, allot ten to fifteen minutes each morning to do deep-tissue work
on any tight spots, since that will ensure your body is more prepared for
anything that might get thrown at it that day and will reduce any nagging
aches and pains that threaten to distract you during work or exercise later.
In chapter 9, I talked about Olga Kotelko, who became a track-and-
field star in her nineties. Her tip for age-defying muscle was to stay supple.
Every night, she gave herself a foam-roller-style massage with an empty
wine bottle she kept beside her bed. She understood that you cannot
simply beat your body up day in and day out without working into the
tissue to massage the fasciae, muscles, and joints. Similarly, I take time
every morning to utilize a variety of deep-tissue tools. Throughout the
week, I target my lower back, upper shoulders, neck, under armpits, chest,
hips, hamstrings, calves, quadriceps, thighs, neck, and even the bottoms of
my feet. While I still try to get a massage once or twice a month, I’m able
--- END PAGE 573 ---

--- PAGE 574 ---
to keep my body supple with this morning tactic, and my workout later on
in the morning is far easier to start and finish pain-free.
Even if you don’t have a suite of self-massage devices at your disposal,
you can get creative. The corners of dumbbells or kettlebells at the
average hotel gym can easily be used to dig into the sides of your sore hips
or shoulders. Rocks, edges of a park bench, flagpoles, and anything else
with a hard edge or surface can also be used on hips, backs, and the
undersides of your knees. I’ve even done bodywork with a firm, large water
bottle wrapped in a towel.
How to get started: Get started with the best tool in this department:
a foam roller (I prefer a nice, firm one with ridges on it to dig into
muscles, like the Rumble Roller). The Therabody website has a thorough
suite of good bodywork tools. I also recommend picking up the book
Becoming a Supple Leopard by Kelly Starrett, which you can consider a
“cookbook” for all things deep tissue and mobility related. Simply flip to
the page related to the muscle group that’s tight or sore and follow the
instructions.
9. Electrical Muscle Stimulation (EMS)
In chapter 9, you learned that EMS causes muscle contractions using
electric impulses from an external device. It can be used as a strength
training tool, but it can also keep a muscle fit when you are rehabbing
from an injury, or retrain old muscles your brain has forgotten how to
recruit properly. For example, you could do an EMS strength set for your
quads if you have injured your feet and can’t do lower-body exercises, for
your pecs if you have injured your shoulders and can’t press or do push-
ups, or for your glutes if you have back pain due to deactivated,
“forgotten” hip extensors (an all-too-common problem!).
--- END PAGE 574 ---

--- PAGE 575 ---
The Marc Pro is an EMS device that uses a specific waveform to
gradually and gently grab muscle fibers, which works better for
rehabilitation and recovery. This makes it ideal for healing damaged areas
of tissue or enhancing recovery, compared with EMS devices that are
primarily best for maintaining or building strength, muscle endurance, or
power.
The NeuFit and the ARPWave are examples of more powerful devices
that can maintain muscle strength and power with extreme efficacy. They
work through something called interferential, microcurrent, galvanic,
Russian-stim iontophoresis, which is more compatible with your body’s
natural electrical wave production. The current also passes through skin
and fatty tissue more easily, so it can penetrate much deeper without
burning your skin or causing other nasty side effects. Devices like these
are also effective at training muscles close to injuries, as they exert no
stress aside from the current running through the muscle.
Then there’s my favorite: the Katalyst, which is a full-body, wireless
EMS suit that you simply wet with a spray bottle, which allows for better
skin conduction, then sync to an iPad that walks you through an
admittedly brutal full-body strength-training workout, with options for
cardio and rehab sessions, too.
How to get started: I have found that for sore muscles or for sucking
inflammation out fast, EMS combined with pressure and ice works well.
This treatment is pretty simple and works like gangbusters for pain and
soreness: you stick the electrodes from something like a Marc Pro to the
affected area, preferably rubbing a bit of a topical anti-inflammatory like
CBD or magnesium oil on prior; place an ice pack over the electrodes and
secure it all in place with an elastic bandage or kinesiotape; and then flip
the switch for twenty to thirty minutes.
--- END PAGE 575 ---

--- PAGE 576 ---
Near-Infrared Light vs. Far-Infrared Light vs.
Red Light
Light can be broken down into wavelengths, and the wavelengths of infrared
radiation, also called infrared light, are longer than those of visible light, so
it’s invisible to the human eye. Infrared light wavelengths extend from 700
nm, the red edge of the visible light spectrum, all the way up to 1 mm.
Near-infrared radiation (NIR) exists within the spectrum of natural sunlight.
In fact, about half of the total energy of the sun is NIR, which means that our
bodies are already naturally adapted to use it for processes like collagen and
elastin stimulation (which tightens skin), combating cancerous cells, and
improving circulation. Far-infrared radiation (FIR) has longer wavelengths
than NIR, and the benefits of FIR therapy mimic many of the benefits
derived from sunlight, but without the risk of burns or cancerous effects. FIR
can promote blood flow and healthy blood vessel growth and also modulate
proper sleep. Both NIR and FIR induce relaxation and detoxification via
sweating, and my recommendation is to use a one-two combo of both,
preferably along with the visible wavelength of red light so that you get the
best of all spectrums.
Keep in mind that the benefits of NIR and FIR exposure are dose-dependent.
While moderate exposure to the infrared radiation of the sun throughout the
day is beneficial, as is a dose of sauna exposure or the use of PBM devices
that simulate or concentrate the conditions of sunlight, chronic exposure or
doses higher than recommended can lead to skin and cell damage. In
addition, certain infrared saunas may expose you to unhealthy levels of
electrical pollution (the same type of EMF you’ll learn more about in chapter
20), which is especially concerning since these saunas often have FIR
emitters all the way around them, meaning you may be bombarded by
pollution from all directions. This is why it is important to use PBM for only
ten to sixty minutes per day, depending on the power of your chosen device,
and to look for an NIR sauna that uses heat lamps or other low-EMF
strategies, such as two separate magnetic devices that will cancel each
other out, and also has minimal amounts of electrical wiring throughout the
walls.
--- END PAGE 576 ---

--- PAGE 577 ---
Finally, red light, which occurs at a wavelength of 680 nm, does not
penetrate as deep as near infrared or far infrared, but it is more readily
absorbed by your skin, leading to increased collagen production and skin
health—so if your goal is to minimize scar tissue, address wrinkles, and
improve skin tone, you should also include a red-light source in your
photobiomodulation protocol.
10. Photobiomodulation (PBM)
In chapter 6, I mentioned PBM for cognitive enhancement and the
Vielight device for brain PBM therapy. PBM also can improve physical
recovery—at the cellular level, visible red and near-infrared light can
stimulate your cells to generate more energy and undergo self-repair.
Here’s how it works: Each cell contains mitochondria, which produce ATP,
your body’s primary form of usable energy. A mitochondrial enzyme called
cytochrome c oxidase can accept energy in the form of light for enhanced
cellular function. Based on this principle, low-level laser therapy (LLLT),
also known as cold laser therapy, uses a particular kind of laser called a
light-emitting diode (LED) to reduce pain related to inflammation. It is
effective for treating tendinitis, arthritis, and both acute and chronic pain,
and it can lower levels of pain-producing chemicals, such as
prostaglandins and interleukin, while decreasing bruises, swelling,
bleeding, and oxidative stress from free radicals.
--- END PAGE 577 ---

--- PAGE 578 ---
Smaller spot-treatment devices like the Lumaflex and the Kineon Go+
use 650nm red LED combined with 808nm infrared lasers. Larger devices
like the 10X bed or panels, Joovv panels, NovaTHOR bed, and MitoRed
mat allow for full-body treatments, usually emitting red light from mid-
600 nm to near-infrared wavelengths in the mid-800 nm range. The
benefits of full-body light therapy include the repair of sun-related skin
damage, enhanced muscle recovery and performance, rapid wound
healing, the reduction of joint inflammation, improved fertility, and the
removal of scars, wrinkles, and stretch marks.
If you want to get invisible far-infrared light combined with negative
ions, the BioMat provides a deep heating effect along with healing and
recovery-enhancing negative ions, similar to those produced by clean,
pure air outside. Another device by HigherDose does the same, but with
the addition of PEMF. Then there’s the BioCharger, which amplifies red
light and other frequencies into a room, emanating with a three-to-fifteen-
foot-radius treatment for anyone standing near the device.
How to get started: Start small to see how PBM affects you. Get a
portable unit like the Kineon Go+, Lumaflex, or JOOVV Go and keep it on
hand to use the next time a joint becomes painful, overworked, or
inflamed. Fifteen to twenty-five minutes of targeted red-light/laser therapy
can offer significant relief.
11. Infrared Sauna
An infrared sauna is considered a type of photobiomodulation because it
combines heat and light, but due to the difference in heating, blood flow,
sweating, and the production of beneficial recovery compounds like heat
shock proteins (HSPs), the sauna deserves a category on its own. Unlike a
dry or wet sauna, an infrared sauna is a source of radiant heat from light,
the same type of heat you get from sunlight or cold-laser therapy. Radiant
--- END PAGE 578 ---

--- PAGE 579 ---
heat is a form of energy that directly heats objects through a process
called conversion, without heating the air around that object. Exposing the
body to infrared light has been shown to raise white blood cell counts,
enhance immunity, heat tissue, increase blood flow to injured or
recovering muscles, and provide a host of additional recovery benefits. A
full-spectrum infrared sauna produces a combination of near-, mid-, and
far-infrared radiation, allowing for light that targets mitochondria for
increased ATP production, light that penetrates deep into the body for
detoxification benefits, and light that heats the body from the inside out.
In a typical infrared sauna, ceramic or metallic elements are used to
emit energy. Unlike the heat in a regular dry sauna or steam room, this
energy penetrates the skin and heats you up from inside as well as
warming the outside environment, so there can be a much more
pronounced hyperthermic and deep sweating effect. But one drawback to
most infrared saunas is that they can produce a large amount of unhealthy
electromagnetic fields, so you need to find a low-EMF version (I’ll look at
that in more detail in chapter 20).
Finally, a treatment that works well in combination with sauna is
halotherapy, which I use for most of my sauna treatments. Halotherapy
involves breathing microcrystalline particles of salt that are infused into a
room via a salt generator. It is good for skin health, pulmonary issues,
asthma, coughs, and colds, and it can also cause you to sweat more in your
sauna.
How to get started: Low-EMF infrared sauna brands include
Clearlight, SaunaSpace, and Sunlighten. I have a large, four-person
Clearlight Sanctuary infrared sauna in my basement. I’ve removed the
benches from it and use it nearly every day for stretching, heat
acclimation, building blood volume and new red blood cells, recovery, and
detoxification. For a less expensive solution, you can get a wraparound
infrared heating blanket like those made by HigherDose.
--- END PAGE 579 ---

--- PAGE 580 ---
12. Upgraded Water
You no doubt know that water is crucial for hydration, which is critical for
recovery. But water can now be upgraded using a variety of machines that
“structure” water, adding antioxidant-rich hydrogen or even extra
molecular-signaling compounds. For example, a company called Eng3
created a device called NanoVi that infuses water with an electromagnetic
charge that generates free radicals to subject your body to mild oxidative
stress. By charging the water in its humidifier holding tank, then delivering
it through a tube to a nasal cannula around your nose or a small pipe you
can breathe from while working, the NanoVi creates a signal closely
resembling the one given off by free radicals in your body. This stimulates
a stronger healing response than free radicals alone would cause, resulting
in an improved response to oxidative stress and enhanced cell repair and
recovery. It may also enhance protein-folding mechanisms and overall
protein repair.
This is important because as we age, we begin to lose proteostasis, the
biogenesis, folding, mobilization, and breaking down of proteins. In all
cells, the 100,000 to 250,000 proteins (known collectively as the
“proteome”) that we need for life can misfold or become misshapen, and
the normal 3-D shape of native proteins degrades. Part of proteostasis is
refolding or destroying these proteins, but when proteostasis declines,
these damaged proteins can accumulate. Indeed, declining proteostasis is
now regarded as one of the primary causes of accelerated aging. Misfolded
or clumped proteins are significantly implicated in age-related diseases,
such as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s, and multiple studies have shown that
proteostasis is impaired with age. So anything that can enhance protein-
repair mechanisms, such as the NanoVi, not only improves recovery but
can also be used as an antiaging tactic.
Then there is hydrogen-rich water, which I drink a large glass of in the
morning and then again in the afternoon, usually by dropping a few
--- END PAGE 580 ---

--- PAGE 581 ---
hydrogen tablets into water or using a hydrogen water–generating bottle.
Research suggests that hydrogen (H₂) has potent antioxidative properties,
can help control lactic acid levels during exercise, and can even manage
post-exercise inflammation without blunting your natural adaptive
response to a workout (unlike, say, high doses of antioxidants). I have in
my home gym an H₂ water generator that is capable of infusing water with
extremely high concentrations of H₂. According to the Molecular
Hydrogen Institute, drinking this water has been shown to boost energy,
increase focus, increase immune system strength, enhance performance,
elevate mood, eliminate pain, rejuvenate skin, and improve sleep. Because
of this wide variety of benefits, I also travel with hydrogen tablets for H₂-
enhanced performance on the road and simply drop two to four tablets
into a glass of water in the morning and evening. Hydrogen-rich water can
also be used to reduce hydroxyl radicals, a free radical formed in the body
from excess iron. Individuals who have either the HFE or SLC40A1 gene
variant can absorb too much iron, leading to excess production of
hydroxyl radicals and, potentially, unresolved inflammation and poor
recovery. Having your doctor run a complete iron panel to see if your iron
is elevated can be helpful in determining whether this is an issue for you,
but keep in mind that if iron is excessively turning into hydroxyl radicals,
your iron levels may come back normal or even low. To learn more about
this genetic susceptibility, I recommend looking into the work of Dr. Bob
Miller at TOLHealth.com.
How to get started: Admittedly, the NanoVi is expensive (prices range
from $5,000 to $14,000, depending on the model you choose), but the
convenience of a cellular-repair device that you can have sitting on your
desk all day makes it an attractive option for recovery enthusiasts who
want to stack recovery biohacks during a day of work. A hydrogen-rich
under-sink or whole-house water generator like an Analemma, Ophora, or
EchoH2 is convenient but similarly expensive. Grabbing a few bottles of
--- END PAGE 581 ---

--- PAGE 582 ---
hydrogen-rich water tablets from a company like WaterAndWellness is
more affordable, as is owning an inexpensive hydrogen-generating water
bottle like the Python, EchoH2, or Hydrolite. Finally, you can look into a
whole-house or under-sink structured water filter. Two companies I’ve
vetted, both of which I’ve used in my own homes, are Greenfield Water
and Ophora Water. (The latter includes a fourteen-stage filtration system
with the addition of extra oxygen to your water!)
13. Pulsed Electromagnetic Field (PEMF)
Therapy
PEMF uses electrical energy to direct a series of magnetic pulses through
injured tissue. The electrical signal from each pulse stimulates cellular
repair by upregulating a tissue-repair protein called a heat-shock protein
and increasing the uptake of oxygen and nutrients into tissue. Studies have
shown PEMF to be effective in healing soft-tissue wounds, reducing
inflammation and pain, and increasing range of motion. By stimulating
ATP production, PEMF can decrease the amount of time it takes to
replenish energy stores after a workout. PEMF may also accelerate bone
repair, which can come in handy if you have a stress fracture or a broken
bone.
There are several smaller, entry-level PEMF devices on the market. I
own a portable FlexPulse and a Celler8, both of which have options for
signals that elicit focus, relaxation, recovery, and sleep. Such devices can
be held or moved slightly over an area of damaged tissue or healing bone
for ten to thirty minutes for recovery and pain relief. The magnetic signal
released by a PEMF device is similar to that created by grounding or
earthing mats, which professional cycling teams have used for more than a
decade during the Tour de France to enhance sleep and recovery. But
unlike these mats, a PEMF device does not need to be plugged into an
--- END PAGE 582 ---

--- PAGE 583 ---
outlet and grounded, so it exposes you to less electrical pollution, and the
signal is higher and can be concentrated to a more specific area.
For full-body PEMF treatments, there are other good options. The
BioBalance, designed by the same Dr. William Pawluk who developed the
FlexPulse, is a mat that you can sleep on all night, and the PureWave mat
by 10X includes settings for tranquility, stability, and vitality, along with
eye and ear treatment options. For the most powerful PEMF options,
Pulse Centers makes a PEMF massage table called the Pulse XL Pro, which
comes with a variety of different-shaped pads and coils and can be used
for everything from muscle sprains to headaches to sleep induction to
noticeable full-body treatments. The Pulse XL Pro generates up to 10 Hz
of pulsing power that is safe and completely biologically compatible, so it’s
more powerful than any other PEMF device on the market (but it’s also
the price of a small car).
Incidentally, because ultrasonic (ultrasound) waves can penetrate
several centimeters into tissue and, like PEMF, increase circulation,
oxygen, nutrient delivery, and the removal of waste products from the site
of a musculoskeletal injury, you can combine a PEMF unit with ultrasound
or have a separate ultrasound unit. For example, the sam Sport is a
wearable ultrasound unit that delivers 1.3 watts of low-intensity
ultrasound energy at a specific frequency that accelerates healing and
reduces pain—without the time, hassle, and expense of working with a
physical therapist or ultrasound technician. That’s an important aspect of
many of the recovery modalities in this chapter: the ability to quickly and
effectively recover at home without needing to drive to a physical
therapist, fancy recovery center, or doctor’s office.
How to get started: Begin with an entry-level, portable handheld
device like the FlexPulse or Celler8 to experiment with how your body
responds to PEMF.
--- END PAGE 583 ---

--- PAGE 584 ---
14. Inversion
Hanging upside down like a bat may not seem like a stress-relieving or
relaxing activity, but I hang from the inversion table in my garage or the
yoga trapeze in my living room for five to ten minutes several times a
week, especially after a long day at my standing workstation or several
hours sitting in an airplane, and both the traction and the drainage effects
are impressive. Heavy, swollen feet and legs almost instantly become
lighter, and in addition, inversion has been shown to assist with lymphatic
fluid circulation, back pain, blood flow, and spine or hip misalignment
from high-impact workouts. Inversion also lengthens the spine, mobilizes
the hips, and—in the case of the Pettibon neck traction device that also
hangs inside my house—can be used as a chiropractic adjustment tool for
the spine and neck.
Of course, you don’t have to have an inversion table or yoga trapeze to
use inversion. For example, after a long run, you can elevate your legs
above your head by lying on your back with your legs propped against a
wall—keep your legs elevated for at least one minute for every mile you
have run. Other options are yoga inversions like the plow pose, a
supported shoulder stand, a supported headstand, or an unsupported
headstand; a yoga headstand block makes learning an unsupported
headstand easier. Finally, ELDOA, which I’ll talk more about in chapter 17,
works similarly to inversion as a form of self-imposed decompression and
traction for each of your joints.
How to get started: This one is pretty simple, really. Just purchase an
inversion table, a yoga trapeze, or even a set of gravity boots and keep
them in a visible location where you’re likely to use inversion on a regular
basis. My yoga trapeze and neck traction device hang from my living room
balcony, my gravity boots are conveniently located next to the pull-up bar
in my home gym, and my inversion table is next to the exercise bike in my
garage. I tend to invert for five to ten minutes every day, often while
--- END PAGE 584 ---

--- PAGE 585 ---
checking email on my phone or even holding a weight like a kettlebell
while upside down to enhance the stretch!
15. Fasting
While the majority of sports nutrition recommendations advise you to
shove carbohydrates and protein down your gullet as soon as possible
after a workout, there is evidence to suggest that fasting, even
postworkout, can have a potent recovery effect. When your body enters a
fasted state, the process of autophagy is triggered, which is a programmed
cellular response that results in cell turnover and recycling. Autophagy is
particularly important for nervous system recovery, as the disruption or
lack of autophagy has been shown to cause neurodegeneration.
Intermittent fasting has been shown to improve motor-skill recovery in
rats with spinal cord bruises, the result of autophagy clearing away old
neurons to make way for the growth of new neurons. This also improves
cognition, muscle function, and movement-pattern recognition.
In a study of cyclists, three weeks of overnight-fasted workouts
improved postworkout recovery while maintaining lean muscle mass and
performance, as well as keeping body fat low. Another study on endurance
athletes suggested that fasted training may more quickly activate muscle
protein translation, especially compared with athletes who ate
carbohydrates before training, resulting in improved muscle recovery.
Fasting also has benefits for strength athletes. A 2009 study found that
subjects who lifted weights in a fasted state had a greater anabolic
response to a postworkout meal. In this case, levels of p70S6 kinase, a
signaling mechanism for muscle-protein synthesis that acts as an indicator
of muscle growth, were twice as high in the fasted group as in the fed
group.
--- END PAGE 585 ---

--- PAGE 586 ---
Martin Berkhan of the blog LeanGains.com, who is a big proponent of
fasting, has a take on the possible mechanism behind fasted-training
adaptations, as does Dr. Jason Fung in his excellent book The Complete
Guide to Fasting. A simple way to think of it is that when nutrients and
calories are concentrated in the body in a fed state, exercise is experienced
as less of a stressor than fasted-state training, so there is less need to
adapt to or compensate for the stressor. A similar phenomenon appears
with antioxidant intake, with recent studies showing that ingesting high-
dose antioxidants such as vitamins C and E in the presence of exercise
may dampen the body’s natural response to training, such as free radical
formation and satellite cell proliferation. In other words, constantly
training in a fed state or eating postworkout may make things too easy for
the body.
A word of warning when it comes to fasting: for extremely lean
individuals with low stores of essential body fat, people prone to eating
disorders, and women who are dealing with adrenal or hormonal
imbalances, the risks and stresses of frequent fasting, especially pre- and
postworkout, can quickly outweigh any benefits.
In general, women are more susceptible to negative effects from
fasting, which makes biological sense from an evolutionary standpoint:
women need more calories and nutrients to build up and sustain a reserve
that can nourish a growing fetus. Unfortunately, the combination of high
levels of physical activity and fasting can rapidly downregulate fertility
hormones in women, which has an effect not just on fertility but on
overall health. Fasting has also been shown to reduce glucose tolerance in
women. In addition, the fasting-induced benefits seen in obese women
may not apply to leaner women or women in perimenopause.
Interestingly, even in obese women, intermittent fasting can result in the
loss of lean body mass and muscle rather than the loss of pure adipose
tissue. Finally, it has also been shown that women do not experience the
--- END PAGE 586 ---

--- PAGE 587 ---
same benefits of fasting-induced autophagy that men do. So proceed with
caution, ladies.
How to get started: I fast in three ways: (1) an intermittent, daily
overnight fast of twelve to sixteen hours, leaving me with a compressed
eight-to-twelve-hour eating window; (2) a twenty-four-hour fast from
dinnertime to dinnertime, done once or twice per month; and 3) a
quarterly cleanup fast of three to five days of reduced calories and protein,
typically achieved by implementing a bone broth fast, juice fast, or kitchari
cleanse. To maintain adequate recovery nutrients during these fasts, I
occasionally “cheat” with low-calorie recovery or energy-enhancing
supplements, such as essential amino acids, exogenous ketones, coffee,
and minerals, none of which cause an appreciable enough calorie spike to
break a fast.
16. Anti-inflammatory Diet
One huge pet peeve of mine is when someone pulls out all the stops to fix
an injury or struggles with constant joint soreness or subpar recovery, all
while eating supersized sandwiches on whole-grain bread, living out of the
“healthy” bakery case at their favorite coffee shop, eating organic packaged
foods laden with vegetable oil, and gulping down several cups of coffee
every morning. Glycemic spikes, oxidized oils, and—in excess—acidic
beverages like coffee can all aggravate inflammation, so trying to fix an
injury without fixing your nutrition is like fighting a fire in your house with
water on one side and gasoline on the other.
What makes a food inflammatory? There are at least two dozen
factors, including the amounts and proportions of various fatty acids, the
amounts of antioxidants and other nutrients, and the food’s glycemic
impact (its effect on blood sugar levels). But it is not as clear-cut as it
might sound because some foods have both inflammation-producing and
--- END PAGE 587 ---

--- PAGE 588 ---
inflammation-reducing factors. An orange, for example, contains
antioxidants that can fight inflammation, but an entire glass of orange
juice contains concentrated natural sugars that can have a mild
inflammatory effect. Similarly, a nice fatty cut of steak contains enough
saturated fats to create inflammation in many people but also contains
anti-inflammatory monounsaturated fats.
A resource such as InflammationFactor.com can help you cut through
the confusion. Its inflammation factor (IF) rating system allows you to
quickly see whether a specific food is going to have an inflammatory or
anti-inflammatory effect, and from there you can determine the
inflammatory potential of entire meals or recipes. Some convenient anti-
inflammatory foods include:
• Pineapple, which is rich in a proteolytic enzyme called bromelain that
produces substances that help fight pain and inflammation
• Blue, red, and purple fruits and vegetables, all of which contain
antioxidant flavonoids that limit inflammation, prevent tissue
breakdown, improve circulation, and promote a strong collagen matrix
• Ginger, which two studies from the University of Georgia have shown
can help fight inflammation and reduce exercise-induced muscle pain
in doses of 2 g daily. Just boil several slices of ginger, juice a golf-ball-
sized chunk of ginger, or add ginger to a smoothie.
Other foods with high IF ratings include garlic, peppers, parsley, dark
leafy greens, onions, salmon, avocados, and apple cider vinegar.
How to get started: Visit InflammationFactor.com, grab their IF
rating list for five bucks, and then print it and post it someplace you’ll
often see it for the next few weeks. Familiarize yourself with potentially
inflammatory foods that are staples in your diet. Remember, inflammation
is natural, and not all inflammation is bad, but when you’re trying to pull
out all the stops for recovery and your body is already inflamed from, say,
--- END PAGE 588 ---

--- PAGE 589 ---
a workout or injury, you need to be more cautious. There’s a good reason
that Tom Brady, a former top-ranked NFL quarterback who also had one
of the longest professional sporting careers, doesn’t eat tomatoes,
potatoes, or eggplants—although one could argue those foods are healthy.
He wants every recovery advantage he can get.
17. Vitamins C and E
Back in the 1940s, physicians began routinely giving their surgical patients
1,000 mg of vitamin C daily for three days before surgery, followed by 100
mg of vitamin C daily during recovery. These doctors reported in the
British Journal of Surgery that 76 percent of wounds treated this way healed
properly, with a threefold to sixfold increase in the strength of the wound
scar. Russian researchers have shown that surgical patients who take
vitamin C are discharged from the hospital one to two days earlier than
patients who don’t, probably due to vitamin C’s crucial role in collagen
formation (collagen is the primary component of connective tissue). In
fact, when bone broth is combined with vitamin C, exercise-induced
collagen synthesis more than doubles. Vitamin C also works as an
antioxidant to limit free-radical damage to tissues and boosts the growth
of fibroblast and chondrocyte cells, which produce connective-tissue
fibers and cartilage. I don’t take a vitamin C supplement unless I am
injured, but I do make sure I get an adequate daily dose from fruits,
vegetables, and whole-food antioxidant powders.
Vitamin E can be a bit confusing. When I interviewed Dr. Barrie Tan,
author of The Truth About Vitamin E: The Secret to Thriving with Annatto
Tocotrienols, he presented a compelling case for the recovery, muscle
protein synthesis, and anti-inflammatory benefits of vitamin E-based
tocotrienols, which have more potent antioxidant properties than
tocopherols and more efficient penetration into tissues. You can get
--- END PAGE 589 ---

--- PAGE 590 ---
enough tocopherols from walnuts, almonds, peanuts, hazelnuts,
macadamia nuts, grains, eggs, and fish, but it’s wise to supplement with a
tocotrienol source. The best way to do so is to use a tocotrienol derived
from the annatto plant, which contains a high amount of the extremely
beneficial compound geranylgeraniol (GG), producing a side benefit of
reducing muscle soreness (especially soreness from statin use), elevating
CoQ10 and vitamin K (MK4) levels, and increasing testosterone.
How to get started: Choose a nutrient-dense vitamin C source, such
as cherries or kiwi fruit, powdered antioxidant and polyphenol-rich
supplements like red and green powders, liposomal vitamin C capsules, or
a concentrated vitamin C powder. I begin each day with a giant scoop of
Jigsaw Health Adrenal Cocktail added to hydrogen-enriched water, and
will double that up if injured or sore. Split up your portions, because if you
take more than 1.5 g at a time, you can get stomach upset. In addition,
many natural-medicine clinics offer high-dose vitamin C IVs, which can be
administered on a weekly or monthly basis. Contrary to popular belief, it
doesn’t matter whether the vitamin C is synthetic or whole food sourced:
both forms act identically in the body. For annatto, check out Designs For
Health Annatto E-GG, which contains both tocotrienols and GG, and
consider adding in MK-4 from Designs For Health Tri-K for the bone-
building, soreness-reducing, and hormonal benefits. Take both vitamin C
and vitamin E at least two hours before or after any exercise session
because they are such strong antioxidants that they can blunt some of the
natural inflammatory processes produced by exercise.
18. Proteolytic Enzymes
Proteolytic enzymes—such as papain, bromelain, trypsin, and
chymotrypsin—promote healing by supporting the production of
cytokines, activating immune-system proteins (such as alpha-2-
--- END PAGE 590 ---

--- PAGE 591 ---
macroglobulins), breaking down soreness-inducing fibrinogen, and
slowing the clotting mechanism. This is another tool that, like vitamin C,
can help wounds heal faster and help you bounce back more quickly from
surgery.
The best food sources are pineapple, papaya, and red meat, but these
are far less potent than targeted supplementation with the actual
enzymes, especially because proteolytic enzymes produce the best activity
when taken on an empty stomach. This is because proteolytic enzymes
taken with food will digest the proteins in the food rather than breaking
down the fibrinogen in your body, which is the mechanism by which
enzymes modulate blood clotting following tissue damage.
One of the most potent sources of proteolytic enzymes is a recovery
blend I helped formulate: Kion Flex, which contains Serrapeptase,
Serrazimes, and ProHydrolase—all created specifically to break down the
dead tissue and proteins that can cause pain, swelling, and soreness
postworkout or when injured.
Serrapeptase is an enzyme produced by a bacteria called Serratia that
lives inside silkworms. After the silkworm weaves a cocoon and begins
transforming into a moth, it releases Serratia from its gut and the bacteria
then produce Serrapeptase, which eats through the silk protein that makes
up the cocoon. When you eat Serrapeptase enzymes, these same protein-
dissolving properties help dissolve soreness-inducing proteins in your
body that can accumulate in response to inflammation and injury
(especially scarring).
Then there’s Serrazimes, which is a blend of proteases that can break
down protein substrates in a manner very similar to Serrapeptase. Rather
than being derived from silkworm bacteria, this proteolytic blend is
composed of enzymes derived from the edible fungi Aspergillus oryzae and
Aspergillus melleus. (Don’t worry, you don’t eat fungi when you take this
stuff, just the enzymes that the fungi produce.) Serrazimes has proteolytic
--- END PAGE 591 ---

--- PAGE 592 ---
activity comparable to serratiopeptidase and supports healthy joints and
muscles by degrading proteins associated with inflammation.
Finally, there’s the advanced enzyme blend known as ProHydrolase.
Numerous in vitro studies and two separate human clinical studies have
shown that ProHydrolase can quickly break down protein, increase
available amino acids in the blood, and even decrease the large peptides
associated with stomach discomfort that results from consuming protein.
How to get started: If you’re sore or beat up, try taking three capsules
of Kion Flex on an empty stomach prior to bedtime. You can also double
up with a morning dose.
19. Amino Acids
Branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), such as leucine, isoleucine, and
valine, have been a darling of the bodybuilding industry for decades. When
used in daily doses (preferably during workouts) of 5 to 10 g per hour, they
have been proven to significantly enhance performance, and since BCAAs
are the building blocks of neurotransmitters, they are also particularly
important for nervous system performance. For neurotransmitter
optimization, amino acids are best consumed with vitamin B and minerals,
which are the other neurotransmitter precursors. These amino acids also
improve physiological markers such as red blood cell count, hemoglobin,
hematocrit, serum albumin, and fasting glucose, and they even decrease
inflammatory markers like creatine phosphokinase while enhancing the
restoration of muscle glycogen. You can find BCAAs in capsule or powder
form.
On the other hand, essential amino acids, or EAAs (also known as
whole amino acids), are a far better option than BCAAs because they are a
more well-rounded source of amino acids and can keep your body from
cannibalizing your own lean muscle tissue during exercise. However, EAAs
--- END PAGE 592 ---

--- PAGE 593 ---
are relatively pricey, especially if you’re popping them during or after
every workout. Why are they so much more expensive, and what’s the
difference between them and other proteins? At the low end of the amino
acid spectrum, you will find whey and soy protein powders—only 17
percent of their amino acid content is utilized by the body, with the other
83 percent leaving the body as nitrogen-based waste. Foods like red meat,
fish, and poultry fare a bit better, with 32 percent being absorbed and 68
percent being wasted. Eggs are the winners in the food stakes, with 48
percent being utilized and 52 percent being wasted.
Compare those numbers with EAA supplements: a whopping 99
percent of their amino acids are utilized, with only 1 percent wasted. EAAs
are also absorbed by the body within twenty-three minutes, compared
with several hours for food or powder sources of whole protein (and
weight watchers will be happy to know that there is only 0.4 calorie per
gram, tablet or capsule). My friend and forty-two-time Ironman triathlete
Dr. David Minkoff, a specialist in alternative and antiaging medicine,
introduced me to essential amino acids. He swears by them and
completely healed a nagging hamstring injury by taking 40 g per day (yes,
that is admittedly a boatload of amino acids). He prescribes the same for
many of his patients and athletes. When I interviewed pro bodybuilder
Milos Sarcev, he reported lightning-speed recovery results when sipping
on EAAs between sets at the gym. The brand I prefer is Kion Aminos
because of the appropriately formulated amino acid ratios in that
particular blend, along with absence of artificial sweeteners and other
chemicals. It is entirely legal to use EAAs in sporting events, and because
they have potent fatigue-fighting and recovery-enhancing effects, they are
one of my most highly recommended supplements for both performance
and recovery.
How to get started: I recommend taking 5 to 10 g of EAAs before a
hard workout or race, another 5 to 10 g each hour during the event, and 10
--- END PAGE 593 ---

--- PAGE 594 ---
to 40 g per day if you’re healing from an injury. The same ISSN paper I
discussed in chapter 1 shows that you can dose with over 100 g of aminos
per day and still experience muscle protein synthesis, although I haven’t
experimented with that high a dose for injury . . . yet.
20. Fish Oil
In chapter 4, I explored the cognitive benefits of supplementing with DHA,
EPA, and ALA, but the anti-inflammatory properties of these omega-3
fatty acids make them important for physical recovery, too. Omega-3s—
found in cold-water fish, algae, and fish oil—can increase muscle protein
synthesis and support healthy circulatory and brain function, as well as
enhance cognition and mood.
Fish oil supplements generally contain significantly more EPA than
DHA (usually at a 2:3 DHA-to-EPA ratio). But mounting research suggests
that higher levels of DHA are optimal for recovery, neuronal health, and
anti-inflammation, so you should look for a fish oil supplement with a 1:1
DHA-to-EPA ratio. Make sure that it is in a natural triglyceride form and
not the cheaper ethyl-ester form, which is not absorbed as well. It should
also be packaged with antioxidants, such as astaxanthin and vitamin E, to
keep the fatty acids from becoming rancid (and to keep your fish oil from
doing more harm than good to your joints).
While the omega-6 fatty acids found in vegetable oils and heated
seeds, nuts, and nut butters can produce eicosanoids, which are pro-
inflammatory (especially when eaten in the quantity that many endurance
athletes tend to eat them), please note that not all omega-6 fatty acids are
“bad”—and if you overdose with omega-3 fatty acids while completely
eliminating all quality sources of omega-6 (such as flaxseed oil, flax seeds,
flaxseed meal, hemp seed oil, hemp seeds, pumpkin seeds, raw sunflower
seeds, pine nuts, pistachios, borage oil, evening primrose oil, black currant
--- END PAGE 594 ---

--- PAGE 595 ---
seed oil, and acai), you can deleteriously affect cardiolipin, which is a
critical component of your mitochondrial membranes. For most people, a
ratio of 4:1 omega-6 to omega-3 is ideal, although the average American
eats a ratio ranging from 12:1 to 25:1! You can test your omega fatty acid
ratios from home with high precision using a testing kit like the one from
Zinzino or OmegaQuant.
How to get started: I take 1 to 2 g per day of Kion Omegas oil, which
contains the ideal DHA-to-EPA ratio and is harvested from clean, omega-
rich anchovy sources from the Peruvian coast. When I am injured or in
need of more recovery, I treat myself to 10 to 15 g per day, a “megadose” of
fish oil, which can also provide an impressive boost of cognitive clarity.
Other good brands include Pharmax, Barlean’s, Carlson, Big Bold Health,
and Green Pastures. If you’re vegan, you can use plant-based omegas from
algal oil, such as Nordic Naturals.
21. Glucosamine and Chondroitin
Glucosamine is a sugar present in the protective exoskeleton of shellfish,
and chondroitin is found naturally in animal tissue, particularly
connective tissue like beef cartilage. Glucosamine stimulates cartilage
production in your joints, while chondroitin helps attract water to the
joint, which allows your cartilage to maintain elasticity. It is one of the
building blocks of articular cartilage, which helps your bones glide over
each other with minimal friction. The rationale for the use of glucosamine
supplements stems from its experimental use in animal models, where it
has been shown to help rebuild damaged cartilage and fight inflammation.
Chondroitin may also inhibit the enzyme activity that breaks down
cartilage and in some research shows even greater pain-reducing benefits
compared to taking glucosamine alone.
--- END PAGE 595 ---

--- PAGE 596 ---
How to get started: Seek out shellfish like shrimp, prawns, lobster,
and crab, along with the cartilaginous components of animal meat such as
skin, bones (easily made edible in bone broth), and the “gristly bits.” For
example, when you have chicken or turkey, eat the skin and chew the
knuckles off the ends of the bones, and eat the gristly bits whenever you
consume meat. When you have shrimp, eat the shells. Bake bone marrow
to spread on foods as an alternative to butter, and drink bone both
regularly (plenty of recipes for such strategies are in Boundless Cookbook
and Boundless Kitchen). You can also use glucosamine chondroitin as a
supplement. Glucosamine is usually made from the shells of shellfish,
while chondroitin comes from the windpipe (trachea) of cows. A typical
dosage is 1,500 mg per day.
Not All Fish Oil Is Created Equal
I am often asked what the healthiest fish oil is. A good general rule is to look
for a fish oil supplement that contains a 1:1 ratio of DHA to EPA, since the
additional DHA results in a ratio closer to what you find in many cold-water
fish. But this doesn’t necessarily mean that more DHA than EPA is a good
thing. For example, one study tested the hypothesis that DHA-to-EPA ratios
might affect how well the omega-3s are digested and absorbed. The
researchers found that a 2:1 DHA-to-EPA ratio reduced the uptake of both
omega-3s by 21 to 23 percent, while a 1:2 DHA-to-EPA ratio reduced the
uptake by 14 to 18 percent. If you invest in a fish oil supplement, you do not
want to lose up to 23 percent of the available omega-3 fatty acids, so it is
worth taking the time to look for a supplement that contains an approximate
1:1 ratio. When taken in the right amounts, EPA and DHA work synergistically
to affect mood, behavior, and coagulation, as well as brain development,
structure, and function.
In addition, it’s important to take into consideration whether the fish oil is in
ethyl ester (EE) or triglyceride (TG) form. The TG form is best, hands down.
This is the form found in nature; in fact, over 98 percent of all fats ingested
from any natural food are in TG form. When you take fish oil in EE form, the
--- END PAGE 596 ---

--- PAGE 597 ---
free fatty acids must be reconverted into TGs before they can enter your
bloodstream. This leads to far less absorption, along with a release of ethyl
alcohol and subsequent oxidative stress from a release of both free radicals
and ethanol, the latter of which must be filtered through the liver in the
same way as any other toxin. EEs are also more resistant to hydrolysis by
pancreatic lipase than natural TG forms, which further limits their absorption
and utilization. On the other hand, there are virtually no negative side
effects from the TG form of fish oils, and nearly all clinical studies
demonstrating fish oil benefits are performed with whole-food fish
consumption or fish oil supplements in the TG form.
Unfortunately, EE is the prevalent form of fish oil on the market because it is
cheaper to produce than the TG form. In fact, the supplements industry
created EE because it is easier to work with than TG. The EE form has a
much higher boiling point and is easier to process during the molecular
distillation protocol used to remove industrial contaminants such as heavy
metals and PCBs. Problem is, the process to convert fish oil EE back to the
natural TG form is costly, so supplement manufacturers often skip this step.
Ideally, they would forgo the option to leave the fatty acids in a free form
attached to an ethyl alcohol backbone and instead, reattach them to a
glycerol structure to form a triglyceride molecule. But despite multiple
studies showing that of EE, TG, and whole fish, EE is the least bioavailable
form of omega-3, supplement manufacturers simply cut corners.
Because it’s so supportive of cognition, hormones, and joint health, I
consume fish oil regularly: four to six capsules of Kion Omegas on any day
I’m not eating seafood from sources like salmon, mackerel, sardines, herring,
or anchovies. It is a high-quality EPA and DHA fish oil supplement made
from sustainably sourced cold-water anchovies and contains both EPA and
DHA in their natural TG forms.
What About NSAIDs for Injury and
Recovery?
If you are injured or sore, why not simply take nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen? Unfortunately, when you
--- END PAGE 597 ---

--- PAGE 598 ---
take NSAIDs, you prevent your body from manufacturing prostaglandins,
which protect your stomach lining, regulate blood pressure, and bring
inflammation to an area that has been injured (yes, pain, redness, swelling,
and discomfort are part of inflammation, but that’s part of the body’s natural
repair process).
Because prostaglandins protect the stomach lining, NSAIDs can cause
stomach upset, and with long-term habitual use of NSAIDs, there is a risk of
stomach bleeding. While many people who exercise pop these pills only
every now and again—for example, to reduce pre- or postworkout soreness
or to be able to “push through the pain” to complete a competition—even
occasional use is not a good idea, and you’re going to discover why right
now.
A recent study titled “Aggravation of Exercise-Induced Intestinal Injury by
Ibuprofen in Athletes” revealed some pretty upsetting information. Nine
healthy athletes were studied on four different occasions: (1) taking a
standard dose of 400 mg of ibuprofen twice in the hours leading up to a
bike workout, (2) taking no ibuprofen before a bike workout, (3) taking 400
mg of ibuprofen twice at rest, and (4) resting without taking ibuprofen.
In each case, researchers measured small-intestinal damage by monitoring
intestinal fatty-acid-binding proteins (I-FABPs). They also measured urinary
excretion of special sugar probes, which can determine the amount of
gastrointestinal permeability—a sign that the gut is becoming leaky.
The researchers found that while both ibuprofen use and working out
resulted in increased I-FABP levels, reflecting small-intestinal injury, levels
were higher after a workout with ibuprofen than a workout without
ibuprofen. Gut permeability also increased, especially after taking ibuprofen
and working out, which reflected a loss of gut-barrier integrity. In addition,
the amount of intestinal injury from ibuprofen and gut-barrier dysfunction
were extremely well correlated. Thus, it is clear that exercise irritates your
small intestine slightly, and ibuprofen makes the irritation worse. In fact, the
researchers concluded that “NSAID consumption by athletes is not harmless
and should be discouraged.”
So what about the prevalent practice of taking NSAIDs before a long event
like an Ironman or a marathon to “mask the pain”? It turns out that this has
been researched, too. One study found that taking 400 mg of ibuprofen
four hours before exercise reduced soreness but didn’t actually prevent
--- END PAGE 598 ---

--- PAGE 599 ---
muscle-cell injury, which is cause for concern because it means that by
masking pain, ibuprofen may lead to an increased risk of injury.
Other studies have found that NSAID use during long events, such as a
marathon or triathlon, decreases kidney function. This can lead to dangerous
issues, including a reduced ability to regulate sodium, electrolytes, and
hydration levels. This lack of proper regulation becomes especially
dangerous in hot weather, when there is already a lot of stress on the
kidneys. The extra stress may create a high risk of long-term kidney damage
or kidney failure.
One of the most eye-opening studies on ibuprofen use during exercise was
performed during the grueling Western States Endurance Run, a 100-mile
ultramarathon. Runners were split into three groups: one that didn’t take
ibuprofen, one that received 600 mg one day before the race and on race
day, and one that took 1,200 mg one day before the race and on race day
(having a group taking more ibuprofen allows researchers to see if there is a
dose-dependent response). In this study, both of the ibuprofen groups had
significantly higher levels of markers for severe muscle damage, including C-
reactive protein, plasma cytokine, and macrophage inflammatory protein,
with higher levels in the group taking more ibuprofen.
Taking ibuprofen did not affect race time, postworkout soreness, or
perceived exertion. This means that ibuprofen did not help at all, and it
caused significantly greater inflammation and muscle damage!
NSAID use during training has also been shown to slow down muscle-
building processes. The human body responds to muscular exertion by
producing prostaglandins. Muscle tissue in injured areas or areas damaged
by muscular exertion fills with a particular type of prostaglandin that
stimulates stem cells within the muscle to begin multiplying to create new
muscle cells. The resulting muscle tissue is stronger than before. NSAIDs
block the production of prostaglandins, which means that fewer stem cells
become active, fewer new cells are produced, and the muscle tissue exhibits
reduced strength and flexibility.
Finally, multiple studies have linked the chronic use of NSAIDs with a higher
risk of heart attack and stroke. The mechanisms for cardiovascular damage
appear to be mediated through the inhibition of an enzyme known as COX-
2, inhibition of the production of a molecule called prostacyclin that relaxes
--- END PAGE 599 ---

--- PAGE 600 ---
blood vessels and limits platelet clumping, and inhibition of the production
of nitric oxide.
So as you can see, the jury is not out when it comes to using NSAIDs. Just
don’t use them. Period. With so many healthy alternatives, this should be a
no-brainer. If you do for some reason use NSAIDs during exercise or in hot
conditions, or you struggle with gut issues during activities such as summer
outdoor workouts or long runs, then colostrum consumption can decrease
exercise-induced gut permeability but typically requires a loading phase of a
couple weeks for the benefits to significantly kick in.
22. Curcumin
I consume curcumin in some form nearly every day—via turmeric root,
spices, powders, curries, or supplements. You may recognize curcumin as
the principal compound in turmeric, which is a member of the ginger
family, and it’s a widely recognized herbal anti-inflammatory that has been
shown to be as effective at reducing inflammation as injectable cortisone.
Curcuminoids, the subparticles that make up curcumin, have been found
to be powerful inhibitors of inflammatory compounds called COX-2
without damaging the gut the way ibuprofen does.
Unfortunately, the anti-inflammatory compounds in turmeric,
including curcumin, are notorious for having poor bioavailability. Research
suggests that the concentrations in blood plasma, urine, and peripheral
tissues are low to nonexistent, even when you take a high-dose
supplement. This means that, while the turmeric-derived compounds can
have anti-inflammatory action in the gut, they may not have the same
effect elsewhere. So unless all you’re trying to do is quell gastric
inflammation, you need to increase curcumin’s bioavailability.
One strategy is to consume black pepper along with turmeric. It
doesn’t take much pepper—just one-twentieth of a teaspoon can
significantly increase measurable blood levels of curcumin—but a quarter
--- END PAGE 600 ---

--- PAGE 601 ---
teaspoon of black pepper causes curcumin’s bioavailability to increase by
2,000 percent. This is why you’ll see bioperine, which is just black pepper
extract, on the labels of many curcumin supplements. Another strategy is
to consume turmeric with a healthy fat source. When consumed with
ghee, butter, coconut oil, or olive oil, curcumin bypasses liver processing
and is then less exposed to metabolic enzymes, allowing it to be in a more
absorbable free form. The third way is to heat turmeric. The anti-
inflammatory compounds become more bioavailable when you heat
turmeric root in warm oil in a sauté pan or sprinkle it into whatever dish
you are heating.
How to get started: There are a range of bioavailable curcumin
supplements. Look at the label for an ingredient called Meriva, which
many supplement companies use as a more absorbable form of curcumin
phytosome, which has been demonstrated to be nearly thirty times more
bioavailable than curcumin in whole foods. You can also try
turmerosaccharides, which are water-soluble bioactive polysaccharides
extracted from the turmeric plant. Turmerosaccharides have been shown
to significantly protect cartilage, reduce acute and chronic inflammation,
support a balanced inflammatory response, and increase gene expression
of type II collagen. They are an active ingredient in Kion Flex.
23. Magnesium
You have probably heard that the magnesium sulfate in Epsom salts baths
or float tanks can decrease muscle soreness, enhance relaxation, and
displace the calcium ions that can accumulate in muscle tissue during
workouts. But concentrated magnesium chloride is even more effective
than Epsom salts. Why is pure magnesium so effective for recovery?
As you read this, you have about two ounces of magnesium in your
body—mostly in muscle and bone tissue. This mineral is essential for
--- END PAGE 601 ---

--- PAGE 602 ---
more than three hundred reactions, including nerve and cardiac function,
muscle contraction and relaxation, protein formation, and the synthesis of
ATP-based energy. A magnesium deficiency can result in muscle cramping,
excessive soreness, low muscular force production, disrupted recovery
and sleep, immune system depression, and even potentially fatal heart
arrhythmias during intense exercise.
Several studies have shown magnesium to be effective for buffering
lactic acid, enhancing peak oxygen uptake and total work output, reducing
heart rate and carbon dioxide production during hard exercise, and
improving cardiovascular efficiency. In addition, supplementing with
magnesium can elevate testosterone levels and muscle strength by up to
30 percent, as well as combat calcium buildup from muscle microtearing.
While seeds, nuts, grains, and vegetables are good dietary sources of
magnesium, active people who eat these foods can still be deficient in
magnesium because high activity levels—especially when combined with
sweating, which causes mineral loss—deplete it more quickly.
Unfortunately, an oral magnesium supplement may not fully
compensate for this deficiency, as oral magnesium in the amount athletes
need is not readily absorbed, and magnesium causes diarrhea at high
doses. So, while the use of oral magnesium is certainly helpful, topical
magnesium is a far better way to target muscle soreness, injuries, and
recovery.
The delivery of drugs transdermally (through the skin) is used to avoid
the risk or inconvenience of intravenous therapy, to improve the
absorption of a drug by bypassing the gastrointestinal tract, to decrease
the metabolism of a drug by the liver, and to provide a more targeted
application (for example, in the form of a topical nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drug patch that’s applied directly to the site of injury). This
same method can easily be used to deliver high doses of magnesium
directly to your muscles pre- or postworkout to enhance performance and
--- END PAGE 602 ---

--- PAGE 603 ---
recovery. You can magnify this effect by combining it with electrical
muscle stimulation.
There are many ways to deliver magnesium transdermally. While
Epsom salts provide magnesium sulfate, which can help with postworkout
recovery, magnesium chloride is even more effective. You can dissolve 1 to
3 pounds of pure magnesium chloride flakes or crystals in a bath, giving
you a dose of about 500 mg for an extremely relaxing and soreness-
relieving soak. Alternatively, after a long run or bike ride, you can soak
your feet in a magnesium chloride bath for fifteen to twenty minutes. After
drying off from my postworkout cold shower, I apply transdermal
magnesium lotion to any major muscle groups that I worked that day,
rubbing the lotion in for about thirty seconds.
Magnesium chloride is also available as a spray. I use eight to ten shots
of the spray or a large dab of the lotion on my shoulders, arms, and legs
after a particularly hard workout, often driving it into the tissue with
electrical muscle stimulation or a vibration device. In most cases, ten
sprays deliver approximately 100 mg of magnesium. Make sure that your
skin is dry before applying the spray, and lightly rub the magnesium in
after application. Magnesium spray may cause a tingling or slightly
annoying burning sensation. This is normal and usually subsides with
repeated use.
If you get sports massages, you can give magnesium chloride spray or
oil to your massage therapist for use after your session (it likely produces
too much friction for your therapist to want to use it during a session).
This can assist with the body’s natural recovery process and speed up
healing from a workout or injury, as well as help prevent future injuries
from sore and stiff muscles. If you have a strain or sprain, topical
magnesium can also be used to improve circulation or decrease pain.
Simply spray the magnesium on any sore area and rub it in.
--- END PAGE 603 ---

--- PAGE 604 ---
It is important to keep track of exactly how much magnesium you
consume between oral and topical use because anything above 500 to
1,000 mg can cause loose stools or gastrointestinal discomfort. So make
sure you keep track of your total magnesium exposure unless you want to
spend a lot of time on the toilet.
How to get started: Go to a website like Ancient Minerals (ancient-
minerals.com) and grab a bottle of magnesium lotion and a few bags of
magnesium bath flakes. Use them regularly during the week. For a heavier
dose, Google the name of your city and the words “float tank,” which will
help you find a sensory deprivation chamber in which you can float for one
to two hours a few times each month in hundreds of pounds of
magnesium chloride at the same temperature as your body. Finally, for
oral supplementation, I’m a fan of Magnesium Breakthrough, which
contains seven different forms of magnesium in appropriate ratios and
doses. When taken before bed, it can help with sleep and also support a
nice, slippery bowel movement the next morning.
24. Cannabidiol (CBD)
While THC, the psychoactive chemical found in cannabis, is a restricted
substance that is not legal in several states and countries, the compound
cannabidiol is—at the time of this writing—perfectly legal in all fifty
states, meaning you can take it on a plane to anywhere in the US. CBD is a
cannabinoid that composes up to 40 percent of the marijuana plant and is
believed by many researchers to be the single most important cannabinoid
ever discovered. CBD acts as an antagonist of THC by turning off or
turning down anything that would activate the receptors through which
THC exerts its effects. CBD itself does not, like THC, attach to receptors
associated with addiction, so it is neither addictive nor habit-forming.
--- END PAGE 604 ---

--- PAGE 605 ---
CBD also has no psychoactive effects, and there is a growing body of
research to support CBD use for recovery. The late Dr. Tod Mikuriya, the
former national administrator of the US government’s marijuana research
programs, stated that no other single drug or substance has as many
therapeutic benefits as cannabis. CBD is particularly potent against
inflammation, which is one of the leading contributors to conditions like
heart disease, cancer, chronic lower respiratory disease, stroke,
Alzheimer’s, diabetes, and nephritis. CBD is also effective against acute
inflammation, which you might encounter, say, after a long day of racing or
working out. For example, cytokines, the signaling proteins synthesized
and secreted by immune cells, modulate the initiation and resolution of
inflammation. CBD reduces cytokine production by immune cells such as
T helper cells TH1 and TH2 (which are the same cells in which
overactivity can contribute to autoimmune issues and food intolerances).
CBD can also reduce levels of the inflammatory compound interleukin-6.
The problem with CBD is that it is not naturally highly bioavailable
because CBD oils, capsules, and powders are not water soluble.
Considering that your body is over 60 percent water, you have to find a
way to overcome this problem to enjoy the benefits of this cannabinoid.
Turmeric, mentioned earlier, can play a significant role here because the
isolated curcuminoids (which are the active ingredients of a high-
curcumin-containing turmeric plant) mix with the cannabinoids and
terpenoids of CBD, causing their bioavailability to explode. When you take
CBD with curcumin or turmeric high in curcumin, you can get five to ten
times the effects that you otherwise would. Just remember that curcumin
itself must be taken alongside black pepper, consumed with a healthy fat
source, or heated to get the full effect. Finally, CBD topical lotions can be
just as effective as or more effective than oral CBD supplementation for
spot-targeting joints.
--- END PAGE 605 ---

--- PAGE 606 ---
How to get started: Try CBD capsules that have been blended with
turmeric (BioCBD is one good brand) or take your CBD at the same time
you take another turmeric supplement, like Kion Flex. You can also look
for CBD that is mixed with phytocannabinoids from hemp stalk oil, clove,
black pepper, hops, and rosemary, all of which can help with absorption
(Thorne Hemp Oil is a good brand). A starting dose is typically 10 to 20
mg, although up to 300 mg can be used to support sleep and relaxation or
to battle heftier bouts of inflammation and soreness. For topical use,
Element Health CBD has an ointment that blends organic CBD with other
soreness-reducing compounds like arnica, St. John’s wort, and rosemary
extract.
My 1-2-3 Technique for Fast Recovery
I use this three-step recovery process to suck inflammation out of strained
and sprained joints and muscles as quickly as possible.
1. Apply topical magnesium: You can use any topical anti-inflammatory,
including CBD oil, but magnesium chloride seems to work best. I use the
Magnetic Clay magnesium oil made by the brand Ancient Minerals
because it doesn’t contain the heavy metals that many other brands do.
2. Turn on electrical muscle stimulation: EMS has the capacity to drive a
topical treatment like magnesium deeper into the tissue. After applying
the magnesium or another topical anti-inflammatory, place the EMS
electrodes in the appropriate sore spots. Remember that it is important
to place the electrodes precisely, and be sure to check the instructions
that accompany the device you use for information on where to place the
electrodes for maximum effectiveness. I use the MarcPro device for
recovery, as this waveform is best for avoiding any excess stress to
injured muscles.
3. Place ice over the electrodes: The cryotherapy from the ice allows you
to withstand higher levels of EMS, and this helps drive the topical anti-
inflammatory even deeper into your tissue. Once you have the EMS
--- END PAGE 606 ---

--- PAGE 607 ---
electrodes in place and the device is running, cover the electrodes with
an ice pack, even if it’s just a zip-top bag of ice (although I prefer the
brand Frozen-Peaz). The cold exposure will also reduce inflammation and
improve circulation and blood flow once the ice is removed, bringing
more nutrients to the injured area and clearing away metabolic and
inflammatory debris.
One other factor to consider when using this technique is that icing an injury
only reaches its full potency when it is combined with compression. In fact,
when you ice an injury without compressing the ice around the sprained or
strained area, you can end up with poor lymphatic drainage and backflow of
lymph fluid. Because of this, I usually wrap an elastic bandage or other
compression wrap tightly around the electrodes and ice. The benefits of
compression seem to provide the icing on the cake when combined with
magnesium, EMS, and ice.
You can use this 1-2-3 technique two to three times per day for ten to
twenty minutes at a time. You will be blown away at how quickly it removes
pain and enhances recovery.
25. Sound Healing
Sound healing is the practice of targeting the whole body or parts of the
body with audio tones and vibration. It works on A) the idea that all
matter is vibrating at specific frequencies, and that sickness, disease,
depression, and stress cause human beings to vibrate at a lower frequency,
while tones that promote healing, happiness, and vitality can produce
surprising effects and even allow DNA strands to repair themselves; B) the
ability of vibrations and touch (haptic) sensations to shift the brain into
states of relaxation, calm, or recovery; C) an increase in blood or lymph
flow to an area of the body.
You can use sound to improve your mood and switch from a
sympathetic (“fight-or-flight”) state to a parasympathetic (“rest-and-
digest”) state, and vice versa. Sound can also help with depression,
--- END PAGE 607 ---

--- PAGE 608 ---
anxiety, stress, and sleep. But you can also use sound technology to heal
you on a cellular level and help with chronic disease. Tibetan singing
bowls, tuning forks, drumming therapy, and chanting are all utilized in
sound therapy, and many participants experience strong emotions during
these therapy sessions. Advocates of sound healing claim that it has the
power to heal mental illness, arthritis, and autoimmune disorders, and
that it can even shrink cancerous tumors.
One example of simple music for recovery are the tracks designed by
composer Michael Tyrrell, recorded at specific frequencies to shift the
body into a parasympathetic state that supports relaxation and recovery.
Other notable examples—all of which I own and cycle into my recovery
protocols—include the full-body Bioacoustic mat made by Biomat; the
chest-worn Sensate device that vibrates the entire body via the sternum
bone; a tiny vibrating band called the Apollo Neuro, designed to be worn
on the ankle or wrist; light-sound-producing headsets like the BrainTap or
NeuroVizr; and apps like NuCalm, SleepStream, SleepSpace, and Brain.fm.
While you’ll usually find me listening to podcasts or audiobooks while
working out, driving, cleaning, or walking, I turn to sound and vibration
when I’m ready to relax. Even playing an instrument, chanting, singing,
humming, audible breathwork, and nature sounds all count as sound
tactics that can enhance recovery.
How to get started: After your next hard workout, cool down with
noise-blocking headphones and five to ten minutes of a few of your
favorite songs, combined with deep, relaxed breathing—or, for a done-for-
you option, try a recovery breathwork session from The Breath Source or
Othership app. For an upgraded option, try combining your session with a
sound-producing pillow like the Sound Pillow, Soli Pillow, or Sleep
Therapy Pillow.
26. Peptides
--- END PAGE 608 ---

--- PAGE 609 ---
In chapter 5, I introduced you to short chains of amino acids called
peptides. Several notable peptides have been shown to promote wound
healing, tissue regeneration, muscle recovery, and immune function,
including BPC-157, TB-500, GHK-Cu, ipamorelin, and CJC-1295. Most of
these peptides are injected subcutaneously in the abdomen or buttocks or
close to the site of injury, pain, or soreness.
Isolated from a larger peptide known as “body protecting compound”
that is normally found in human gastric juice, BPC-157 has numerous
regenerative effects, including healing of muscles, tendons, ligaments,
bone, and skin burns and increased blood flow through angiogenesis, and
possesses powerful anti-inflammatory properties. Unfortunately, as of
January 1, 2022, the World Anti-Doping Agency listed BPC-157 as a
prohibited substance, but at the time of this writing, that applies only to
the injectable, not the oral version. Companies such as CanLabs, Peptide
Sciences, Limitless Life, and LVLUP Health have access to oral versions of
BPC-157 and several of the other peptides listed on the next page.
TB-500 is a naturally produced peptide found in nearly every part of
the human body. It increases the activity of the muscle protein actin to
promote cellular growth and stimulate blood cell development and has
been shown to repair damage to the heart, skin, tissue, ligaments, and
other organs and provide pain relief. It is probably the best peptide for
muscle repair, whereas BPC-157 shines in treating gastrointestinal
disorders. However, TB-500 is banned by WADA and most other global
sporting organizations both in-competition and out-of-competition.
Then there’s ipamorelin and tesamorelin, both of which improve all
aspects of tissue regeneration and healing through the increased
production of human growth hormone (GH). Tesamorelin is a growth
hormone–releasing peptide (GHRP), and ipamorelin is a growth
hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), so they act together to maximize
GH production and usage with fewer side effects than actual HGH, which
--- END PAGE 609 ---

--- PAGE 610 ---
can negatively impact pituitary function, can lead to side effects such as
excess bone growth and excess pituitary gland growth, and is very
expensive. Note that these two peptides are also banned by WADA for
sports.
Finally, the copper peptide GHK-Cu can increase collagen production,
suppress chronic inflammation, and repair damaged DNA. It is also very
effective for pain reduction and can even be applied topically.
How to get started: The following is a sample peptide stack for
recovery or injury management based on the half-life and recommended
doses for each peptide:
Morning: 
Evening:
Ipamorelin: 200–300

Tesamorelin: 1 mg
mcg
TB-500: 2.0–2.5 mg
BPC-157: 250 mcg
BPC-157: 250 mcg
GHK-Cu: 2 mgWhile BPC-157, TB-500, and GHK-Cu are best injected locally, tesamorelin
and ipamorelin should be injected systemically because the signaling
receptors they need to reach are in the brain and other parts of the body
and are most likely not at the site of the injury.
The Bottom Line
Whew! With this lineup of recovery methods, you have no excuses for not
healing your body far more quickly than most folks settle for.
It always surprises me that after getting hurt, many people settle for a
once- or twice-weekly visit to the physical therapist, a bit of time on the
recumbent bicycle at the gym, some light stretching, and perhaps a cup of
ginger tea. But by pulling out all the methods in this chapter, you can heal
your body far more quickly and rapidly get your musculoskeletal system
--- END PAGE 610 ---

--- PAGE 611 ---
back to a state that allows you to enjoy life. My home is littered with all
the tools and ingredients from this chapter—not only because I live an
adventurous life in which I am occasionally strained, sprained, or broken,
but also because I want my body to recover from normal day-to-day
activities far faster than it normally would so that I can simply get more
out of life!
Should you want to know the best way to identify whether these
methods are working, how recovered your body is, and whether your
system is fully prepared to handle a rigorous workout or race, check out
the sidebar on the Oura “readiness score,” which is a simple way to
measure how recovered you truly are.
The Best Way to Know Whether You Are
Truly Recovered
While attending a biohacking conference in Helsinki, Finland, in 2015, I
discovered a small, lonely table in the corner manned by a gentleman who
had designed a unique ring for self-quantification. I found the ring—called
the Oura—so intriguing that I purchased one from his small start-up
company and spent the next year experimenting with the device to track my
sleep, physical activity, stress levels, and more. Most importantly, I
discovered that the Oura could be placed in airplane mode, disabling the
Bluetooth and Wi-Fi signals so commonly emitted by such devices.
Fast-forward several years, and the Oura ring has not only taken the world
by storm but has also impressively upgraded its tracking capabilities,
making it my number one tool for tracking my readiness to train, using a
built-in algorithm called the readiness score.
Ranging from 0 to 100 percent, the readiness score helps you identify which
days are ideal for challenging yourself and which are better for taking it
easy. The score is affected by a variety of “readiness contributors” that
evaluate the balance of your recent and cumulative sleep, physical activity,
and recovery. Generally, a readiness score above 85 percent indicates that
--- END PAGE 611 ---

--- PAGE 612 ---
you are well recovered. A score below 70 percent usually means that an
essential readiness contributor has either fallen outside of your normal range
or clearly differs from recommended, science-based values.
The following are the most important variables that affect readiness:•

The previous night’s sleep: How well you sleep has a significant impact
on your performance the next day. For a maximum positive contribution
to your readiness score, your sleep score needs to be above 85 percent
and at the high end of your normal range.•

Sleep balance: Sleep balance shows you if your last two weeks of sleep
were in line with your needs and is based on a long-term view of your
sleep patterns. The ring compares your total time spent asleep in the last
two weeks to your long-term sleep history and the amount of sleep
recommended for your age. On average, adults need seven to nine hours
of sleep per twenty-four hours to stay healthy and maintain peak
performance.•

Previous day: Yesterday’s level of physical activity is one of the primary
factors that impacts your readiness score. A contributor bar that reads
100 percent tells you that you’ve gotten enough rest to balance out your
activity and that you’ve spent a good amount of time performing low-
intensity activity. A high amount of inactive time or excess activity causes
your readiness score to drop. If your score drops because of intense
exercise and high activity burn, you can improve your readiness and
fitness by spending time recovering.•

Activity balance: Activity balance determines how your activity over the
previous few days impacts your readiness score. A full bar indicates that
you’ve been active but haven’t gone all out or trained your absolute
hardest, which allows you to recover and restore your energy.•

Body temperature: Body temperature is a well-regulated vital parameter.
As you sleep, the Oura ring tracks your body temperature variations and
compares that night’s skin temperature to measures from previous
nights. A full contributor bar indicates that your estimated body
temperature is within normal variation. When your temperature falls
outside of your typical range, your readiness score falls.•

Resting heart rate: Your resting heart rate (RHR) is how many times your
heart beats per minute when you are at rest. It’s known to be a reliable
marker of your state of recovery. By studying your data from active days
--- END PAGE 612 ---

--- PAGE 613 ---
and recovery days for a couple of weeks, the ring estimates your optimal
RHR range, at which point your readiness score becomes more accurate.
An RHR slightly below your average means you’ve recovered well and
have good readiness. On the other hand, an unusually high or low RHR
means you need to spend some extra time focusing on recovery. Intense
training, a big meal right before bed, or an elevated body temperature
can elevate your RHR through the night, resulting in a lower readiness
score.•

Recovery index: Your recovery index tells you how long it takes your RHR
to stabilize and reach its lowest point as you sleep. Ideally, you want your
RHR to reach its lowest point at least six hours before waking. So if your
RHR reaches that point during the first half of the night, it’s a sign of
excellent recovery. Consuming alcohol or food right before bed, getting
sick, and working out late in the day can all elevate your RHR, thus
delaying your recovery and causing your readiness score to drop.•

Heart rate variability (HRV): HRV is a measurement of the variation in the
time interval between heartbeats, which, in an ideal recovery scenario,
fluctuates mildly. Both researchers and practitioners consider HRV a
good measure of your readiness status, as it can indicate stress and
fatigue. Generally speaking, when you’re fit, relaxed, and recovered, your
HRV is higher. When your body is recovering from stress or strenuous
exercise, your HRV is lower. The Oura ring app shows your average HRV
(from five-minute measurements taken overnight) and your nightly HRV
curve.
Unless you are trying to get yourself into an overreached or slightly
overtrained state for the purposes of supercompensating and bouncing
back with a higher level of fitness, I highly recommend that you pay
attention to your readiness score. When I’ve ignored it and pushed through,
nine times out of ten, it’s led to illness and injury. Finally, an Oura ring isn’t
the only device that will gather heart rate, body temperature, activity, and
sleep data to predict your recovery. From wearables like the Biosensor and
Whoop to heart-rate straps like the Hanu and FrontierX to rings like the
Ultrahuman and Noise, there are plenty of other options out there. The key is
to pick one, use it, and accept the fact that biometric data can often tell you
more about your true recovery than your own sense and experience.
--- END PAGE 613 ---

--- PAGE 614 ---
THE LAST WORD
You obviously don’t need to do everything in this chapter if you have just
gone out for a relaxed, sociable Saturday morning bike ride, or even after a
typical week of minimalist training or low-level physical activity. But if you
are injured, have some nagging ache or pain that just won’t go away, are an
athlete and have an important competition approaching, are wiped out
from a tough series of workouts, or are doing a big deload or rest-and-
recovery week after a hard block of training, you should consider pulling
out as many stops as possible and geeking out on recovery so that your
body is 100 percent repaired from musculoskeletal damage, oxidative
damage, chemical damage, or a combination of all three. Consider this
chapter to be a cookbook for doing just that.
But maybe your head is spinning from trying to take in vibration
platforms and EMS and lasers and proteo-something-or-other. Maybe you
want to apply those tools to your personal recovery plan without spending
all your precious time fretting over recovery without enjoying your
training or exposing your body to a constant state of underrecovery.
What would a typical recovery day, week, or month look like if you
were uninjured and just trying to maximize the results of your training?
What would it look like if you were injured and trying to heal your body as
fast as possible? What would it look like if you were overtrained and in a
state of chronic fatigue? What would it look like in those last few precious
weeks leading up to a competition? What would it look like in the throes
of healing your body from something like a Spartan Race or an Ironman or
a marathon?
After all, properly programming these recovery techniques can take
some serious forethought and scientific application. If you are concerned
about how to string together all this training and recovery material into a
viable and effective program that doesn’t leave you gasping for air during a
--- END PAGE 614 ---

--- PAGE 615 ---
race because you spent too much time hanging from an inversion table or
electrocuting yourself, don’t worry. Here’s a simple guide to a typical year
of optimized recovery. Many of these strategies, such as infrared light and
sauna, can be used while doing other productive activities, such as reading,
listening to audiobooks, or working.
DAILY
Identify inflammatory foods

Apply full-body
(InflammationFactor.com is a
photobiomodulation for 10 to
good resource) and avoid
20 minutes.them. 
Drink hydrogen-rich or

Fast for 12 to 16 hours. structured water with
minerals added.
Self-administer foam rolling
or deep-tissue work on any
tight or sore spots, using
books like Becoming a Supple

Practice inversion for five to
Leopard and Ready to Run as
ten minutes.“cookbook” guides for any
areas that need detailed
work.
Use vibration therapy on any

Take 10 to 50 mg of CBD
tight or sore spots. prior to bed.
Take a quick cold shower or

Take three Kion Flex capsules
cold plunge every morning
on an empty stomach
and evening. sometime during the day.
Wear compression socks or

Take 1 to 20 g of fish oil with
tights during the day and
one meal each day.when traveling.
Take a nutrient-dense source

Eat the shells of shellfish and
of vitamin C (no more than
the gristly bits of animal meat
1.5 g at a time) and for glucosamine and
--- END PAGE 615 ---

--- PAGE 616 ---
DAILY
supplement vitamin E with
chondroitin. These can also
tocotrienols at least 2 hours
be supplemented in daily
before or after a workout.
1,500 mg doses.
Apply transdermal

Cool down after a workout
magnesium lotion to targeted
with 5 to 10 minutes of music
muscle groups after a
combined with deep
workout, rubbing it in for 30
breathing. seconds.
WEEKLY 
Take one longer, 20-to-30-

Get a 60-to-90-minute
minute cold soak or
massage. cryotherapy session.
Have a chiropractic
adjustment (I swear by a

Have between two and five
weekly quick adjustment to
20-to-30-minute infrared
shoulders, hips, back, and
sauna sessions.wrists).
Do a hot-cold contrast

Take 5 to 10 g of essential
session, alternating 5 minutes
amino acids before a hard
in the hot tub, 5 minutes in
workout and an additional 5
the cold pool, then 4/4, 3/3,
to 10 g during each hour of
etc. exercise.
Soak in a magnesium chloride
bath or apply 100 mg of
topical magnesium chloride
after a hard workout. Rub it in
with electrical muscle
stimulation for better results.
IF INJURED
Apply electrical muscle stimulation one to two times daily for 10 to 30
minutes, preferably combined with ice and topical magnesium or
--- END PAGE 616 ---

--- PAGE 617 ---
IF INJURED
topical CBD.
Apply pulsed electromagnetic field therapy throughout the day as
often as possible. These devices can be worn throughout the day and
night.
Have a sixty-to-ninety-minute HBOT session once or twice a week,
especially after periods of heavy workouts or airline travel.
Take three Kion Flex capsules in the morning and another three in the
evening.
Take 20 to 40 g of Kion Aminos spread throughout the day.
Adjust your training protocol so you can stay active with less intense
activities (e.g., sauna; cold thermogenesis; walking; swimming; non-
weight-bearing cardio such as rowing machine, cycling, and elliptical;
light weights or bodyweight training combined with blood flow
restriction bands).
Apply targeted red light or laser therapy to the injured area for 15 to
25 minutes.
Use prolotherapy or stem cell therapy (optional).
Sleep with magnets on the injured area (optional).
Take a high-dose vitamin C supplement or get a vitamin C IV
(optional).
Have peptide injections in the morning and evening (optional).
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
After your next workout, try one of the simplest recovery techniques in
this chapter: inversion. Once you have cooled down, lie on your back with
--- END PAGE 617 ---

--- PAGE 618 ---
your feet up against a wall for about five minutes. Not only will you
reactivate your “rest-and-digest” parasympathetic nervous system, but
you will also recover far faster as blood and metabolic by-products make
their way out of your legs. For an added bonus, use the alternate-nostril or
box breathing techniques described in chapter 3. Finally, should you want
a practical example of how I string together and stack strategies like this
to target a specific injury, I’ll include a helpful link on the resources page
for this chapter on how I biohacked a back pain injury with red light, deep-
tissue work, inversion, minerals, and a few other key elements from this
chapter.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/12. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 618 ---

--- PAGE 619 ---
13
CLEAN GUT
HOW TO FIX YOUR GUT, OPTIMIZE DIGESTION,
AND MAXIMIZE NUTRIENT ABSORPTION
From marijuana suppositories to coffee enemas to rocket-shaped high-dose Mitozen melatonin
capsules, I have put a lot of strange things up my butt. I have also experimented with just about every
detoxification strategy on the face of the planet, from basic tactics like dry skin brushing and
trampolining to more advanced experiments such as lining my abdomen with BioLite red-light
cupping devices to produce a “reverse-massage” effect for clearing colonic blockages, five days of
deep-tissue work at Clear Passages to remove fascial adhesions from the abdominal cavity and the
muscles surrounding the small intestine, and building an entire infrared sauna in my basement, then
insulating it, sticking a wine cork in the temperature sensor, jacking up the heat to a level that would
cause a Finnish Sauna Society member to spontaneously combust, and sitting in the sauna for hours
on end, sweating like a detoxifying pig.
Why do I go to so much trouble? Frankly, it all comes down to attempting to crack the code on
fixing the notorious digestive issues that seem to plague even the fittest of folks. For my own
self-proclaimed “princess gut,” I’ve had to undo years of damage from growing up on a crappy
--- END PAGE 619 ---

--- PAGE 620 ---
diet and destroying my gut with intense competition, combined with a couple decades of
consuming six to eight thousand calories per day to fuel my endurance drive.
From the digestive glands in your mouth to your esophagus, gallbladder, stomach, small
intestine, and colon, there are endless possibilities for what can go wrong in your digestive
system. This chapter will focus on the eleven issues that can create frustrating problems such
as constipation, bloating, gas, brain fog, indigestion, leaky gut, irritable bowel syndrome, and a
host of other digestive disturbances that can plague even the healthiest individuals.
After all, boundless energy flows through the entire digestive system, and one of the best
ways to avoid disrupting that flow is to have a healthy, flawless gut. This chapter will serve as
the last resource you will ever need to unlock the mystery of any gut issue you may have. It
explains how the gut breaks and how to fix it, unlocks the surprising truth about
detoxification, demystifies food allergies and intolerances, highlights the serious issue of
glyphosate exposure, and even includes a handy guide to healing the gut from occasional bouts
of hedonism.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 101
You are not alone if you think of your gut as one simple, long, twisting garden hose that
extends from your mouth to your butt. Heck, even the classic Gray’s Anatomy—a go-to manual
for every aspiring medical student—describes the gut as “a musculomembranous tube, about
thirty feet in length, extending from the mouth to the anus, and lined throughout its entire
extent by mucous membrane.”
But the gut is far more complex than that description suggests. For example, three-
quarters of your immune system resides in your digestive tract. And that entire immune
system is protected from the rest of the body by a thin, fragile lining only one cell thick. If that
lining is damaged and the barrier that it creates is penetrated, you become allergic to foods
you normally would have been able to digest without a problem, you get sick more easily, and
your immune system becomes hyperactive, leading to systemic inflammation.
Your gut is also crawling with critters. Five hundred species and three pounds of bacteria
in your digestive tract form a giant ecosystem that produces vitamins and other healing
compounds and helps you digest food, regulate hormones, and excrete toxins.
Your gut is intimately tied to your brain and mood, too. This is called the brain-gut
connection. Jordan Rubin describes this relationship in his book Patient, Heal Thyself: “Early in
our embryogenesis, a collection of tissue called the ‘neural crest’ appears and divides during
fetal development. One part turns into the central nervous system, and the other migrates to
become the enteric nervous system. Both ‘thinking machines’ form simultaneously and
independently of one another until a later stage of development . . . then the two nervous
systems link through a neural cable called the ‘vagus nerve,’ the longest of all cranial nerves.
--- END PAGE 620 ---

--- PAGE 621 ---
The vagus nerve ‘wanders’ from the brain stem through the organs in the neck and thorax and
finally terminates in the abdomen. This is your vital brain-gut connection.”
This brain-gut connection is why
• You get butterflies in your stomach before going onstage
• You get nervous or have stomach cramps before a hard workout or race
• Antidepressants cause nausea and stomach upset, and stomach upset can, ironically,
depress you
• Overeating when you are anxious helps your body produce extra feel-good chemicals,
often creating a vicious cycle of face-stuffing
• Stress makes you want to eat more, and eating more makes you feel stressed
• Food intolerances or gut inflammation can cause behavioral issues
• An unhealthy digestive system can make you feel stupid or sluggish
Then there’s your liver, which is also part of your digestive system. Your gut has to
eliminate all the toxic by-products of digestion by transporting food components to your liver.
If the liver, gallbladder, or gut is not functioning properly, toxins accumulate. Your liver
destroys old red blood cells; manufactures proteins, blood-clotting agents, and cholesterol;
stores glycogen, fats, and proteins; converts fats and proteins to carbohydrates and lactic acid
to glucose; transforms galactose (milk sugar) into glucose; extracts ammonia from amino
acids; converts ammonia to urea; produces bile; stores fat-soluble vitamins; converts adipose
tissue into ketone bodies; and, finally, neutralizes pharmaceuticals and alcohol. The
gallbladder, which is sadly absent in an increasing number of populations and is often
considered a throwaway organ, stores and concentrates bile and, when not functioning
properly, can cause post-meal nausea, bloating, indigestion, fatty stool, constipation, bacterial
overgrowth, low thyroid activity, hunger, and blood sugar dysregulation. Even the appendix,
long denigrated as useless and removable, now appears to have a reason to exist, namely as a
“safe house” for the beneficial bacteria living in the human gut.
Just imagine what could happen if any of those important organs broke down. No wonder
fixing your gut is at the root of fixing so many health problems.
THE 11 MOST COMMON GUT ISSUES AND
HOW TO FIX THEM
While there are many things that can go wrong with the digestive system, most problems—
from bloating and constipation to leaky gut, brain fog, and irritable bowel syndrome—can be
traced back to eleven main issues.
--- END PAGE 621 ---

--- PAGE 622 ---
1. Gluten and Gliadin Sensitivities
I have to admit that I was a bit hesitant to begin this section with gluten because these days,
everybody and their grandma, their kindergartner, and their dog seems to think they have a
gluten intolerance. Sure, gluten intolerance is a legitimate problem and can bring on a host of
problems ranging from gut inflammation to autoimmune disease and neurodegeneration. But,
as you are about to learn, many people have a completely different problem that they
incorrectly attribute to gluten intolerance.
Still, it’s important to talk about gluten first so that you can determine if it’s a problem for
you. Let’s begin by taking a look at gliadin, the gut-inflaming substance behind most gluten
sensitivities.
Gliadin is a protein molecule found in most (but not all) gluten-containing foods,
primarily wheat, rye, barley, kamut, spelt, teff, and couscous, with wheat being the most
popular gliadin-containing grain. An inflammatory reaction to gliadin can take place in the
small intestine in many people who do not have diagnosed celiac disease or gluten intolerance
but who instead have what is called a subclinical sensitivity to gliadin. This is often the case in
those of Irish, English, Scottish, Scandinavian, or other Northern and Eastern European
ancestry. If you’re wondering if your ancestry makes you more susceptible to gliadin
sensitivity, you can perform an in-home ancestry test provided by 23andMe and get the results
mailed to you, and you can also get a more in-depth and accurate gluten-sensitivity test from
Cyrex Laboratories.
If you have a gliadin sensitivity and consume a food containing gliadin, it causes an
inflammatory reaction in the gastrointestinal tract that involves heat, redness, swelling, and an
interruption in the normal function of the small intestine. The blood vessels in the gut enlarge
and become more permeable, which brings more white blood cells and other immune cells to
the site of injury. In addition, fluids leak from these blood vessels into the surrounding tissues,
bringing even more white blood cells for additional immune activity. A thin filament called
fibrin (the same substance involved in blood clotting) also forms at the site of inflammation to
aid in the intestinal wall’s repair process. Within twelve to fifteen hours after the gliadin-
containing meal has hit the gut and the inflammatory response has occurred, immune system
activity diminishes, and the gut is able to begin to slowly heal—assuming that there is no
further gliadin exposure. But if you eat more gliadin-containing food, the entire inflammatory
response repeats. A vicious cycle sets in and the gut is never allowed to heal before it’s
hammered with more inflammation.
--- END PAGE 622 ---

--- PAGE 623 ---
This is why I am not a fan of a cheat meal of items such as pizza, hamburgers, and breaded
and fried foods—you literally never give your gut a chance to fully heal, which generally takes
around two weeks after removal of gliadin from the diet (so be patient if you do begin to
moderate or remove gliadin!). I personally “cheat” with a tasty grass-fed rib-eye steak, a mess
of baked sweet potato fries, Brussels sprouts cooked with bacon, a glass of rich, organic red
wine, and a bit of dark chocolate with coconut ice cream for dessert. In other words, when I
cheat, I cheat with the good stuff.
Constant gliadin-induced inflammatory surges create many problems. First, there may be a
loss of nutrient absorption. Your small intestine is lined with tiny, fingerlike projections called
villi, which increase the surface area for absorption by up to a thousand times. This means that
the absorptive surface area of your small intestine may be roughly the size of a basketball
court! These villi allow you to efficiently absorb massive quantities of nutrients from your
food. A substance that irritates the lining of the small intestine, like gliadin, can destroy the
villi and significantly reduce the total available absorptive area. This not only affects your
ability to absorb vital nutrients from food but also leads to indigestion. Typically, this
manifests as bloating, tiredness, a hyperactive bowel, and sizable or uncomfortable bowel
movements, especially during exercise.
Second, gliadin can increase gut permeability. Your small intestine has a mucosal lining,
the same kind of tissue that lines your sinus passages, your lungs, your urinary tract, your
mouth, and your throat. This mucous membrane protects your body from infection. Under the
inflammatory stress accompanying repeated gliadin exposure, the mucosal tissue breaks down,
and your gut becomes extremely permeable, resulting in leaky gut syndrome. Having leaky gut
syndrome is like using a water filter with big holes in it: stuff you don’t want to drink gets
through the holes and into your water instead of being filtered out. In the case of a leaky gut,
--- END PAGE 623 ---

--- PAGE 624 ---
undigested food particles, particularly proteins, pass through the intestinal barrier and into
the bloodstream, resulting in an immune response in the blood and an enormous amount of
stress as your body fights off these foreign particles. Gut permeability already increases as
soon as you begin exercising, especially if you are exercising in the heat, and when this
combines with the permeability caused by gliadin, the likelihood that you’ll get sick, suffer
from brain fog, have difficulty sleeping, and experience inadequate energy levels is vastly
increased.
Nutrient malabsorption and a leaky gut aren’t the only issues brought on by gluten and
gliadin. Regular consumption of gluten-containing foods may also cause fat malabsorption and
lactose intolerance, even if you weren’t prone to them in the first place. Here’s what happens
with fat absorption: In the tips of your villi are lacteals, which are responsible for breaking
down fat into tiny, absorbable droplets. When these lacteals are compromised, as when gliadin
destroys villi, you can’t properly absorb fat, which is crucial for producing hormones and
building cell membranes. You also miss out on absorbing fat-soluble vitamins, such as
vitamins A and E. And yes, this means you may not be getting any benefits from those
expensive fish oil pills you pop every day, and you also miss out on many of the benefits of
sunlight and photobiomodulation. Fat deficiencies can result in poor blood sugar control, an
inability to repair central nervous system damage, poor nerve cell function, low hormone
production, and reduced antioxidant levels.
Then there is lactose intolerance. The enzyme lactase normally breaks down lactose in
milk into a digestible and absorbable form. But a damaged intestinal wall can’t adequately
produce lactase, so many people who can normally eat cheese, yogurt, and ice cream can’t do
so when they consume gluten and gliadin. It is advisable to avoid milk products for several
months after going gluten-free (yes, it takes that long for the lining of your digestive tract to
heal). On the bright side, many people find that they can comfortably eat ice cream after giving
up bread.
Incidentally, even if gluten doesn’t bother your stomach, it can still cause brain
inflammation and fuzzy thinking, likely due to systemic inflammation and high cytokine count
in those sensitive to gluten.
What can you do about gluten- and gliadin-related gut issues? First, obviously, avoid
gluten- and gliadin-containing foods. This can be trickier than it sounds. Many naturally
gluten-free foods are treated, processed, and packaged to contain gluten, so it is critical to
check labels before loading up on groceries. In addition, some foods that seem like they
wouldn’t include gluten or gliadin actually do, such as these:
• Canned fruits and vegetables (especially when highly processed, sugary, or dried)
• Uncovered meats in the meat case in the butcher’s section at the grocery store (crumbs
and other glutinous products often fall in and cross-contaminate the meat)
• Highly processed nuts and seeds, like those found at gas stations and airports
--- END PAGE 624 ---

--- PAGE 625 ---
• Chocolate bars that contain wheat or wheat-containing products, especially wafers, and
chocolate-coated sweets. Plus, many chocolate bars are produced in facilities that also
process wheat-containing products.
• Nutrition, protein, energy, or weight-loss bars, which often contain wheat or gluten as a
binding agent
• Canned soups or prepackaged soup mixes, which often contain gluten as a thickener
• So-called healthy popcorn snacks, which are often coated with not only gluten but also
rancid vegetable oils
And then there’s cross-reactivity. In some people, foods that do not contain any
appreciable amount of gluten are still seen by the immune system as gluten and trigger a
similar reaction. This happens because these foods have similar protein structures to gluten
and therefore can trigger antigluten antibodies. The foods most often associated with gluten
cross-reactivity are these:
• Dairy products (specifically the alpha-casein, beta-casein, casomorphin, butyrophilin, and
whey found in dairy)
• Chocolate
• Coffee
• Soy
• Sorghum
• Eggs
• Corn
• Millet
• Oats
• Rice
• Yeast
• Quinoa
• Tapioca
If you do eat glutinous foods, you can take peptidases (often sold as “gluten enzymes”) to
help break down the gluten. One of my favorite brands is Gluten Guardian—if you break open
the capsules and sprinkle it on a slice of bread, it can cause the bread to actually dissolve
before your very eyes! To heal a damaged gut lining and reduce gluten-induced gut
permeability, you can drink a few cups of an organic bone broth each day (unless you are
sensitive to histamines, in which case you may be sensitive to bone broth) and consume
--- END PAGE 625 ---

--- PAGE 626 ---
marshmallow root supplements, licorice extract, colostrum, L-glutamine, aloe vera juice, chia
seeds, probiotics, and digestive enzymes.
Finally, if you want to check for gluten sensitivity and intolerance, order a test through
Cyrex or Zoomer, both of which offer gold-standard gluten-reactivity screening, along with the
option to test for intestinal permeability, celiac disease, and even pathogenic organisms such
as bacteria, viruses, worms, parasites, and fungi. It also reports on six antibiotic-resistant
genes.
2. FODMAP Sensitivity
As common as gluten and gliadin sensitivities are, many people with gut distress don’t suffer
from either of them. This may be especially true if you eat properly prepared, low-gluten or
gluten-free grains and fermented foods and still find you have gut issues.
One study found that people with self-reported gluten sensitivities actually had no adverse
effects in the gut from eating gluten. In fact, they experienced complete elimination of their
gut issues after reducing their consumption of a kind of poorly absorbed, short-chain
carbohydrates called fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and
polyols—more commonly known as FODMAPs. The researchers reported that in all
participants, gastrointestinal symptoms consistently and significantly improved during
reduced FODMAP intake but significantly worsened when their diets included gluten or whey
protein—meaning that combining gluten (even small amounts) with high-FODMAP foods can
be a quite problematic one-two combo for many people.
Gluten-induced gut issues are present in a broad spectrum of patients with clinical
presentations of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). But a study published in the journal Nutrients
found that IBS patients put on a low-FODMAP diet experienced significantly less abdominal
pain and bloating than patients who received a high-FODMAP diet, even when gluten was
present in the diet.
In other words, it may not be gluten that’s upsetting your gut but rather combining gluten-
containing foods with FODMAPs, or even FODMAPs all by themselves. How could this
happen? Let’s back up for a moment and look into what FODMAPs are.
If You Eat Bread, Eat This Bread
I do indeed eat bread—but it is the mouthwatering, slow-fermented sourdough bread that my wife,
Jessa, makes. The process of fermentation used in sourdough bread not only predigests the gluten
but also reduces the glycemic index of the bread, making it far friendlier to your gut and blood
sugar levels.
--- END PAGE 626 ---

--- PAGE 627 ---
Lest you think you can go to the grocery store and grab any old sourdough loaf, it is important to
note that the fermentation process capable of breaking down gluten is called slow fermentation.
Many sourdoughs are short-fermented and are made quickly with chemicals and acids that impart
a sour taste without allowing natural yeasts and lactic acid bacteria to work through the grain. If
you want to experience the full benefits of sourdough, make sure to find a baker who makes slow-
fermented sourdough or learn how to make it at home.
This is Jessa’s sourdough recipe in all its tasty, mildly addictive glory. I highly recommend serving
it with a pat of grass-fed butter, a drizzle of raw honey or blackstrap molasses, and a sprinkling of
coarse salt. Several adaptations and tasty modifications of this recipe can be found in my books
Boundless Cookbook and Boundless Kitchen.
• 1 cup sourdough starter
• 1 cup lukewarm water
• 2 teaspoons salt
• 3 to 4 cups organic all-purpose flour (I like Himalayan Tartary Buckwheat from Big Bold
Health)
1.

In a large mixing bowl, combine the starter, water, and salt and mix well. Add 2 cups of the
flour and stir until well combined. Allow the mixture to rest for 5 minutes.2.

After 5 minutes, add more flour ½ cup at a time, until the dough is sticky but can be
handled. Sprinkle the counter with flour, place the dough on the flour, and knead (the
dough should feel elastic and easy to knead). Continue to add small amounts of flour at a
time while kneading until the dough does not stick to your hands. Knead for 10 to 15
minutes for a high-gluten flour, or less for flours with less gluten, like einkorn wheat flour.3.

Place the dough in a large mixing bowl and cover it with plastic wrap. Allow the dough to
sit at room temperature for at least 8 hours or overnight. It should double in size.4.

Pop the dough out of the bowl, knead in about 2 tablespoons of flour, and shape the dough
to fit whatever vessel you’ll be baking it in, such as a loaf pan. If you are using a loaf pan,
grease it now. If you are using a traditional proofing basket, sprinkle it with flour. Place the
shaped loaf in the pan or basket and loosely cover it with plastic wrap. Place it on the
countertop and let it rise for 2 to 4 hours. You will know it is ready when it is close to or
fully doubled in size.5.

Preheat the oven to 550°F or the hottest setting (sourdough likes it hot!). If you are using a
proofing basket, place a cookie sheet in the oven before preheating. Once the oven is
preheated, turn the temperature down to 450°F. If you are using a proofing basket, take
the cookie sheet out and gently flip the loaf out of the basket and onto the cookie sheet.6.

Place the loaf in the oven and bake for 10 minutes. Turn the temperature down to 350°F
and bake for an additional 30 minutes, or until the bread sounds hollow when you knock on
it or the internal temperature is 190°F.7.

If you are using a loaf pan, remove the pan from the oven and place it on a wire rack to
cool. If you are using a cookie sheet, use hot pads to transfer the bread to a wire rack.8. 
Allow the bread to cool completely before cutting into it, preferably with a serrated knife
to avoid any problematic crumbling.
--- END PAGE 627 ---

--- PAGE 628 ---
TIP: Whole-wheat flour tends to absorb water less quickly, so if you use it, be patient in step 1 and
allow the flour mixture to rest for the full 5 minutes. Too little water or too much flour results in a
useless brick of dough.
NOTE: A proofing basket is generally made of wicker and produces a rustic artisan-style bread. It’s
used during the second ferment of the sourdough. When you transfer the dough from the basket
to the cookie sheet, you will see the spiral design of the basket imprinted on the loaf.
Many of the foods that we commonly eat, even in a healthy diet, are called high-residue
foods: when they’re digested, they leave behind a lot of extra matter, such as lactose,
indigestible fiber, and other plant particles, for bacteria to feed on. When bacteria feed and
proliferate, fermentation begins, and fermentation in your gut causes bloating, cramping, gas,
constipation, and diarrhea. Which foods tend to ferment more or faster than others? You
guessed it: FODMAPs.
FODMAPs often cause symptoms beyond gut-related distress, such as depression, fatigue,
headaches, and brain fog (which makes sense given that whole brain-gut connection you
learned about earlier).
The following is a list of the major high-FODMAP foods. While I am certainly not
advocating that you cut these foods out of your diet completely, you may find that when you
consume large amounts of them, especially at a single meal or in one day, significant gut issues
arise, and that when you eliminate these foods, you can eat gluten-containing foods without a
problem. If all this seems a bit overwhelming, the top two foods to eliminate right away are
onions and garlic, the biggest culprits in those with FODMAP sensitivities.•

Fruit, agave, and honey: Fructose is a monosaccharide (the M in FODMAPs) fruit sugar.
Fruits that are higher in fructose include melons and tropical fruits such as mangoes.
Fruits high in polyols (the P in FODMAPs), such as apples, peaches, and pears, also contain
high amounts of fructose, as do sweeteners like high-fructose corn syrup, honey, and agave.
And of course, fructose is a major ingredient in most sports gels and drinks, so if sports
gels make your digestive system go awry, fructose could be the reason.•

Beans and lentils: Oligosaccharides are short strands of simple sugars present in all beans
and lentils. Maltodextrin, which is found in many sports gels, is also an oligosaccharide, as
are isomaltooligosaccharides (IMOs) and other forms of so-called low-carb fiber found in
many energy bars. Interestingly, IMOs, despite being marketed as low-carb and appearing
in a host of “low-carb” energy bars, along with inulin, are notorious for spiking blood
sugar.• 
Wheat, onions, scallions, garlic, and cruciferous vegetables such as cabbage and
cauliflower: The culprit in all these is a sugar called fructan. Surprisingly, wheat is even
found in many sports bars and energy chews.
--- END PAGE 628 ---

--- PAGE 629 ---
•

Dairy: Lactose, the sugar found in dairy (especially in unfermented forms such as milk, as
opposed to yogurt or kefir), is a disaccharide. Large amounts of lactose are found in many
postworkout recovery drinks.• 
Sugar alcohols: Sugar alcohols are also called polyols, which makes them one of the
substances FODMAPs are named for. They’re used as sweeteners, especially in sugar-free
and so-called health foods, diabetic candy, toothpaste, and chewing gum. Xylitol, maltitol,
and sorbitol are examples of sugar alcohols found in many packaged and processed foods.
Some sugar alcohols are not as bad as others: xylitol is better tolerated than mannitol,
sorbitol, and disaccharide polyols like lactitol, and erythritol’s structure and molecular
weight keep it from causing the negative reactions that other polyols do. But sugar alcohols
are used as alternative, low-calorie sweeteners because they bypass digestion, and this is
known to cause gastrointestinal distress. In most folks, erythritol seems to be the best-
tolerated sugar alcohol.
As you may already know from personal experience or pure common sense, eating an
entire plate of sautéed onions or a bowl of roasted garlic is probably going to give you gas.
Indeed, for most people who have FODMAP issues, onions and garlic tend to be the biggest
culprits (although if you are using garlic for its tremendous antimicrobial and antifungal
properties, you can take a supplement such as Allimax, which contains high amounts of allicin,
the active ingredient in garlic, without causing fermentation issues). You also probably
wouldn’t mow down a few bowls of beans and lentils or eat a smoothie made with four or five
apples and not expect to feel some funky repercussions in your gut. But you can create a
nuclear bomb in your gut by consuming 50 to 100 g of fructose and maltodextrin per hour
from sports gels during or before a workout or race, downing a wheat-filled energy bar every
afternoon at work, or sucking down a lactose-laden postworkout recovery shake or a coffee
cup full of heavy creamer in the morning.
While you can get a breath test for FODMAP reactivity similar to that designed for small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth (which is discussed later in this chapter and often goes hand in
hand with FODMAP issues), a simpler way to assess the situation is to eliminate the major
high-FODMAP foods from your diet and observe how you feel—which is basically an
elimination diet strategy. If you have gas, bloating, indigestion, or other gut problems, I highly
suggest that you photocopy the tables on the next two pages, stick them on your fridge for
easy reference, try a low-FODMAP diet for a week, and see what happens. You may also want
to download the Monash University FODMAP Diet app, a handy, relatively inexpensive app
that helps you identify foods high in FODMAPs.
If you opt for a breath test, look into the TrioSmart breath test, a highly sensitive test that
can detect all the primary fermented gases produced in your gut, including those that can
contribute to FODMAP sensitivity or cause SIBO (discussed later in this chapter), or the
FoodMarble AIRE, a portable breath tester and app to help you find the foods most compatible
--- END PAGE 629 ---

--- PAGE 630 ---
with your unique digestive system, achieved by recording your fermentation scores from your
breath and then allowing you to log your foods; track your symptoms, stress, and sleep; and
test your tolerance to individual foods.
Finally, if you do eat FODMAPs, you can undo some of the damage with a blend of herbs
found in over-the-counter supplements (similar to the way gluten enzymes can assist with
gluten sensitivities). One of these supplements, Atrantil, capitalizes on the potency of
different plants’ polyphenols, which both reduce the effects of some of the bad bacteria and
nourish your good bacteria. Atrantil contains three botanicals: peppermint, which relaxes the
small intestine and allows the other two to do their work more effectively; quebracho, which
soaks up the hydrogen that can fuel uncomfortable methane production and also disrupts the
cell walls of methane-producing bacteria; and horse chestnut, which enters the disrupted cells’
walls and inhibits the enzyme that allows methane to be produced. After the polyphenols do
their work in the small intestine, they move into the colon and are broken down into
prebiotics for good bacteria.
3. Insufficient Enzymes
I often see this problem in people who stress their guts by eating large amounts of food, eating
in a stressed state, or eating before, during, or after exercise or in a tired, postworkout state.
When you consume a meal, an energy bar, or a sports drink, your pancreas and small intestine
secrete enzymes that break down proteins, carbohydrates, and fats into absorbable nutrients.
Meat, eggs, and beans, for example, consist of large protein molecules that must be broken
down by these enzymes before they can be used to build and repair body tissues. Pepsin, an
enzyme found in the digestive juices of the stomach, starts the digestion of protein. Then, in
the small intestine, several enzymes secreted by the pancreas and the lining of the intestine
complete the breakdown of these protein molecules into even smaller molecules—amino
acids. These amino acids can then be absorbed into the blood and carried to all parts of the
body.
But there can be problems that keep these enzymes from completely breaking down your
food. The amount of food you eat can exceed the capacity of your digestive enzymes, a
scenario typical among active, calorie-devouring individuals. Or your pancreas or small
intestine can have a genetic inability to produce a certain enzyme, such as lactase. Or perhaps
your gut is ravaged from periods of poor eating, gliadin exposure, and the like and is simply
unable to produce enough enzymes. Sometimes, enzymatic activity declines because of
intense physical activity—so, for example, there may not be enough enzymes to handle that
protein shake you slurp down immediately after walking in the door from a hard run.
Whatever the case, if your digestive tract can’t produce enough enzymes or the enzymes
simply aren’t working, then nutrients are not completely digested. (Undigested protein is
--- END PAGE 630 ---

--- PAGE 631 ---
particularly likely to pass through a damaged intestinal wall into the bloodstream and cause
inflammation.) How do you know if you have a digestive enzyme insufficiency? The best way is
with a stool test, such as a three-day Genova protocol, which involves multiple stool
collections that you send to a lab. The lab measures the presence of bacteria, parasites, yeasts,
fungi, and other compounds, along with how well you digest your food and how well your
pancreas produces digestive enzymes. Most doctors won’t run these tests, and they may not be
covered by insurance, but you can oversee the process yourself. The report you get with the
test results is pretty self-explanatory.
FOODS SUITABLE ON A LOW-FODMAP DIET
•

banana
• cranberry
• honeydew
• mandarin
• rhubarb
• blueberry
• durian
melon
orange
• rockmelon
Fruit •
boysenberry
• grape
• kiwifruit
• passionfruit
• star anise
• cantaloupe
• grapefruit
• lemon
• pawpaw
• strawberry
• lime
• raspberry
• tangelo•

alfalfa
• choko
• olives
• silver beet
• sweet
• bamboo
• choy sum
• parsnip
• spinach
potato
shoots
• endive
• potato
• squash
• taro
• bean shoots
• ginger
• pumpkin
• swede
• tomato

Vegetables •
bok choy
• green
• red
• turnip
• carrot
beans
capsicum
• yam
• celery
• lettuce
(bell
• zucchinipepper)
•

basil
• ginger
• mint
• rosemary

Herbs •
chili
• lemongrass
• oregano
• thyme•
coriander
• marjoram
• parsley
• gluten-free
• 100% spelt
• oats

OTHER •
quinoa
bread or
bread
• polenta •

arrowroot
• sorghum

Grain Foods cereal
• rice
• millet
• tapiocaproducts
• psyllium
MILK •
rice milk*

CHEESES 
ICE CREAM

BUTTER
•

lactose-free
• soy milk* •

hard
SUBSTITUTES SUBSTITUTEmilk*
cheeses
•

gelato
•

olive oil
Milk
• oat milk*
• Brie
• sorbet
YOGURTProducts
• Camembert •

lactose-
free
varietiesSWEETENERS •
artificial

HONEY
• molasses
•

sugar**
sweeteners
SUBSTITUTES • treacle(sucrose)
not ending
•

golden

Other
• glucose
in “-ol” syrup**
• maple
syrup**
--- END PAGE 631 ---

--- PAGE 632 ---
* Check for additives
** Small quantities 
FOODS TO ELIMINATE ON A LOW-FODMAP DIETFRUIT •
canned
• concentrated
• dried fruit

SWEETENERS•

apple
fruit in
fruit sources
• fruit juice •

fructose

Excess
• mango
natural
• large
• high-fructose
Fructose
• nashi
juice
servings of
corn syrup
• pear
• watermelon
fruit
• honeyMILK •
custard ice

CHEESES •
cream
•

milk from
cream
•

soft
• mascarpone

Lactose
cows,
• yogurt unripened
• ricottagoats, or
cheeses
sheep
• cottage
VEGETABLES •
fennel

CEREALS 
FRUIT 
MISCELLANEOUS•

artichokes
• garlic
• wheat and
•

custard
•

chicory
• asparagus
• leek
rye in large
apple
• dandelion
• beetroot
• okra
amounts
• persimmon
• inulin

Fructans
• broccoli
• onions (all)
(e.g., bread,
• watermelon •
pistachio•
Brussels
• shallots
crackers,
sprouts
• spring
cookies,
• cabbage
onions couscous,
• eggplant
pasta)LEGUMES •
kidney
• soybeans•

baked
beans

Galactans
beans
• lentils
• chickpeas
FRUIT •
cherry
• pear

VEGETABLES 
SWEETENERS•

apple
• longon
• plum
•

cauliflower
•

sorbitol
• apricot
• lychee
• prune
• green
• mannitol
• avocado
• nashi
• watermelon capsicum
• isomalt

Polyols
• blackberry
(bell
• maltitol
pepper)
• xylitol•
mushroom
• sweet corn
You can also pay attention to symptoms. Symptoms of digestive enzyme problems include
the following:

• Gas and bloating after meals
• Feeling as if you have food sitting in your stomach after you eat
• Feeling full after eating a few bites of food
• Seeing undigested food in your stool
--- END PAGE 632 ---

--- PAGE 633 ---
• Frequent and consistent floating stool
• An “oil slick” in the toilet bowl (indicative of undigested fat)
If many of these symptoms subside after you begin to eat more slowly and mindfully and
use a digestive enzyme supplement before your meal, then it’s likely you have some kind of
digestive enzyme insufficiency. The fixes for this problem can be simple:
• Clean up your diet using some of the strategies you have already learned about, such as
avoiding excessive calories, eating when relaxed, and not eating too close to or during
exercise, so that your gut can produce adequate digestive enzymes.
• Eat more slowly and mindfully, and avoid rushed, hectic meals. Eating in a relaxed
emotional state increases stomach acid production, which aids protein digestion, liberates
digestive enzymes for the breakdown of fats, proteins, and sugars, and enhances
peristalsis, the wavelike muscle contractions that move food along the digestive tract. My
family and I all take one to three deep, slow breaths in through our nose and out through
our mouths before every meal, even at restaurants. Try it sometime!
• Engage in intermittent fasts of twelve to sixteen hours daily to give your gut a break. (See
here for more on fasting.)
• Jump-start your digestion by taking digestive enzymes, preferably a product that contains
all the necessary enzymes, such as BioOptimizers Masszymes, or one packaged with HCl
and bile, such as Thorne Bio-Gest. Apple cider vinegar and bitters pre-meal can also help.
• If you do need to eat while stressed, in a hurry, or in a postworkout state, try to blend and
grind your foods as much as possible so that your digestive system has less work to do. For
this reason, I believe every kitchen should be equipped with a good blender, a juicer, a
mortar and pestle, and a food processor.
• Fix inflammation. When inflammation is not controlled, the body’s ability to make bile is
downregulated, but when inflammation is addressed, the body’s ability to make bile
improves. (There’s plenty on controlling inflammation in chapters 8 and 12.)
Finally, no discussion of enzymatic issues and nutrient malabsorption would be complete
without a nod to your gallbladder. The bile produced by your gallbladder is potent for
enhancing digestion of all foods, particularly fat. If your gallbladder is sluggish or not working
correctly, even digestive enzymes won’t work quite as well. To maximize gallbladder function
and health, I recommend ample use of digestifs and bitters before a meal (such as my favorite
mix of a little ginger, black pepper, raw honey, and lemon juice), a spoonful of sauerkraut, a
digestive enzyme that contains ox bile extract, or a supplement such as Quicksilver Scientific’s
Dr. Shade’s Bitters No. 9. In a pinch, you can even use common cocktail bitters that you would
normally add to an alcoholic drink. Mix them with sparkling water or lemon juice. In addition,
consider herbal gallbladder-drainage homeopathic remedies, which can be very effective for
--- END PAGE 633 ---

--- PAGE 634 ---
people with a sluggish gallbladder or a need for increased bile production. A good brand is
Pekana. Certain supplements can help the body make and secrete bile more effectively,
including milk thistle, pantothenic acid (vitamin B5), acetyl-L-carnitine, and
phosphatidylcholine.
4. Insufficient Gut Bacteria
A healthy human body has more than 100 trillion microorganisms in its intestines, which is
ten times more than the total number of human cells in the body. The metabolic activities
performed by gut microflora resemble those of an organ: they train the immune system, attack
foreign invaders such as toxins, prevent the growth of harmful pathogenic bacteria in the gut,
regulate the development of the intestinal lining, produce vitamins such as biotin and vitamin
K, and even produce hormones.
So how do your gut bacteria become imbalanced? In my article “The Art of Using
Antibiotics: How to Limit the Damage” (BenGreenfieldLife.com/anti)—which I recommend
you read if you have ever been on antibiotics—I explained how antibiotics can deprive your
body of precious probiotics. So can an appendix removal. A low-fiber diet can also result in
insufficient gut flora because prebiotics are fiber-based sugars from fruits and vegetables that
provide sustenance to probiotics. An inadequate intake of fermented foods rich in good
bacteria can also be an issue, especially in a modern Western diet. Unfortunately, most
commercial probiotic foods have been pasteurized (which kills the beneficial bacteria), are
packaged improperly, or have lots of added sugars to satisfy palates conditioned to sweet
foods.
If you do have insufficient levels of gut bacteria, you are likely to experience some
troubling issues, including these:
• The complete absence of gas (yes, you actually stop farting)
• Undigested fiber in your stool, which appears as white or dark specks
• Constipation, with occasional periods of diarrhea or IBS
• Frequent sickness and allergies
• Blood-clotting problems
• Neurological problems and brain fog
• Decreased physical performance
If you suspect that you have insufficient gut bacteria levels, I recommend the three-day
Genova gut-testing kit to check for the presence of bacteria, along with a microbiome analysis,
which is offered by companies such as Viome, Wellnicity, BIOHM, Psomagen, Ombre, and
Thorne. If you discover that you have insufficient bacteria or you have many of the symptoms
--- END PAGE 634 ---

--- PAGE 635 ---
described above, you can repopulate your gut with good bacteria and consume adequate
amounts of fiber and prebiotics. I recommend the following 1-2-3 combo:1.

Consume a wide variety of fermented foods, such as kimchi, sauerkraut, and pickled
vegetables, along with yogurt, kefir, kombucha, miso, natto, and other foods with naturally
occurring good bacteria. This combo provides both good bacteria and the fiber that feeds
them. Some people wonder whether prebiotics and fiber can feed the pathogenic bacteria,
too, but that’s not really the case. While some in-vitro research suggests that certain
prebiotics may promote the growth of pathogens like Klebsiella, these test-tube
experiments do not relate to real-life scenarios in the human gut. The vast majority of
evidence demonstrates that prebiotics mainly promote the growth of beneficial bacteria,
which, if supplementation with prebiotics is continued, typically outweighs any
simultaneous growth of bad bacteria. As good bacteria flourish with prebiotic
supplementation and fermented-food intake, the pH of the gut tends to decrease, which is
a natural deterrent to the growth of pathogens. When combined with the good bacteria’s
antipathogenic effects, this helps maintain a healthy balance of good and bad bacteria in
your gut.2.

Use a full-spectrum probiotic. Seed is my preferred source for probiotic capsules. It is a
probiotic and prebiotic formulated to provide benefits for gut immune function and
whole-body health, and one of the few probiotic supplements that can reach your colon
alive. Several studies on SIBO and IBS indicate that the best results from using a probiotic
come from a multi-therapy approach that includes three forms of probiotics: lactobacillus
with bifidobacteria, Saccharomyces boulardii, and a soil-based probiotic such as Bacillus
coagulans. All three forms are in the Seed formula. Other good probiotic brands include
Thrive, Ancient Nutrition, and Functional Medicine Formulations.3. 
Consume plenty of vegetables and moderate amounts of fiber from other sources,
such as seeds and nuts, to feed the probiotics. If eating salads, smoothies, and plant matter
is logistically tough for you or causes digestive distress, consider a greens powder or
supplement that is rich in polyphenols, flavonols, and prebiotics and that is derived from
organic greens (no exposure to pesticides or herbicides). Good brands include Organifi
Green Juice, Living Fuel SuperGreens, Athletic Greens, Thorne, and Garden of Life.
The Cross-Talk Between the Gut Microbiota and
Mitochondria During Exercise
Your mitochondria play a crucial role in energy generation and the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) and reactive oxygen nitrogen species (RONS), along with regulation of
inflammatory by-products, particularly from endurance exercise. Endurance exercise is beneficial
--- END PAGE 635 ---

--- PAGE 636 ---
because it can prevent mitochondrial DNA depletion and mutations, promote mitochondrial
biogenesis, and increase mitochondrial oxidative and antioxidant capacity.
But chronic stress, particularly from overtraining, can produce inflammation in the gut, which, in
turn, causes stress that promotes the movement of toxic lipopolysaccharides from the gut to the
bloodstream, as well as the growth of harmful bacteria in the gut. This is why endurance athletes
who don’t consume the high-carb foods made popular in the marathoning craze of the 1980s and
promoted by the Gatorade Sports Science Institute—such as scones, biscotti, processed grains,
and sugary drinks, gels, and bars—can still experience gut distress, bloating, constipation, and
many other GI issues.
Science is still in the infancy of understanding the bidirectional communication between the gut
microbiota and mitochondria, but several studies have shown that gut microbiota molecules,
including short-chain fatty acids such as butyrate, are essential for controlling mitochondrial
oxidative stress, inflammatory response, and pathogen growth, and also significantly improve
metabolism and energy expenditure during exercise.
Furthermore, short-chain fatty acids and their precursors—such as those found in butter, coconut
oil, buckwheat, quinoa, millet, amaranth, cultured vegetables, coconut water, kefir, and probiotic
beverages—can induce mitochondrial biogenesis through a variety of mechanisms such as an
increase in the activity of PCG-1α (a key regulator of energy metabolism), an increase in redox
sensitive energy sensor SIRT1 (a cell-protective and antiaging pathway), and an increase in the
enzyme AMPK (crucial for ATP production), all of which suppress inflammatory responses and
enhance the beneficial effects of exercise.
Dampening inflammation and oxidative stress during endurance exercise is an ideal approach to
restricting the growth of pathogens in the gut as well as the detrimental effects of those
pathogens on mitochondrial functions. While treating inflammatory responses with diet is still a
challenge, making the right nutritional shifts to tone down oxidative stress can promote the
growth of healthy gut bacteria and, thus, protect proper mitochondrial function and gut health
during exercise.
But it’s not just gut bacteria talking to mitochondria—mitochondria affect gut bacteria, too.
Mitochondrial ROS production influences the integrity of your intestinal barrier and mucosal
immune responses, which regulate the balance and quality of your gut microbiota. Even
mitochondrial DNA mutations can affect the function of gut bacteria, and mutations in
mitochondrial genes and oxidative stress can impact your microbiota.
So, if you want to perform at your best, you must care for your gut bacteria by eating foods rich in
healthy short-chain fatty acids, and you must care for your mitochondria by consuming mineral-
rich water and electrolytes, getting enough sunlight and infrared light exposure, grounding, and
using pulsed electromagnetic field therapy, cold thermogenesis, and heat therapy. New research
shows that one of the most important compounds for gut mitochondria is polyphenols, found in
foods like blueberries, plums, cherries, apples, strawberries, black currants, black olives, dark
chocolate, black tea, coffee, hazelnuts, pecans, and most notably pomegranates, which cause the
gut bacteria to churn out the antiaging compound Urolithin A.
Prebiotics, Probiotics, Postbiotics, and Modbiotics
Decoded
--- END PAGE 636 ---

--- PAGE 637 ---
Probiotic is a common term in health and nutrition circles, but prebiotics, postbiotics, and
modbiotics tend to fly under the radar. What are they, exactly?
As you probably know, probiotics are gut-dwelling bacteria: living microorganisms that enjoy a
symbiotic relationship with their human host. A prebiotic is a substance that is generally
indigestible by humans but nourishes probiotics. Prebiotics include oligosaccharides,
arabinogalactans, fructooligosaccharides, and inulin, which are abundant in vegetables, grains, and
roots. It is important to remember that prebiotics are water-soluble fiber, not insoluble fiber, which
is found in foods such as legumes, oats, rice bran, barley, citrus, and potatoes. Insoluble fiber
promotes healthy bowel movements and is the fiber that is often recommended for healthy
digestion, but it does not selectively fuel growth of beneficial bacteria in the colon in the same
way as soluble fiber. However, if you’re eating a widely varied whole-foods diet that’s rich in plants,
tubers, and legumes, you’ll get plenty of both forms of fiber.
Postbiotics are exactly what their name suggests: the by-products of probiotics after they have
fermented and metabolized prebiotics. Research has shown that postbiotics, which were long
thought to be mere metabolic waste, are key factors in maintaining long-term digestive health. In
fact, some research suggests that postbiotics may bestow many of the health benefits of healthy
probiotic populations—even without the presence of probiotics themselves.
Modbiotics are compounds that influence the growth of gut microbiota through their antibacterial,
antifungal, and antiparasitic properties. They can reduce excessive firmicutes (sugar-eating
bacteria that drive inflammation, oxidative stress, and metabolic acidosis) and increase gut
bacteroidetes (a class of bacteria that are beneficial in the gut but can be harmful when they
migrate to other parts of the body).
The interesting fact about naturally occurring modbiotics is that they always occur alongside the
sugars that feed firmicutes. So, if you eat a natural source of sugars, such as a handful of
pomegranate seeds, you get a large dose of modbiotics that would combat the negative effects of
harmful sugar-eating bacteria. Modern processed foods high in sugar do not usually contain
modbiotics, and neither does the average bottle of so-called superfood juice from the health food
store—you need to get modbiotics from whole-food sources.
In summary, to fully capitalize on the power of your gut bacteria, your diet needs to be rich in
prebiotic, probiotic, and modbiotic foods. Since postbiotics are the by-products of probiotic
metabolism, you do not necessarily need to include postbiotic supplements in your diet, although
research does suggest that they can aid in digestion, and a growing number of supplement
companies are now selling blends of commonly known by-products of bacterial metabolism,
including short-chain fatty acids, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), B vitamins, vitamin K, amino
acids, hydrogen peroxide, and enzymes. Prebiotic foods include raw asparagus, underripe
bananas, raw leeks, raw garlic, raw Jerusalem artichoke, raw dandelion greens, and raw or cooked
onions. Probiotic foods include yogurt, kefir, coconut kefir, kimchi, kombucha, sauerkraut, natto
(fermented soybeans), raw cheese, apple cider vinegar (with the “mother”), and salted gherkin
pickles. Make sure that the probiotic foods you consume contain live bacteria cultures and are not
pasteurized or heat treated, which kills the bacteria.
To get a good amount of modbiotics, the average diet needs to contain more fruit peels, pulp,
fiber, seeds, and skins. Potatoes, lettuce, onions, garlic, ginger, turmeric, tomatoes, green beans,
broccoli, coriander, mint, apples, cherries, and pineapple are also good modbiotic sources. Active
individuals in particular need to eat a host of whole-food sources of modbiotics so that their
digestive systems can keep up with their dietary loads. If you’re concerned about lectins or other
digestive irritants present in the skins and peels of plants and produce, don’t worry: you can
--- END PAGE 637 ---

--- PAGE 638 ---
generally prepare whole foods to limit the effects of irritants. For example, in the case of a
pomegranate, you can dry the skin in a food dehydrator, then pulverize it in a blender or food
processor for a modbiotic- and antioxidant-rich powder; and you can juice or blend a mixture of
the flesh and the seeds. In the same way that nose-to-tail eating—rather than just eating the
muscle meat—has a myriad of benefits, so does eating all parts of a plant, not just the flesh—
especially when it comes to the health of your gut.
If all this sounds very complex, the takeaway message is this: eat a diet that includes a wide
variety of plant matter, including the outsides and insides of vegetables, and a moderate amount
of natural fruits, along with a diverse array of fermented foods, and you’ll be guaranteed to get
prebiotics, modbiotics, and probiotics, and your probiotics will have what they need to produce
postbiotics.
Finally, if your bacterial insufficiency includes a strange absence of gas accompanied by
frequent constipation, which can happen if you have been on a hefty antibiotic regimen, and
you want the shotgun, fix-everything-all-at-once approach, the best solution I have found (if
you are not interested in the trendy world of fecal transplants) is reinoculating your large
intestine with a bacterial strain. There are two options: a probiotic enema or the use of a
probiotic that can survive the acidic environment of the stomach and effectively “seed” the gut
(I prefer the probiotic Seed for this, although an enema is still more effective). Both
approaches seed your large intestine with good bacteria without the mess or expense of fecal
transplantation or the consumption of someone else’s number two. If you are interested in
fecal transplantation, or so-called “poop pills,” then pay attention to chapter 19.
Other strategies that can be helpful to heal the gut after an antibiotic regimen include
anything that can be used to heal a leaky gut, particularly colostrum, L-glutamine, John
Douillard’s “decoction tea” (see here for the recipe), and bone broth.
The Probiotic Enema
As gross or off-putting as it may sound, you can repopulate your good gut bacteria by sticking a
tube up your butt and funneling probiotics into your colon—very much like a coffee enema, but
with probiotics rather than a cup o’ joe. My friend Matt Gallant is a professional poker player and
biohacker who created a recipe for a probiotic enema, which he shared with me on a podcast. It
maximizes absorption by minimizing the distance that the probiotics have to travel through the
digestive tract, bypassing the acidity of the stomach, and mainlining the bacteria directly into the
colon.
For this enema recipe, you will need:
• 1 liter of coconut water
• 5 capsules of Matt’s P3-OM Probiotics (for a discount code, visit BoundlessBook.com/13)
• 2 butyric acid (butyrate) capsules (optional, for an even more beneficial effect)
• A large glass jar with a lid, such as a 32-ounce mason jar
--- END PAGE 638 ---

--- PAGE 639 ---
If you are too squeamish to give yourself an enema, you can also drink this mixture over two days
after it is cultured and refrigerated. (If you decide to drink it, I recommend adding a sweetener,
such as pureed fruits like blueberries or strawberries, maple syrup, or liquid stevia.) But as
uncomfortable as it may sound, the quickest route is right up the back door. Since learning of this
approach from Matt, I’ve adapted my weekly coffee enema to include a handful of probiotic and
butyrate capsules that I break open into it. I’m lying on the floor for ten to twenty minutes doing
the enema anyway, so I figure it’s a good opportunity to populate my colonic flora. This tactic may
also decrease incidence of colitis and improve the mucosal lining of the colon.1.

In a large mixing bowl, mix the coconut water and P3-OM capsules with a fork, whisk, or
milk frother. (If you’re using butyric capsules, break them open and add them to the
mixture, too.) Pour the whole mixture into the glass jar and put the lid on it.2.

Let the mixture ferment at room temperature for three to six hours, until you see bubbles in
the mixture (the warmer the room, the less time you’ll need). You can even leave it
overnight.3. 
Once the whole probiotic bath is cultured and you can see bubbles, keep it refrigerated
until you are ready to use it. To administer the enema, you will need an enema tube (you
can find the full stainless steel enema kit I use on BoundlessBook.com/13). Administer the
mixture, then hang upside down from an inversion table or yoga trapeze, or lay on your
back with your legs up against the wall, for about 20 minutes to let the mixture soak in.
5. Too Much Gut Bacteria
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) tends to fly under the radar, but it can be
problematic in people who consume a high-carbohydrate diet (because bacteria in the gut
readily feed on sugars and starches) and in people with any of the following:

• Low stomach acid production
• Irritable bowel syndrome
• Celiac or Crohn’s disease
• Poor liver function
• A history of multiple courses of antibiotics
• A history of heavy alcohol consumption
• A history of taking oral contraception
SIBO is a chronic bacterial infection of the small intestine. These bacteria normally live in
other parts of the gastrointestinal tract, but when they expand into the small intestine, they
interfere with healthy digestion and absorption of nutrients and are associated with damage to
the lining of the small intestine (leaky gut syndrome). Over time this can lead to deficiencies
--- END PAGE 639 ---

--- PAGE 640 ---
in the bacteria’s favorite nutrients, such as iron and B , deficiencies that can reduce red blood
12cell levels. In addition, when damage to the lining of the small intestine prevents foods from
being absorbed, these bacteria gobble them up, which creates a vicious cycle of more bacteria
growing and damaging the small intestine, more food being available for bacteria, and then
even more bacteria growing. After eating your food, these bacteria produce gas, leading to
flatulence, abdominal bloating, abdominal pain, and constipation, diarrhea, or both
(“constirrhea”). Bacteria also reduce fat absorption by deconjugating bile, which leads to
deficiencies in vitamins A and D and the production of those lovely fatty stools.
Through the damaged lining of the gut, larger, undigested food particles enter the body,
and your immune system reacts to them, creating food allergies and sensitivities. Bacteria can
also enter the bloodstream and lead to an immune response. This can cause endotoxemia, a
condition characterized by chronic fatigue and stress in the liver. Meanwhile, the bacteria
secrete acids that, in high amounts, can cause neurological and cognitive symptoms, such as
depression and autism.
So how do you know if you have SIBO? The presence of many of the symptoms listed
above—nutrient deficiencies, flatulence, bloating, abdominal pain, constipation, diarrhea, food
sensitivities—is a good sign. If you have SIBO, you may have a negative reaction to fermented
foods, such as kombucha and kefir. You can even get irritable bowel syndrome from
consuming probiotics, which often simply aggravate the issue by dumping bacteria on top of
excess bacteria. It may seem counterintuitive, but in this case, fermented foods and probiotics
could actually aggravate an already bothersome condition.
You can also test for SIBO with a simple at-home breath test that measures the amount of
gas produced by bacteria. But even these tests can have high rates of false negatives, meaning
the test results come back as negative but you actually do have SIBO—so it can be helpful to
simply pay attention to any bloating or gas that occurs when you eat carbohydrate-laden or
fermented foods. If that happens, it can be a big clue that you have SIBO.
If you do have SIBO, a combination of lowering your carbohydrate intake, juicing, and
doing herbal cleanses can eradicate the issue, as can a special type of diet called an elemental
diet. This may be difficult to do when you are in the throes of an intense exercise program, so
you will probably need to save it for the off-season—unless you want to take thirty days off to
take care of it.
There are a variety of SIBO healing programs out there, which I will outline shortly, but
here’s one basic protocol that works for many people:
• Test for and verify SIBO using the TrioSmart test or the FoodMarble AIRE device
discussed in the section on FODMAPs in this chapter.
• Modify your diet. Eat only nonfermentable carbohydrates (the low-FODMAP approach
described earlier in this chapter), and limit carbohydrate intake in general. On
BoundlessBook.com/13, you’ll find an outline of the Specific Carbohydrate Diet, which
--- END PAGE 640 ---

--- PAGE 641 ---
limits carbs, and a sample meal plan for treating SIBO. For the most effective dietary
protocol I’ve ever seen for SIBO, get the book The Microbiome Connection: Your Guide to
IBS, SIBO, and Low-Fermentation Eating by Dr. Mark Pimentel, one of the world’s foremost
SIBO researchers and physicians. At the top of the list of foods to avoid are all
nonabsorbable sugars, such as sucralose, sorbitol, lactitol, xylitol, mannitol, and even
stevia. Humans cannot digest these artificial sweeteners, and therefore 100 percent of their
calories are available for bacteria to digest, allowing the bacteria to thrive and overpopulate
in your gut. Additional problematic foods that are often championed as health foods but
are bad-news bears for those with SIBO include high-fiber foods and inulin, along with
high-residue foods that are difficult to digest and leave a residue in your gastrointestinal
tract, such as lentils, peas, soy products, milk, yogurt, and cheese. To complicate matters
slightly, SIBO often goes hand in hand with histamine sensitivities, which are testable with
a DAO and histamine blood test. If this is the case for you, you may need to follow a low-
fermentation, low-histamine diet. In working on this chapter, I hunted down a list of the
best foods and recipes for this approach, and I will include them all on the resources page
for this chapter.
• If you have a juicer, juice once or twice a day with this recipe: fresh plantain leaves (you
can often find them at local ethnic grocery stores—in my town, the Mexican one), one-
quarter of a medium-sized cabbage, two small-to-medium-size beets, two carrots, two
stalks of celery, and one 1-to-2-inch chunk of ginger.
• Every day, use herbal antibiotics and tinctures such as goldenseal extract, phellodendron,
coptis, cordyceps, garlic extract, and oil of oregano. People who do not recover after a
standard botanical antimicrobial protocol may benefit from the addition of a prokinetic
agent such as octreotide or low-dose naltrexone to increase the muscular contractions of
the bowel. You will also likely find the supplement Atrantil to be helpful.
• For four weeks, consume ½ to 1 cup per day of Dr. William Davis’s SIBO yogurt recipe. I
used this strategy myself when I had SIBO, and it works amazingly well. The full recipe is
in my book Boundless Kitchen, and I will also include a link to a webpage with instructions
on the resources page for this chapter. The yogurt uses specific bacterial species/strains
that colonize the upper GI tract, where SIBO occurs, and produce bacteriocins, which are
natural antibiotics produced by select microbes effective at killing or suppressing the
species of SIBO such as Klebsiella, E. coli, or Streptococcus. There are both dairy and
nondairy options—I make mine with coconut yogurt and then add gelatin as a thickener.
• Consider looking into any anatomical issues with your ileocecal valve, which separates the
small and large intestines, iliacus muscle (in the pelvis) or psoas muscle (connecting your
back and upper thigh), especially any closures or tightness. If the ileocecal valve won’t stay
fully closed, bacteria can pass through it to relocate from the colon to the small intestine.
Here’s one way to check: palpate the area about 2 inches to the right of your belly button,
--- END PAGE 641 ---

--- PAGE 642 ---
or massage it with an iliacus and psoas massage tool like a Pso-Rite. If there’s a problem
with the ileocecal valve, you’ll find that this region is extremely tight and sensitive. (I have
some friends who will even use the handle of a kettlebell to massage the area, but that
certainly isn’t for the faint of heart!)
• Ileocecal valve issues are often correlated to poor vagus nerve tone, so addressing that can
be helpful. (There are guidelines for stimulating the vagus nerve to improve its function in
chapter 2.) This is especially important for constipation since the vagus nerve can
modulate bowel movements and slow the heart and breathing so you can relax, especially
during bowel movements. If you have a combination of SIBO and constipation, consider
supplementation to support the production of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, which
is needed by the vagus nerve, the brain, and other nerves of the parasympathetic nervous
system. Many people have used one such supplement, Parasym Plus, to successfully
eliminate constipation issues due to poor vagus nerve function. Interestingly, nicotine can
act on similar pathways to support acetylcholine production; some people have even
experimented with nicotine patches over the lower-right abdomen to stimulate peristalsis
or deal with constipation. (This, as well as the Parasym Plus supplement, can be especially
helpful if your ileocecal valve is closed, but be cautious with nicotine if you have mast cell
activation or the histamine issues discussed in chapter 4.)
• Look into the little-known but highly useful peptide LL-37. There’s more about peptides in
chapter 19, but research on this so-called antimicrobial peptide indicates that it may be
highly effective for autoimmune issues and gut-inflammation-related conditions—
including fungal and bacterial overgrowth. The approximate dosage schedule is 100 mcg
per week for about six weeks, injected subcutaneously in the abdomen. Warning: The die-
off and Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction to administration of LL-37 can be uncomfortable and
involve flu-like symptoms and diarrhea for up to two weeks. After that, however, many
people experience the complete resolution of SIBO symptoms and elimination of bloating
and gas in response to carbohydrate intake.
If you want to learn more about SIBO and how to fix it, check out the comprehensive and
helpful website SiboInfo.com, and my friend Dr. Michael Ruscio’s website DrRuscio.com, and
consider getting a SIBO breath test from DirectLabs. On BoundlessBook.com/13 you’ll also
find a bonus video and free PDF entitled “The Hidden Killer in Your Gut.”
6. Yeast, Fungus, and Parasites
This is nasty stuff to think about, but we humans are constantly surrounded by biological
organisms that prefer to use us as their host so they can feed upon the food we eat—and I have
been shocked at the number of seemingly healthy folks who complain of issues such as
--- END PAGE 642 ---

--- PAGE 643 ---
insomnia, raging appetite, or dysregulated mood and test positive for parasites, yeast, and
fungus.
A parasite is a microscopic organism that derives nourishment from its host without
benefiting or killing that host. You can have both parasitic fungi and parasitic yeast in your
body. Intestinal parasites in particular are quite common and can lead to issues such as
abnormal bowel movements, muscle aches and pains, chronic fatigue, insomnia, skin
problems, and gut discomfort.
How do you get parasites? You can contract them in many ways, including from raw meat
and fish (had any sushi lately?), contaminated fruits and veggies, polluted water (the open-
water swims in many obstacle races and triathlons can be problematic), contact with infected
animals and pets, insect bites, and tainted water or food (most commonly, food or water
consumed during travel abroad).
Several years ago, within three weeks of returning from a long triathlon training and racing
trip to Thailand—which included elephant rides, open-water swims in stagnant, human-made
lagoons, liberal consumption of foods cooked in suspect ways, and many insect bites—I had
some strange coughing, skin rashes, and seriously smelly poo. I tested with a home poop panel
(the three-day Genova gut test that I mentioned earlier) and, sure enough, I had quite a few
critters in my gut, particularly yeast, fungi, Blastocystis, Achromobacter, Clostridium,
Pentatrichomonas hominis, Chilomastix mesnelli, and Helicobacter pylori. (Note that, as chapter 15
will explain, for overall immunity, your goal should not be to wipe your gut completely clean of
foreign invaders, which can modulate your immune system positively. It’s better to specifically
address the pathogenic ones.)
Most GI tests will tell you which particular herbal remedies your invaders are sensitive to.
After reviewing my results, I opted to take a high-grade oil of oregano four times per day, use a
supplement called mastic gum twice per day, throw down a few capsules of berberine, allicin,
and black walnut extract each day, and drink a face-puckering detox beverage once per day. I
was good to go with a normally functioning bowel within a month. (Incidentally, if you have
other gut issues such as yeast, fungus, food poisoning, or a mild gut bug, that same detox drink
can work wonders.) I probably got lucky because parasitic infections often require more
serious medication and long-term treatment. It all depends on the type of parasite you have.
How about yeast and fungi? Yeast are microscopic organisms categorized as fungi. The
most common culprit for yeast-induced gut issues is Candida albicans. It is a normal inhabitant
in your body but can wreak havoc if it grows out of control. When that happens, you develop
chronic fatigue, difficulty losing weight, sugar and carbohydrate cravings, brain fog, and even
sensitivities or allergies to foods that were once fine for you to eat. This issue is similar to
SIBO in its consequences, and it even has a similar name: SIFO (small intestine fungal
overgrowth). Dr. Mahmoud Ghannoum is a leading SIFO researcher who coined the term
mycobiome to describe the diverse fungal species that live on and in us humans, and his book
--- END PAGE 643 ---

--- PAGE 644 ---
Total Gut Balance: Fix Your Mycobiome Fast for Complete Digestive Wellness is a treatise on how
certain fungi can literally take over your gut and cause a host of digestive issues.
How to Make a Cleansing Detox Juice
I’m not gonna lie: the first time you try this detox juice, it will taste absolutely horrible. That’s
because, unlike the juices found at Whole Foods, it doesn’t contain eighteen apples, three
bananas, and a pound of other concentrated sugar and fructose sources. The first time I tried it, I
had to water it down and chug it so that I wouldn’t have to taste its full flavor. But between the
potent ginger and garlic, the spicy cayenne, and the powerful turmeric, it will knock out just
about any major toxins that are floating around in your system. If you must, add stevia to bestow
just a hint of sweetness to the brew.
For this detox juice, you will need:
• 1 (1-inch) piece of ginger, chopped
• 3 cloves garlic•

½ to ¾ cup water
• 1 teaspoon cayenne pepper
• 1 teaspoon turmeric powder
• Juice of 1 lemon
• 1/3 cup apple cider vinegar (see Tip)
• Liquid stevia (optional)
TIP: Use organic apple cider vinegar with the mother, like Bragg brand.
1.

Place the ginger, garlic, and water in a medium-sized saucepan over high heat and bring to
a boil. Boil for 10 minutes, then remove from the heat and let cool to room temperature
(you can drop a few ice cubes in there).2.

Add the rest of the ingredients to the mixture. If you prefer, transfer it to a blender and
blend for a minute or two, until smooth.3. 
Pour it into a glass, slam it, and try not to gag. There’s an entertaining video of my first
time trying it on BoundlessBook.com/13.
Due to higher levels of estrogen, genetic susceptibility, and natural levels of yeast in the
vaginal canal, women (especially those who eat lots of carbs) seem to be most susceptible to
candida infection, although men can also grow an overabundance of yeast, particularly when
consuming a high-carb diet that includes plenty of processed sugars and alcohol. A low-carb
diet combined with a cleansing protocol can eradicate the problem (see the SIBO
recommendations above), but you may need an even more comprehensive protocol, including
--- END PAGE 644 ---

--- PAGE 645 ---
• Daily consumption of a sludgy but effective drink composed of ½ teaspoon of
diatomaceous earth and ½ teaspoon of bentonite clay mixed into 2 cups of water
• Yeast-eating probiotics such as Saccharomyces boulardii, preferably consumed separately
from your daily meals
• An antifungal protocol that includes olive leaf extract, grapefruit seed extract, oregano, and
other herbs. The product ParaX by Cymbiotika is the most complete formula I know of for
a done-for-you supplement solution.
• A diet that restricts sugar, refined carbohydrates, white rice, gluten, dairy, fried foods, fruit,
fruit juices, foods made with yeast (such as bread, pasta, and crackers), MSG, vinegar,
fermented foods (yes, even sauerkraut, kimchi, kombucha, and yogurt), alcohol,
mushrooms, cheese, peanuts, pistachios, and meats from animals that have been exposed
to antibiotics
• Evaluation of your personal environment and diet for the presence of mold and
mycotoxins (see chapter 4 for more)
So what can you eat? Your options include but are not limited to all vegetables (particularly
onions and garlic if you do not have FODMAP sensitivities), meats not treated with
antibiotics, eggs, gluten-free grains such as quinoa, amaranth, and millet, coconut milk,
coconut butter, teas, olive oil, bone broth, nuts, and most beans, provided the beans have been
rinsed and soaked. Throughout a candida cleansing protocol, which can take up to thirty days,
you can test your progress by using a urine pH strip the first and second time you pee each
morning. Look for urine pH values of 6.8 to 7.2 to indicate that your body is recovering from a
yeast infection.
Ultimately, I am a fan of a high-quality GI test for a full scan of what exactly is going on in
the gut. An in-home test can screen for H. pylori, pathogenic bacteria, Candida albicans, and
fungus, in addition to many types of protozoa and worms, including Clostridium difficile,
Giardia lamblia, E. coli, Blastocystis hominis, roundworms, Toxoplasma gondii, Trichinella spiralis
(from pork), and tapeworms. Genova Diagnostics offers a GI Effects panel, and Diagnostics
Solutions produces a GI-MAP DNA Stool Analysis, both of which are good stool tests for these
issues. In addition, an organic acids test (OATs) is a urinary panel that can identify candida, 5-
Hydroxymethyl-2-furoic, and Furan 2,5-dicarboxylic, all of which can indicate gut fungal
issues, and the at-home blood test Metabolomix by Genova Diagnostics can also give good
clues. Sometimes, testing urine, blood, and stool is necessary to get a complete picture of
what’s going on.
7. Insufficient Stomach Acid
--- END PAGE 645 ---

--- PAGE 646 ---
I’m disappointed when I learn that someone with indigestion or heartburn has been
prescribed a proton pump inhibitor or some other medication that blocks the production of
stomach acid (hydrochloric acid, or HCl). If you’re not digesting food properly, the last thing
you want to do is further limit your stomach’s ability to break down food!
In many cases, the cause of heartburn, gastroesophageal reflux disorder, and the like is,
paradoxically, inadequate HCl production, a condition known as hypochlorhydria.
Hypochlorhydria is often combined with bacterial overgrowth, a lack of digestive enzymes,
and excessive carbohydrate intake. This is a pretty significant issue since HCl sterilizes food in
your stomach, reducing your risk of being colonized by harmful microorganisms like parasites
or fungi. Stomach acid also plays an important role in the digestion of proteins and the
absorption of minerals and vitamins, and it even signals the release of digestive enzymes and
bicarbonate from your pancreas.
Insufficient stomach acid can lead to food particles that would normally be digested and
absorbed in your upper intestines instead passing into your lower intestines, where they
provide fuel for yeast or fungi, promote the overgrowth of pathogens, and cause poor
absorption of vitamins, minerals, and amino acids. They can also pass through a damaged
intestinal wall to be attacked by the immune system, leading to food intolerances or allergies.
Low stomach acid levels can be genetic or acquired, and there are a variety of ways to test
for it. A gastric acid secretion test is a highly invasive and expensive test that is typically used
only by physicians for patients with a diagnosed stomach ulcer. The Heidelberg stomach acid
test is considered the gold-standard test for stomach acid and precisely measures the
stomach’s ability to produce acid. You can also diagnose low stomach acid levels from routine
complete blood counts and comprehensive metabolic panels if you know what they are
looking for. When you get the results, the numbers to pay attention to are chloride, which
should be less than 100, and CO , which should be greater than 27. You can also simply pay
2attention to your symptoms.
Another option is a simple at-home baking soda test. Just mix ¼ teaspoon of baking soda
into ½ to ¾ cup of cold water. Drink this solution before eating or drinking anything else, and
then time how long it takes for you to burp or belch. If you don’t burp within five minutes of
drinking the solution, you aren’t producing enough stomach acid. A similar test is the apple
cider vinegar (ACV) test. On an empty stomach, take a teaspoon of ACV diluted in 4 ounces of
water. If you feel an immediate strong burning sensation, your stomach acid might be high.
(To help reverse this burning sensation quickly, mix ½ teaspoon of baking soda into 4 to 8
ounces of water and drink it.) If you feel a mild warming sensation after drinking the ACV,
your stomach acid is good. If you don’t feel any warming sensation, you may have low stomach
acid. In that case, you can increase the amount of ACV in increments of 1 teaspoon until you
begin to feel a mild warming sensation, and this would be an appropriate amount to consume
prior to a meal to assist with digestion.
--- END PAGE 646 ---

--- PAGE 647 ---
If you have heartburn after a meal (especially a protein-containing meal), your HCl is
probably low. So what can you do about insufficient stomach acid? A combination of the
following protocols can be very effective:
• Add crushed raw garlic to your diet. It contains the natural antimicrobial allicin, which can
help reduce levels of harmful bacteria and fungi, such as candida. You can also purchase
allicin in supplement form; the brand Allimax is quite good.
• If you eat grains, legumes, seeds, and nuts, soak, sprout, or ferment them to improve their
digestibility.
• Increase your fiber intake and encourage healthy bowel movements by adding a daily
handful of dried prunes or ground flax or chia seeds to your diet.
• Consume two to three tablespoons of extra-virgin coconut oil a day. The antiviral,
antibacterial, and antifungal properties of the medium-chain fatty acids and triglycerides
in coconut oil have been researched since the 1960s. Microorganisms that can be
inactivated by coconut oil include bacteria, yeast, fungi, and viruses. If you’re not a fan of
coconut oil, you can use monolaurin capsules or powders; monolaurin is one of the more
effective antimicrobial components of coconut oil.
• Avoid refined carbohydrates, including white bread, pasta, cookies, cakes, and crackers.
Also avoid soda, alcohol, wheat and gluten, peanuts, shellfish, excessive caffeine, artificial
sweeteners like aspartame and sucralose, nitrites (found in processed meats like hot dogs,
lunch meats, and bacon), MSG, hydrogenated and partially hydrogenated oils (which are
found in most processed foods), deep-fried foods, fast food, junk food, and nightshades
such as tomatoes, eggplants, potatoes, and peppers of all kinds and colors.
• Eat smaller, more frequent meals instead of fewer large meals, not because snacking a lot
will magically boost your metabolism, but because it may be easier for you to digest small
meals until you have fixed your HCl problem.
• Do not eat right before bed, and maintain an upright position for about forty-five minutes
after eating to allow for easier digestion. If gastric reflux becomes a serious issue at night
and you’ve tried everything else, consider using a zero-gravity bed or sleeping position,
lying on your back with a pillow tucked under your knees and your head and shoulders
elevated.
• Do not drink ice water before, during, or after meals, as this can reduce HCl production.
• Eat mindfully, and chew your food thoroughly before swallowing.
The following supplementation protocol can enhance the gut-healing effects of the above
strategies:
--- END PAGE 647 ---

--- PAGE 648 ---
• Take half a tablet of HCl with pepsin immediately before eating. If you experience no
burning or indigestion, the next day take one tablet the same way. If you still have no
burning or indigestion, the next day take two tablets the same way. Continue until you
experience burning, then back off.
• Consume one to two servings of organic bitters or a bitters supplement immediately
before a meal. If you drink cocktails, consider something like a Ben & Gitters, which, aside
from being named after yours truly, is a tasty digestif composed of a shot of gin on the
rocks splashed with two to four dashes of bitters such as angostura. Alcoholic beverages
with low ethanol content, such as a splash of bitters or beer and wine, stimulate gastric
acid secretion and gastrin release, so even a small amount of beer or wine prior to a meal
can help. Just be careful, as excess alcohol can make acid levels too high and contribute to
heartburn.
• Consume a tablespoon of a fermented vegetable, such as sauerkraut or kimchi, before a
meal.
• Consume 1 to 2 cups of bone broth, an 8-to-12-ounce glass of chia seed gel (see here), or 5 g
of L-glutamine powder with each meal.
If you want to read more about the issues with heartburn medications and the methods
you can implement to restore proper HCl production and heal gastroesophageal reflux
disorder (GERD), I recommend the heartburn and GERD section of Chris Kresser’s website
(chriskresser.com/heartburn/). Physician Carolyn Dean also discusses this concept in detail in
her post on my website, “Why Kill Your Stomach Acid?”
(BenGreenfieldLife.com/article/digestion-articles/why-kill-your-stomach-acid/).
8. Other Food Intolerances or Sensitivities
Let’s say Joe and Jane both have problems eating fruit or, for that matter, anything that
contains fructose. They both get horrible bloating and gas from fruit, especially concentrated
fruit sources such as dried fruit. But they don’t have the same underlying problem. Joe’s
sensitivity is related to the type of the digestive enzyme deficiencies you read about earlier in
this chapter, but Jane’s is due to something else: fructose intolerance. Unlike Joe, Jane suffers
from impaired fructose absorption due to a deficiency of fructose carriers in the small
intestine, which are responsible for carrying fructose across the gut barrier and into the
bloodstream.
The terms food intolerance and food sensitivity are widely used to refer to a variety of
unpleasant responses to specific foods or compounds that don’t reach the level of an allergy,
which involves a serious and immediate immune response. While you have already learned
--- END PAGE 648 ---

--- PAGE 649 ---
about gluten intolerance, a combination of the following six factors can create other food
intolerances:
• A lack of the chemicals or enzymes necessary to digest a certain food
• Malabsorption, which is an inability of the digestive system to absorb specific nutrients
• A negative reaction to a normal amount of a substance, usually some type of
pharmacological compound, like a food additive, preservative, or coloring
• An immune antibody response to food that is less serious than a full-blown food allergy
(for example, gluten intolerance)
• A toxin present in food from either contamination or mold (for example, aflatoxin from
peanuts or coffee)
• A psychological reaction to a food associated with a past experience, such as being unable
to eat chili without feeling nauseated because of that time you ate chili on a road trip and
got carsick
Lactose and gluten are the substances most commonly associated with food intolerances,
and they have sparked entire industries of lactose-free and gluten-free foods. But there are
also lesser-known intolerances to food additives, preservatives, artificial colors and flavors,
fructose, and foods that contain high levels of salicylate, such as many fruits, juices,
vegetables, spices, herbs, nuts, teas, wines, and coffees.
If you experience gas, bloating, frequent bathroom trips, or cramping after a meal, you
likely have an intolerance to one or several compounds in those foods. While moderate
indigestion from high carbohydrate and high calorie intakes is normal, especially during a long
workout or race, it is not normal to have excessive mucus, coughing, itching, rashes, sinus
inflammation, or headaches, which dozens of my clients have reported after a big workout or
race. These are all potential signs of food intolerance.
The good news is that by accurately identifying specific intolerances, adjusting dietary
intake, and choosing the right training and racing fuels, food intolerances can become a
nonissue. Unfortunately, testing for intolerances is confusing, to say the least. Options include
breath testing, skin pinpricks, stomach gastroscopy, intestinal biopsy, stool analysis, skin
sample analysis, electrical current testing, muscle testing, and more—and there is a lot of
controversy in the medical and nutrition communities about which test is best. Results go all
the way from questionable to downright useless.
If you suspect a specific intolerance, that hunch can help you choose the proper test.
Fructose intolerance is best identified by a breath test, which measures undigested fructose
levels through hydrogen levels in the breath, whereas lactose intolerance is better measured by
analyzing the blood sugar response to lactose consumption. Meanwhile, an IgG and IgA test
(not to be confused with an IgE test, which identifies a true food allergy) can measure
--- END PAGE 649 ---

--- PAGE 650 ---
immunoglobulin levels for specific protein-based food intolerances, such as those to chicken
or eggs. Cyrex Labs and Zoomer both offer good tests without giving you a frustrating laundry
list of false positives.
For a simpler solution, keep a record of everything you eat for a few weeks and a list of any
symptoms that develop in response to specific foods. Doing so can help you narrow down the
list of foods that may be causing you problems. The next step is a food-elimination diet, in
which you avoid suspected triggers.
One of the most accurate methods for determining food sensitivities is to do an
elimination diet. This consists of eliminating all the foods that are suspected as possible
allergens for seven to ten days and then adding them back, one at a time, every two to three
days. Try to keep the foods you eliminate as pure as possible, meaning that if you are testing
for a dairy allergy, you could test with cottage cheese, sour cream, or milk, but not ice cream,
because ice cream contains sugar and other ingredients that might skew the results. If no
reaction occurs within forty-eight to seventy-two hours, you can move on to the next food
group. But if there is a reaction, you should wait for two to three days to clear your intestines
and then try the next food. When testing foods, it is important to eat quite a bit of the chosen
food to provoke a reaction. This is because small amounts may not cause a noticeable reaction,
so you miss out on important information.
What do you do if you discover that you do indeed have a food intolerance? The nature of
the food intolerance will determine the steps you take to address it. For example, since a
gluten intolerance is related to an immune system response, you would need to switch to a
gluten-free diet or use a dipeptidyl peptidase supplement prior to consuming any gluten. The
same can be said for a fructose intolerance, which requires you to eliminate fructose and
sucrose (which contains fructose and glucose) from your diet. In other cases, eliminating the
food entirely isn’t necessary. For example, if you are lactose intolerant (as I am), taking a
lactase enzyme pill immediately before eating any dairy, or eating only raw, unpasteurized
dairy, in which the natural lactase enzymes are fully intact and active, may do the trick.
Since having several food intolerances is quite common, you may need to adopt a diet that
is free of the usual food culprits, especially if you are an active exercise enthusiast who chows
down on thousands of calories a day. If you want an extremely clean autoimmune diet that
eliminates just about every possible food-sensitivity trigger, follow the guidelines in The
Autoimmune Paleo Cookbook, which is one of the better and tastier autoimmune diets out there.
You’ll also find a few other options in chapter 21.
Finally, one of the most common but lesser-known intolerances is histamine intolerance
and sensitivity, which can be a confusing problem for those who begin to eat a healthy diet,
since many health foods are loaded with histamine, including fermented foods, aged cheeses,
eggplant, avocado, citrus foods, dried fruit, legumes, and processed meats, including that can
of healthy sardines. While this issue is often solved simply by using a diamine oxidase
--- END PAGE 650 ---

--- PAGE 651 ---
supplement prior to consuming high-histamine foods, you need to avoid high-histamine foods
altogether if you’re extremely sensitive. (For good low-histamine diets and recipes, visit the
resources page for this chapter.)
9. Food Allergies
A true food allergy is usually a much bigger deal than a food intolerance. A food allergy is often
accompanied by serious, and sometimes even fatal, symptoms. It occurs when the body’s
immune system mistakenly identifies a protein—such as the proteins in shellfish or peanuts—
as harmful. Some proteins or fragments of proteins are resistant to digestion and are tagged by
the antibody immunoglobulin E (IgE). These tags fool your immune system into thinking that
the protein is an invader, and your immune system triggers an allergic reaction to defend the
body. So unlike food sensitivities, which can arise from several different causes, allergic
reactions to foods are characterized by elevated allergen-specific antibody levels in your blood.
These allergic responses can range from mild to severe and include hives, a severe drop in
blood pressure, dermatitis and other skin reactions, gastrointestinal and/or respiratory
distress, anaphylactic shock, and even life-threatening anaphylactic reactions in which the
throat swells and closes, requiring immediate emergency action.
Unlike food intolerances, you usually know for sure when you have a food allergy because
the response is readily identifiable and highly uncomfortable or severe. Caution: If you search
online for “food allergy test,” most of those that will appear in the results are just at-home
food sensitivity or intolerance tests. But you can get a true food allergy IgE test and/or skin
prick test, usually overseen by a physician or medical clinic. But if you suspect that you have a
food allergy, don’t mess around: consult with a licensed medical care provider who specializes
in allergy treatments.
If you decide to take an alternative route, you can look into Nambudripad’s Allergy
Elimination Techniques (NAET) or sublingual immunotherapy, in which small drops of the
substance you’re allergic to are placed under your tongue in increasingly greater doses. An
alternative medical or homeopathic practitioner can walk you through either of these
methods. I used this strategy with small amounts of peanut powder to cure one of my boys of
a peanut allergy he developed early in life. Later, when the other son developed significant
seasonal allergies, an acupuncturist was able to cure him within a day. Upon researching, I
discovered that this strategy, along with other traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) herbal
treatments, can also effectively eliminate food allergies.
10. Mold and Mycotoxin Exposure
--- END PAGE 651 ---

--- PAGE 652 ---
The mold and mycotoxin exposure discussed in chapter 4 can further aggravate gut issues.
Mold toxins have a direct inflammatory effect on the stomach and intestinal lining and can
cause gastric pain, heartburn, diarrhea, and constipation. The intestinal inflammation they
create also weakens the tight junctions in the lining of the gut, allowing the entry of foreign
proteins to which the immune system can make antibodies, causing food allergies and
autoimmune disease. This disruption of the gut microbiome causes a further inflammatory
response, including the production of inflammatory cytokines that can cross the blood-brain
barrier and create inflammation in brain tissues, most notably the vagus nerve and nervous
system. This then further interferes with intestinal motility and adds to the inflammatory
damage of the intestinal lining. So, as you can imagine, the vicious cycle created by mold (and,
similarly, Lyme disease), dictates that you should revisit chapter 4 if you are having gut issues
so that you can learn how to rule out mold and mycotoxin exposure as the potential culprit.
11. Biomechanical Constraints
There’s an intricate relationship between musculoskeletal biomechanics and gastrointestinal
function. Tightness in the muscles surrounding your abdominal region, including the rectus
abdominis, obliques, psoas major, iliacus, and pelvic floor muscles, can significantly impact gut
health. These muscles play a key role in providing structural support to the abdominal cavity
and pelvis, as well as regulating intra-abdominal pressure during processes like digestion and
defecation. When these muscles are chronically tight or hypertonic, or chock-full of scar tissue
or adhesions (which is common in athletes, mothers who have had C-sections, and people who
have struggled with constipation, hemorrhoids, hernias, or prolapse), they can exert excessive
pressure on the visceral organs, leading to compromised digestive function and discomfort.
The psoas major and iliacus muscles, collectively referred to as the hip flexors, are
particularly important in this context. Tightness in these muscles, brought on by long periods
of sitting, weak glutes, or poor posture, can alter lumbar spine mechanics, resulting in postural
malalignment and increased intra-abdominal pressure. This compromises gastrointestinal
motility, contributing to symptoms such as bloating, distension, and constipation. To make
matters worse, the proximity of the psoas major and iliacus muscles to the nerves in the
lumbar plexus can produce pain and even difficulty pooping, further exacerbating
gastrointestinal discomfort.
Dysfunction in the pelvic floor muscles can also have profound implications for
gastrointestinal health. The pelvic floor muscles, including the levator ani, coccygeus, and
obturator internus, play a crucial role in maintaining continence and sexual function and
supporting the pelvic organs. When these muscles are hypertonic or exhibit poor
coordination, which is common if you breathe improperly, have a history of sexual trauma, or
live a highly stressed life, they may impair rectal sensation and hinder proper defecation
--- END PAGE 652 ---

--- PAGE 653 ---
mechanics, leading to constipation and fecal incontinence. Pelvic floor dysfunction can also
contribute to alterations in intra-abdominal pressure regulation, further disrupting
gastrointestinal function.
In addition to muscular tightness, fascial adhesions within the abdominal and pelvic
regions can impact gut health. Fascial adhesions are fibrous connections that form between
layers of connective tissue in response to inflammation, injury, or chronic stress. These
adhesions can restrict the mobility of visceral organs and impede the transmission of neural
signals, resulting in altered gastrointestinal motility and discomfort. Fascial adhesions can also
compromise blood flow to the digestive organs, impairing nutrient absorption and waste
removal processes.
In summary, tight muscles, fascial adhesions, and biomechanical issues in the abdominal,
psoas, iliacus, and pelvic floor regions can affect gut health in significant ways. Addressing
these musculoskeletal dysfunctions through targeted interventions such as manual therapy,
stretching, and corrective exercise plays a crucial role in alleviating gastrointestinal symptoms
and optimizing digestive function. Fostering awareness of posture and movement patterns can
help mitigate the risk of musculoskeletal imbalances and promote long-term gastrointestinal
well-being.
So what are the best ways to address the biomechanical constraints that are causing your
gut issues?
• Learn to breathe properly, including mindful meditation and breathwork based around
your abdomen and pelvic floor area. Two good resources are The Empowered Flower by
Denise Conway and Dr. Bri’s Vibrant Pelvic Health YouTube channel.
• Do consistent deep-tissue, mobility, and relaxation therapy on your psoas, iliacus,
abdominals, and pelvic floor musculature, both with a massage or physical therapist and by
using self-management tools like the Pso-Rite therapy device and inflatable TuneUp balls.
This counts as part of the morning mobility session I recommend in chapter 11. When you
find tight spots, pause, wiggle, and shift pressure into them, and breathe until you feel
relaxation set in.
• Look into Clear Passage Therapy, which employs a combination of manual therapy
techniques designed to deform and detach the bond of adhesions and return the digestive
and reproductive organs to normal, pain-free function. This technique is performed during
a week over a series of daily sessions, with each session lasting around three to five hours
(breaks are included!). The therapists use their hands to manipulate the fascial tissues,
gradually breaking down adhesions and restoring normal tissue mobility. I’ve had it done,
and it was transformative for my gut and pelvic musculature function.
• Try cupping. Cupping therapy involves creating local suction on the skin by applying
vacuum-like cups. Just as cupping over a sore muscle can help unblock congestion and get
--- END PAGE 653 ---

--- PAGE 654 ---
fluids moving under the skin, using cupping tools clockwise over the abdomen can help
improve digestion and relieve constipation. When you cup over the abdomen, the suction
has the ability to penetrate up to four inches below the skin, which can help increase blood
flow and circulation in your digestive tract. The “reverse massage” effect of cupping can
stimulate the digestive organs, clear colon blockages, and help your digestion work more
smoothly overall. When I do my weekly enema, I use the BioLite cupping devices for both
cupping and infrared therapy on my abdominal area.
The Bottom Line
Perhaps your head was spinning as you read through these eleven gut issues just described and
thought, “I have that! No, wait—I have that!” Don’t worry. It’s typical for gut issues to be
multifactorial. In fact, people often carry a cocktail of bacterial imbalances, food intolerances
or allergies, leaky gut, and toxic liver, and the psychosomatic stress generated by consistently
nagging gut issues can create a vicious feedback loop via the gut-brain axis in which the
constant worry, stress, and confusion about what to eat can make matters worse.
Ultimately, the best way to begin figuring out what is going on in your gut is to (1) test your
gut with a stool panel, and consider a DNA test, (2) alter your diet and use targeted nutritional
supplements based on your personalized test results, and (3) manage the less-discussed topics
of stress and posture as much as possible, since both can significantly exacerbate gut issues.
Finally, you’ll learn more about my favorite diets and clean-eating options in chapter 21.
Now that you have learned how to fix your gut, it is time to discover the truth about
detoxification and the best way to clean up the rest of your body, too.
DETOXIFICATION 101
Think of detoxification, or detox, as spring cleaning for your body. Heavy metals, toxins,
pesticides, and other compounds that your body is unable to metabolize can accumulate in
your tissues, cells, and digestive tract. This may not occur to the extent that some of the more
extreme folks would have you believe (no, there is not twenty years’ worth of rotting meat
simply hanging out in your colon in a giant meat brick), but you may indeed have amassed
enough toxins to affect the way your metabolism and brain and other organ systems function.
And there are certainly different natural compounds that can aid your body’s natural processes
in removing these toxins.
But recently, I read an article in the Guardian with the headline, “You Can’t Detox Your
Body. It’s a Myth. So How Do You Get Healthy?” In the article, author Dara Mohammadi said,
“Detoxing—the idea that you can flush your system of impurities and leave your organs
--- END PAGE 654 ---

--- PAGE 655 ---
squeaky clean and raring to go—is a scam. It’s a pseudo-medical concept designed to sell you
things.”
Is this true? Is detoxing a scam?
To answer this question, it is important to first understand what toxins are. No matter how
cleanly or toxin-free you live your life, just about everyone has some toxic buildup somewhere
in their body. When the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) published the
most recent Fourth National Report on Human Exposure to Environmental Chemicals in 2009, it
revealed some pretty shocking results. On average, the CDC’s report found 212 chemicals in
people’s blood or urine, 75 of which had never before been measured in the US population.
These chemicals included the following:
• Acrylamide, which is formed at high temperatures when foods are fried or baked and is
also a by-product of cigarette smoke
• Arsenic, which is found in many home-building products
• Environmental phenols, which include bisphenol A (found in plastics, food packaging, and
epoxy resins) and triclosan (used as an antibacterial agent in personal care products such
as toothpaste and hand soap)
• Perchlorate, which is used in airplane fuel, explosives, and fireworks
• Perfluorinated compounds, which are used to create nonstick cookware
• Polybrominated diphenyl ethers, which are found in fire retardants in products like
mattresses
• Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), which are found in paints, air fresheners, cleaning
products, cosmetics, upholstery fabrics, carpets, dry-cleaned clothing, wood preservatives,
and paint strippers
These chemicals, especially in combination, can create a dangerous toxic load in the body,
accumulating in blood, urine, and tissues. While detox organs such as the liver and kidneys can
process much of this toxic burden, exposure to these chemicals can potentially cause medical
problems if the liver and kidneys are not functioning well or are overburdened by a poor diet,
or if other important detox pathways are not working properly, most notably the Nrf2
pathway, which turns on over two hundred genes, many of which are related to detoxification.
While the kidneys are indeed an important filtration mechanism for removing waste and
excess water from the body, the liver has the most crucial job when it comes to detoxification.
In addition to filtering toxins out of your blood, your liver uses a four-phase process to
eliminate chemicals and toxins.
In phase 0, a fat-soluble compound that needs to be removed from the body or undergo
detoxification—such as a xenobiotic, toxic compound, or synthetic drug—is transported into a
liver cell. During phase 1, detoxification officially begins as these fat-soluble toxins are broken
--- END PAGE 655 ---

--- PAGE 656 ---
down into smaller fragments. Then, in phase 2, the fragments are bound to other molecules,
such as glutathione or a methyl group, creating new nontoxic, water-soluble molecules that
can be excreted in bile, urine, sweat, or stool. Finally, in phase 3, these water-soluble molecules
are transported out of the liver cells and into the bloodstream, to eventually be excreted. But
for this entire liver detoxification pathway to work efficiently, your body must have adequate
nutrients, particularly those that support phases 1 and 2. There are specific nutrients that
support both pathways.
Phase 1 supportive nutrients•

B vitamins, specifically B , B , B , B , and B (folic acid)
2 3 6 12 9 •
Flavonoids, which are found in fruits and vegetables
• Vitamins A, C, and E, which are found in carrots, oranges, wheat germ, and almonds
• Glutathione, which is found in avocados, watermelon, asparagus, walnuts, and other fresh
fruits and veggies
• Phospholipids, which are found in eggs, lean meats, organ meats, fish, and soybeans
• N-acetylcysteine, cysteine, and methionine, which are found in many high-protein foods
such as eggs, meat, fish, seeds, and nuts
• Branched-chain amino acids, which are found in animal protein sources such as dairy
products, red meat, and eggs
Phase 2 supportive nutrients•

Indole-3-carbinol, which is found in cabbage, broccoli, and Brussels sprouts
• Limonene, which is found in oranges, tangerines, caraway seeds, and dill seeds
• Glutathione (see the phase 1 list)
• Fish oil from fatty cold-water fish like salmon, herring, and sardines
• Amino acids (protein)
Now let’s look into whether supporting these detoxification pathways with specific
compounds actually works.
The Evidence for Detoxification
The Guardian article mentioned earlier included a quote from Edzard Ernst, a professor of
complementary medicine at Exeter University, who said, “There are two types of detox: one is
respectable and the other isn’t.” The respectable one, the article explained, treats people who
are addicted to drugs in order to save their lives. “The other,” said Ernst, “is the word being
--- END PAGE 656 ---

--- PAGE 657 ---
hijacked by entrepreneurs, quacks, and charlatans to sell a bogus treatment that allegedly
detoxifies your body of toxins you’re supposed to have accumulated.”
The article went on to explain that when it comes to “detoxifying” dietary supplements,
smoothies, and shampoos, not one manufacturer can define what it means by “detox” or name
the toxins that these products are supposed to remove. But just because a manufacturer of,
say, spirulina powder can’t say how it works doesn’t mean that there is no evidence of its
power to eliminate toxins.
For example, cyanobacteria are a type of bacteria found in spirulina that act as
accumulators (also known as “biosorbents”) of heavy minerals, meaning they can effectively
bind to large minerals and metals. They do this via a process called ion-exchange binding and
can significantly reduce heavy-metal toxicity in tissue. In fact, 100 mcg (a tiny amount) of
spirulina hexane extract has been shown to remove over 85 percent of arsenic found in tissue.
At a dose of 250 to 500 mg per kilogram of body weight (about 20 to 40 g for a 170-pound
individual), spirulina has been shown to prevent metal toxicity in pregnant rats’ offspring
when the mothers were given fluoride. Spirulina has also been shown to reduce lead
accumulation in brain tissue, protect against cadmium buildup, and attenuate mercury
accumulation in the testes.
Granted, spirulina is one of the few substances that has a large body of evidence to support
its detoxifying activity, but other compounds such as dandelion extract, ginseng, and zinc have
also been clinically proven to reduce heavy-metal buildup. And while heavy metals are only
one form of the toxins that can accumulate in your tissues, there is no doubt science has
proven that these toxins can indeed be removed via certain natural compounds. So while the
Guardian article guffaws at the idea of superfoods like spirulina, the evidence suggests that
there is more to the story.
Take milk thistle extract, another popular detox supplement. While the Guardian article
would have you believe that there is no value whatsoever in consuming this type of nutrient,
studies show that milk thistle protects and promotes the growth of liver cells, fights oxidative
stress, and blocks toxins from entering cells. Silymarins, plant compounds extracted from the
seeds of milk thistle, have antioxidant properties several times greater than those of vitamins
C and E. In fact, silybin has been shown to be especially effective in promoting liver health.
Milk thistle also helps prevent the depletion of glutathione, which is necessary for phase 2
liver detoxification.
We can look to farming for another example of detoxification. Glyphosate, the active
ingredient in herbicides used on crops around the world, has been shown to cause gut and
genetic damage as it builds up in the bodies of animals. So some farmers use activated
charcoal and humic acid (a claylike substance extracted from soil) to detox their cattle after
the animals have been exposed to glyphosate chemicals while feeding.
--- END PAGE 657 ---

--- PAGE 658 ---
As you can see from these examples, to claim that detox supplements and diets simply do
not work is a gross oversimplification. While there is no evidence for the efficacy of the
cayenne pepper, lemon, and maple syrup cleanse your coworker has been bragging about,
evidence of other nutrients’ detoxing capacities does indeed exist.
But what about colon cleanses? The Guardian article’s author, Dara Mohammadi, wrote,
“Proponents will tell you that mischievous plaques of impacted poo can lurk in your colon for
months or years and pump disease-causing toxins back into your system. Pay them a small fee,
though, and they’ll insert a hose up your bottom and wash them all away.” She also went on to
say, “Some colon-cleansing tablets contain a polymerising agent that turns your faeces into
something like a plastic, so that when a massive rubbery poo snake slithers into your toilet you
can stare back at it and feel vindicated in your purchase.”
When you think about it, the idea that toxins might somehow be reabsorbed by your body
as they sit in your colon makes some sense. After all, rectal suppositories are used to rapidly
administer drugs. If drugs can enter your bloodstream from your colon, it is certainly possible
that toxins could enter that way, too. But your colon is equipped with several mechanisms to
keep toxins from building up. For example, bacteria naturally present in the colon can detoxify
food waste. Mucous membranes in the colon can keep toxic compounds from reentering the
blood and settling in your tissues. The colon also sheds old cells about every three days,
preventing a buildup of harmful material and even allowing for the expulsion of parasites.
I suspect that if colon cleansing, colonic hydrotherapy, or enemas have any effect in
making you feel like you have more energy or have been “cleansed,” it more likely has to do
with an activation of reflexes in your gut that cause your nervous system to relax and increase
the peristaltic movement of food through your digestive tract. These protocols may also
increase the production of bile by the liver or the release of bile by the gallbladder, which can
indeed improve digestion, and they may have a mild laxative effect and relieve constipation.
This could potentially make you feel better by allowing you to better break down or absorb
nutrients from your food or even to pass some feces that had built up over the previous few
days, but this is one point on which I completely agree with the Guardian. There is no evidence
that waste can sit inside you for years, slowly rotting and leaking toxins into your body.
Glyphosate and Your Gut
Glyphosate is the active ingredient in many commercial, agricultural, and residential herbicides,
causing it to have a significant presence in many modern crops and produce, including wheat and
many other grains, vegetables, and anything using these types of foods as ingredients, such as the
pasta or salad at your favorite restaurant. A host of scientific research has implicated glyphosate
exposure in various systemic disorders: it suppresses the biosynthesis of cytochrome P450
enzymes and amino acids by gut microbes, directly damages DNA, disrupts glycine homeostasis,
inhibits succinate dehydrogenase, affects the chelation of minerals such as manganese, changes
--- END PAGE 658 ---

--- PAGE 659 ---
natural biological compounds to more carcinogenic molecules, and disrupts fructose metabolism,
all of which significantly impact metabolism and lower immune function.
Glyphosate works synergistically with other factors, which means that problems such as exposure
to other toxins, insufficient sun exposure, and deficiencies in nutrients like sulfur and zinc can
aggravate glyphosate’s effects. In other words, eating a diet rich in glyphosate and poor in
nutrients and minerals while spending a lot of sedentary time indoors is one of the worst things
you can do for your gut.
Glyphosate exposure can affect the gut microbiota by damaging or killing bacteria, which, in turn,
can affect behavioral expression and lead to anxiety and depression. Research performed by
Stephanie Seneff at MIT links glyphosate’s suppression of proper gut bacteria function to a
spectrum of chronic health conditions, including gastrointestinal disorders, autoimmune diseases,
neurological impairments, and metabolic syndrome. In fact, research has shown that glyphosate is
ten times more potent than gluten in its ability to degrade the tight junctions between cells in the
intestinal wall, meaning that glyphosate can “poke holes” in the gut lining. The tight junctions
between cells in the gut lining are what allow certain particles, like tiny digested food particles,
into the bloodstream while keeping out other particles, like large undigested protein molecules. As
you have already learned, when unwanted particles get through the gut membrane and into the
bloodstream, they can lead to food intolerances, food allergies, and systemic inflammatory
responses.
Dr. Seneff’s research also shows how glyphosate disrupts the shikimate pathway, crucial for
synthesizing aromatic amino acids and other vital compounds in plants and microbes. She
suggests that glyphosate’s inhibition of this pathway can lead to a cascade of adverse effects in
humans, including compromised immune function, impaired neurotransmitter synthesis, and
dysregulation of metabolic processes. Furthermore, her research underscores glyphosate’s
potential to disrupt sulfate transport and sulfate supply to the gut, which may contribute to the
pathogenesis of various diseases.
There are a few ways to prevent this type of gut damage. For example, the company Intelligence
of Nature (formerly Biomic Sciences) has demonstrated that its soil-based liquid supplement ION*,
which contains the active ingredient lignite, can increase and strengthen tight junctions and
protect against everyday exposure to pesticides and herbicides. Both clinical experience and cell-
culture studies have shown that ION* creates a gut environment in which twenty to thirty
thousand different strains of gut bacteria can thrive and protect the entire GI tract against
agricultural herbicides, antibiotics, GMOs, gluten, and foodborne toxins. You can take a shot of
ION* before eating any plant- or grain-containing meal. (You’ll find a discount code for ION*, as
well as a link to my podcast with the inventor, Dr. Zack Bush, at BoundlessBook.com/13.)
In addition, opting for organic and non-GMO foods can help limit intake of glyphosate residues
commonly found in conventionally grown crops. Emphasizing fermented foods rich in probiotics,
such as yogurt, kefir, sauerkraut, and kimchi, can further promote the proliferation of beneficial gut
bacteria and enhance gut barrier function. Probiotic supplements containing strains like
lactobacillus and bifidobacterium can help replenish beneficial gut bacteria depleted by
glyphosate exposure and restore microbial diversity. Prebiotic supplements, such as inulin,
fructooligosaccharides (FOS), and resistant starch, provide nourishment for probiotic bacteria and
support their growth and activity in the gut. Supplements containing amino acids, vitamins, and
minerals with antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, such as glutamine, zinc, vitamin D, and
vitamin C, can help bolster gut barrier integrity, modulate immune responses, and counteract
--- END PAGE 659 ---

--- PAGE 660 ---
oxidative stress induced by glyphosate. Binders such as humic or fulvic acid and chlorella can bind
to glyphosate in the gut and help remove it.
Beyond dietary and supplementation strategies, lifestyle modifications can play a crucial role in
supporting gut health and in the face of glyphosate exposure. Managing stress through relaxation
techniques like meditation, yoga, and deep breathing exercises can help mitigate the detrimental
effects of chronic stress on gut function and promote overall well-being. Adequate sleep is
essential for optimal gut health, as it facilitates tissue repair, immune function, and microbial
balance. Regular physical activity also promotes gut motility and circulation, which are vital for
maintaining gut health and facilitating detoxification processes. By adopting a holistic approach
that addresses dietary, supplementation, and lifestyle factors, you can take proactive steps to
repair damage to your gut caused by glyphosate exposure and foster long-term gastrointestinal
health.
Aiding Your Body’s Natural Detox Through Diet
Your body has its own powerful methods of detoxing and can activate these methods without
fancy diets or detox spa visits. For example, your liver prevents pathogens from passing into
your bloodstream, processes environmental toxins for safe removal, and helps rid your body of
excess nitrogen that builds up from the breakdown of proteins and amino acids. Your kidneys
filter blood, remove excess water, pass urea (a toxin that builds up as a by-product of protein
breakdown), and send this all out of your body via your urine. So, if you eat foods that support
your liver and kidneys and avoid foods that stress them, you are already detoxing every day.
This is why I am a fan of using strategies like herbal blends and colonic cleanses only sparingly
—such as if you test for extremely elevated liver enzymes or heavy metals, or you’re suffering a
significant bout of constipation—and using natural detox habits all year long.
For example, a natural detox habit for your liver would be to avoid high amounts of omega-
6 polyunsaturated fats from processed and packaged foods, such as canola oil and french fries.
Instead, eat healthy fats from fish, meat, seeds, and nuts, along with plenty of plant matter and
minerals. You should also avoid high amounts of fructose and sugar, limit alcohol intake,
consume plenty of egg yolks (rich in choline, which your liver uses to process fats), and eat
organic liver or use desiccated liver powder a few times a month. Additionally, you can simply
pay attention to the kinds of soaps, shampoos, and household cleaners you use. Many contain
toxins that can tax your liver over time (more about that in chapter 20).
For your kidneys, you can limit your intake of high-fructose corn syrup, drink plenty of
water along with a full spectrum of minerals, limit alcohol intake, and—if you are predisposed
to renal issues—limit protein intake to no more than 200 g per day.
As the Guardian article notes, many popular detox and cleansing diets probably seem
beneficial because of the foods they eliminate and not because of any magical ingredients. In
other words, all that lemon juice, cayenne pepper, maple syrup, and fancy water is probably
--- END PAGE 660 ---

--- PAGE 661 ---
not doing as much as you think when it comes to cleansing and detoxifying your body. But
eliminating processed fats, high-fructose corn syrup, alcohol, candy, soda, conventionally
raised and processed meat, and snack foods while on a detox diet can indeed give your liver
and kidneys a chance to step up and perform their normal duties instead of dealing with toxins
from your food.
Healthy Detoxing Protocols
Simply adjusting what you eat can support your body’s detox, and you can fix your gut with the
methods in this chapter. But if you have been exposed to overprocessed and refined foods,
chemical additives, antibiotics, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, herbicides, chlorinated water,
artificial sweeteners, or anything else that might be considered remotely “unnatural,” you
should think about performing a more thorough detox protocol.
For example, at some point in your life have you consumed lots of diet soda, eaten much
non-organic or non-farm-raised meat, traveled extensively, chomped on fruits and vegetables
without washing them, been sick and taken pharmaceuticals, engaged in nights of excessive
drinking, been exposed to secondhand smoke, or inhaled the fumes of household cleaning
supplies? I don’t know about you, but my answer to many of those items is “Yes!” So, in
addition to prioritizing a once-per-week regimen that begins with a binder like activated
charcoal, then a coffee enema paired with abdominal massage and cupping, then a deep sweat
in the sauna, and finishing with a smoothie rich in antioxidants and minerals, I perform a more
intensive detox of my body once per quarter by doing three to five days of modified fasting
such as a juice fast, bone broth fast, kitchari cleanse, or simply water paired with minerals,
ketones, and amino acids. After I perform these more complete detoxes, I feel reborn and
rebooted in a way, with less brain fog, gut distress, fatigue, joint pain, and other symptoms of
toxic buildup.
The idea behind doing a complete detox or cleanse is to use herbal or medicinal
compounds to induce peristalsis (the contraction of gastrointestinal muscles that propel
contents through the digestive tract) and a rapid, thorough clearing of waste from your colon.
Other herbal compounds can enhance the ability of the liver to bind and excrete toxins. By
also restricting calories and doing light exercise and other activities to strengthen lymph fluid
circulation, sweating, and fat loss, you can accelerate the rate at which your body metabolizes
fat tissue. Since your body stores many toxins in fat, this can increase the rate of
detoxification. In a nutshell, you clean out your digestive tract, remove toxins from your body,
and accelerate fat burning. What’s not to love?
Because you will be moving more compounds through your digestive tract during a detox
protocol and experiencing increased peristalsis and bile production, you can expect to spend
an extra fifteen to twenty minutes or so on the toilet in the morning and possibly again in the
--- END PAGE 661 ---

--- PAGE 662 ---
late afternoon or early evening, depending on how many toxins you need to eliminate.
Incidentally, this is where a Squatty Potty device—or any squatting position that raises your
knees above hip level and helps relax your pelvic ligaments—can come in handy, as can
learning different defecation poses found in the book Toilet Yoga by Derek Nosworthy. (Trust
me: some of the ways you can sit or perch on a toilet while pooping can be a game changer for
constipation and easier bowel movements.)
An important note for those who have been exposed to the type of mold issues discussed
in chapter 4: mold can significantly compromise your body’s ability to detoxify, meaning that
mycotoxins from mold have literally poisoned the very systems needed to remove these
toxins, including the liver, GI tract, kidneys, and lymphatic system. If you’ve been exposed to
mold or mycotoxins, please revisit that section in chapter 4 to better understand how to clean
up your system—or at least test for these issues—prior to a detox protocol.
As you embark on a detox protocol, never discount the power of wild plant intake, which is
also a longevity strategy discussed in chapter 19. Phytochemicals in plants have unique
properties that support detoxification pathways. For example, perhaps your mother or
grandmother encouraged you to eat your broccoli. There is now a solid scientific explanation
for why it is so good for you: Broccoli contains a phytochemical called sulforaphane that
stimulates the protein Nrf2. Nrf2 is the master controller in your body for making, utilizing,
and recycling glutathione, an antioxidant that’s necessary to help remove toxins!
Turmeric also supports Nrf2 and has been shown to downregulate mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathways. This is important because overstimulation of the
anabolic and growth-promoting mTOR pathway contributes to inflammation and impaired
detoxification. In addition, learning how to sprout seeds like broccoli, alfalfa, and clover can
concentrate sulforaphane levels and make digesting seeds and plants much easier. To learn
more, check out The Sprout Book by Doug Evans, and consider ordering a sprouting kit via The
Sprouting Company. At the Greenfield house, we have a handful of jars constantly sprouting
seeds, allowing us ample access to the detoxification and health properties of sprouts for
pennies on the dollar compared to buying them from a grocery store.
Thistle plants like dandelion (found for free in most backyards) and milk thistle also
support Nrf2 and the production of glutathione. Here’s another example: when the enzyme
nitric oxide synthase (NOS) is not functioning optimally, a free radical is produced rather than
the beneficial nitric oxide. One of the cofactors needed to make nitric oxide is called BH4, and
royal jelly, which is the food fed to queen bees and bee larvae, is a naturally occurring source of
BH4. In addition, if NOS is not working properly to make nitric oxide, certain nutrient-dense
foods and herbs, such as green coffee beans, beet root, and hawthorn berries, can also provide
necessary support. There are even phytochemicals that appear to help “scavenge” the excess
free radicals produced when nitric oxide pathways aren’t working properly, including those
from echinacea, garlic, rosemary, and witch hazel. (For testing your own NOS pathways, I
--- END PAGE 662 ---

--- PAGE 663 ---
recommend a test from StrateGene or a visit to the website of Dr. Bob Miller at
TOLHealth.com.)
Finally, no discussion of detoxing would be complete without a foray into fasting, which
allows the body to engage in its own cellular cleanup protocol. While there are entire books on
fasting (Dr. Jason Fung’s The Complete Guide to Fasting is one of the best) and websites devoted
to dozens of different fasting protocols and religious and traditional fasting techniques, my
own fasting protocol is quite simple:
• Perform a twelve-to-sixteen-hour intermittent fast each day. For example, if you finish
dinner at 8 p.m., you do not eat again until at least 8 a.m. the following day. Water and
noncaloric coffee or tea are fine. Most of the benefits of fasting come not from overall
caloric restriction but rather from going relatively long periods of time without food.
Unless you are attempting to lose a significant amount of weight, it is fine to eat as many
calories as you normally would. You simply move all those calories into what is called a
compressed eating window.
• Do a twenty-four-hour fast two to four times per month, in which you do not eat from
dinner on one day until dinner the next day. In my case, I consume only water between
dinner on Saturday and dinner on Sunday.
• Perform a three-to-five-day fast once per year, preferably during a period when you can
devote less time to hard exercise and more time to relaxation, reading, meditation, yoga,
and a vision quest or journey of self-discovery, such as a camping trip or nature immersion
experience.
One-Month Detox Protocol
This is a sample of what a one-month detox protocol typically looks like, similar to what I use with
my clients when they need to focus on cleaning things up for a few consecutive weeks.
Daily Diet Guidelines
•

Avoid frequent snacking; shoot for two or three meals per day with just one or two snacks,
maximum.
• Avoid foods that have been heavily cooked or exposed to high heat.
• Avoid baked goods.
• Avoid soy, wheat, legumes, and dairy unless fermented, soaked, or sprouted.
• Avoid high intake of heavy foods like cheeses and nut butters.
• Avoid extremely spicy foods.
• Avoid white sugar, simple starches, high alcohol intake, high caffeine intake, and frequent
recreational drug use.
• Include fermented foods such as kimchi, sauerkraut, natto, kefir, and kombucha, as long as they
do not have added sugars.
--- END PAGE 663 ---

--- PAGE 664 ---
• Include a wide variety of bitters and digestifs, such as ginger, lemon, lime, and dandelion.
Teas and Broths: Drink several cups of any of the following each day, preferably spread throughout
the day:
• Pau d’arco tea, preferably blended with a tablespoon of soy lecithin or sunflower lecithin and a
teaspoon of turmeric powder. You can add stevia for flavor.
• Organic bone broth. I prefer Kettle & Fire beef or chicken broth. You can also find instructions
for making your own bone broth on BoundlessBook.com/13.
• Decoction tea. You’ll find more information and the recipe on here.
• Fresh celery juice
Daily Hot and Cold Therapy: Stay in a dry sauna, steam sauna, or infrared sauna for ten to thirty
minutes, at least long enough to begin sweating and preferably long enough that you begin to get
uncomfortably hot. You can kill two birds with one stone and do any of the day’s other activities in
the sauna. You can also read or simply sit and breathe—staying still in a sauna can increase
parasympathetic nervous system activity and enhance detoxification. Just stay away from your
phone, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and other emitters of electromagnetic fields. Another good sauna activity
is breathwork: resisted breathwork, restricted breathwork, holotropic breathwork, breath holds, or
any of the other breathwork tactics in chapter 3. Follow this sauna session with a two-to-five-
minute cold shower, soak in a cold bath, dip in a cold pool, or any other cold thermogenesis
activity.
Daily Dry Skin Brushing: Either in the sauna or after a shower, perform a full-body dry skin brush
for two to five minutes. You can find dry skin brushes, as well as full instructions for how to use
them, on BoundlessBook.com/13.
Daily Rebounding: At any point during the day (I prefer first thing in the morning to get the lymph
fluid circulating), jump on a rebounding trampoline for five to fifteen minutes, alternating between
single- and double-leg bouncing. A vibration platform or tai chi full-body shaking are also good
options.
Daily Oil Pulling: This practice involves simply swishing oil in your mouth for five minutes (not
twenty) each morning. You can find full instructions on how to do this on BoundlessBook.com/13.
Be sure to spit the oil out instead of swallowing it when you’re finished. For oil, I prefer The Dirt
brand oil-pulling oil or extra-virgin coconut oil or the ozonated olive oil from SimplyO3.
Daily Intermittent Fasting: After dinner, wait for a minimum of twelve hours (and up to sixteen
hours) before your next meal. The closer you can get to sixteen hours, the better.
Daily Meditation: Meditate for fifteen to sixty minutes. This can include yoga, prayer,
transcendental meditation, mindfulness meditation, box breathing, nature sit spots, or the use of a
meditation or breathwork app such as Headspace, Calm, Oak, Pause, YouBible, Othership, or The
Breath Source.
24-Hour Fast (once or twice per week): At either breakfast, lunch, or dinner on Saturday, begin a
twenty-four-hour fast until breakfast, lunch, or dinner on Sunday. During this fast, you can
consume a maximum of 2 cups of each of the teas listed above, as well as bone broths and celery
juice. You can also drink good clean water liberally, and, especially if you are an athlete concerned
about energy levels or muscle maintenance, you can use any or all of the following:
• Up to 40 g of essential amino acids, split into several 5-to-10-gram portions
• Two or three shots of trace liquid minerals, or sea salt and lemon juice in water
--- END PAGE 664 ---

--- PAGE 665 ---
• One to two daily servings of organic spirulina or chlorella, such as Royal Spirulina or
ENERGYbits.
• One to two servings of exogenous ketones, such as HVMN or KetoneAid.
• Chia seed gel: Soaking chia seeds in water softens the seeds and creates a soothing effect for
the gastrointestinal tract. Put 2 to 4 tablespoons of chia seeds in a 16-to-20-ounce glass mason
jar. Fill the jar with water, place the lid on the jar, and refrigerate overnight. Try not to consume
more than 4 tablespoons of chia seeds in the course of twenty-four hours (1 tablespoon is
about 60 calories). You can add stevia, lemon juice, or sea salt to this chia seed gel. Sea moss
gel is also a good option.
• Regular intake of low-calorie or no-calorie beverages, such as Pellegrino or Gerolsteiner with
stevia, Bragg’s apple cider vinegar drinks, coconut kefir, low-sugar kombucha, or any of the teas
listed above.
When you break your fast, begin with a light, easy-to-digest meal, such as fish, bone broth, and
mashed, pureed, or steamed vegetables.
Coffee Enema (once or twice per week): Since an enema is something you don’t want to make
many mistakes with, you can find full instructions for how to do this on BoundlessBook.com/13.
After you have used a stainless steel enema kit and tube to add 20 to 40 ounces of organic black
coffee to your colon, lie on your left side for twenty minutes. If you have trouble retaining the
enema, add a tablespoon of blackstrap molasses.
HOW TO NEVER GET A HANGOVER AGAIN
No discussion of clean eating or detoxing would be complete without some tips on how to
never get a hangover again, or at least how to mitigate the effects of alcohol or a hefty bout of
hedonism. After all, we healthy, active folks like to get our party on every now and again, right?
Most people think that hangovers are the result of dehydration. But even if you have
followed the sage advice to drink a glass of water for each alcoholic beverage consumed, you
can still wake up feeling less than stellar. Preventing a hangover is way more complicated than
simply chasing your beer or margarita or glass of wine with a pitcher of water (or coconut
water or Gatorade or Pedialyte).
This is because dehydration is just one factor in a hangover. Your pituitary gland normally
produces antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which increases your blood pressure by causing your
body to retain water. When you drink alcohol, your pituitary gland churns out less ADH, so
you stop retaining so much water, which is one reason the bathroom line is so long at parties.
But as soon as your buzz begins to wear off, ADH production increases once again, which
causes a rebound of fluid retention, swollen hands and feet, a puffy face, and a headache as
blood pressure rises.
At the same time, your kidneys pump out more of the enzyme renin and the hormone
aldosterone. This promotes the secretion of vasopressin, which increases blood pressure by
--- END PAGE 665 ---

--- PAGE 666 ---
inducing sodium retention and potassium loss. This is why people with heart problems are
most prone to a heart attack when they have a hangover: the cardiovascular system goes into
electrolyte-roller-coaster hyperdrive trying to retain fluids.
And that’s not all. Cortisol works with aldosterone to balance electrolyte levels, so when
you are hungover, your body pumps out more cortisol. This not only contributes to even more
fluid retention but also raises blood sugar levels by converting amino acids into glucose in
your liver, a process known as gluconeogenesis. As blood sugar levels rise, the pancreas
produces more insulin, resulting in abnormal stress on both the pancreas and the liver. These
elevated levels of cortisol can also cause catabolism (decreased protein availability in skeletal
muscles) as well as a redistribution of body fat from your legs and arms to your belly. Oh yes,
there’s still more.
As you drink and force your body to metabolize alcohol, your liver converts ethanol into
acetaldehyde and acetate, which causes increased production of tiny blood vessel constrictors
called thromboxanes. Thromboxanes also cause blood platelets to stick together and form
clots and decrease levels of natural killer cells, which are crucial to the immune system. This
surge in thromboxane creates symptoms very similar to those of a viral infection, including
nausea, headache, and diarrhea.
Finally, most alcoholic beverages contain congeners, which significantly contribute to
hangover symptoms. Congeners, which are found in high concentrations in dark-colored
liquors like brandy, wine, dark tequila, and whiskey, contain free radicals and positively
charged molecules that can significantly disrupt your acid-alkaline (pH) balance and increase
your body’s need to step up antioxidant activity to scavenge all those free radicals. As your
body goes into fight-or-flight mode to help you handle all these congeners, you get
gastrointestinal issues, nausea, headaches, sweatiness, clamminess, and/or chills.
So what can you do about this cluster of reactions that can occur once you foray into the
realm of two or more alcoholic drinks? Here are my best practices for a bout of higher-than-
normal alcohol intake (or any other outburst of hedonism, toxic excess, or partying).
1 to 3 days before the party•

Log as much sleep as possible. Research has shown this helps mitigate the effects of later
sleep loss.
• Limit your intake of vegetable oil and omega-6 fatty acids and emphasize
monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) and saturated fatty acids (SFAs). Animal studies
have confirmed that high amounts of omega-6 fatty acids from polyunsaturated fatty acids
(PUFAs) increase liver damage in response to alcohol intake, while more stable fats like
cocoa butter and coconut oil protect against it. If you do eat omega-6s, try to make sure
they come from whole foods, such as nuts, seeds, and eggs.
--- END PAGE 666 ---

--- PAGE 667 ---
The day of the party•

Strength training or HIIT prior to heavy eating or drinking can improve glycemic response
to carbohydrate-laden foods or drinks. Exercise also increases antioxidant activity and
reduces alcohol-induced liver damage. Cold therapy, such as a slightly longer three-to-ten-
minute cold soak, can act similarly.
• Eat several egg yolks or a serving of liver or liver capsules (scrambled eggs and liver for
brekky, anyone?). When you consume alcohol, your liver will be burning through its
choline stores so it can mitigate the damage of drinking, and this will top off those stores.
Choline supplementation or adding some extra to your normal dose of fish oil can also
work well.
1 hour before the party•

Eat a spoonful each of extra-virgin avocado oil, extra-virgin olive oil, and red palm oil. The
polyphenols in olive oil and avocado oil and the vitamin E in red palm oil can protect
against alcohol-induced oxidative stress, and the monounsaturated and saturated fats in all
three protect the liver. In a pinch or in a hurry, just choose one. Another good, lower-
calorie source of vitamin E tocotrienols is annatto, as described in my podcast with Barrie
Tan.
• Eat a light meal. Although a liver that is emptied of glycogen stores does allow you to
convert the fructose in cocktails and wines into liver glycogen, which might make you
--- END PAGE 667 ---

--- PAGE 668 ---
consider a complete liver-glycogen-emptying fast before partying, if you plan to drink
heavily, you want some food in your stomach to slow the absorption of the alcohol, but not
so much food that you’re overloaded with calories from both the meal and the booze. If
you do not eat, you risk flooding your body with too much ethanol too fast, and the
subsequent conversion into acetaldehyde can overwhelm your antioxidant defenses.
Preferably, this meal should include plenty of polyphenol-rich plants and spices, including
turmeric powder, ginger, berries, and beets, since anything pungent or colorful is fantastic
for alcohol metabolism. Another way to get in herb or plant matter is to take 1 to 2 g of
curcumin or a spoonful or two of Dr. Thomas Cowan’s vegetable powders. Examples of
good light meals include a fresh salad topped with fish, beets, and nuts; a mess of
scrambled eggs, turmeric powder, and kale served up in a corn tortilla or nori wrap; and a
few small handfuls of nuts, dried ginger, dark chocolate, and berries (not only does the
cocoa fat in chocolate protect against ethanol-induced liver damage, but the cocoa
polyphenols can increase your antioxidant capacity). Make sure you salt these types of
light meals with a good salt, like Celtic, Colima, or Baja Gold.
• Take 500 to 600 mg of N-acetylcysteine (NAC) and 1 g of vitamin C. NAC is a precursor to
glutathione, the antioxidant responsible for metabolizing alcohol. Hospitals give NAC
megadoses to treat Tylenol-based and alcohol-based liver poisoning. Vitamin C helps NAC
supply glutathione, an essential antioxidant. If you can’t get NAC, use transdermal
glutathione.
• Take 300 to 400 mg of magnesium. Alcohol depletes magnesium and can also cause
constipation, and this helps with both. You may want to save this tactic for after the party
if you find the magnesium gives you loose stool. Magnesium Breakthrough is a good brand.
• Mix a few spoonfuls of collagen powder into a smoothie or drink of your choice (such as
green tea—see below) or drink a cup of organic bone broth. The glycine in collagen and
gelatin reduces lipid peroxidation and antioxidant depletion in the liver. Adding vitamin C
with a supplement or a squeeze of lemon can increase glycine absorption.
• Drink a cup or two of green tea or matcha. Green tea contains polyphenols that protect
against ethanol-induced oxidative stress, and the caffeine and L-theanine in the tea can
give you a stable, slow release of energy for a night of fun. You can certainly double up and
make yourself a green tea cocktail that includes the oils, vitamin C, and collagen powder as
well, which is far more effective than forking over ten bucks for an overpriced detox juice
or anti-hangover supplement.
--- END PAGE 668 ---

--- PAGE 669 ---
During the party•

Before you start drinking, try taking a shot of Zbiotics (a new, genetically engineered
probiotic strain designed to support drinking) or a couple capsules of dihydromyricetin
(DHM), both of which can help your body process acetaldehyde. If you want to “feel” your
alcohol, save the DHM for after the party since it can bind to relaxing GABA receptors,
thus keeping the socially lubricating effects of alcohol at bay.
• Drink only the highest-quality alcohol available and avoid high-fructose corn syrup, added
sugars, and other nasty ingredients. (For the healthiest alcohol choices and my favorite
cocktail mixes, visit BoundlessBook.com/13.) A few particularly good choices are Mezcal
tequila, gin, or vodka mixed into sparkling water with bitters or a splash of fresh juice;
organic or biodynamic wine; a noncaloric soda such as Zevia mixed with wine and ice for a
sparkling cooler; or a ketone cocktail alternative such as those made by KetoneAid. I have
plenty of healthy cocktail and mocktail recipes in Boundless Cookbook and Boundless Kitchen.
• Unless you are drinking the super-fancy, expensive stuff, dilute wine and other spirits with
sparkling mineral water to improve hydration. If people ask why you’re bastardizing the
wine with water, inform them that you are making yourself a fancy French sparkler.
• Add a pinch of salt or one effervescent electrolyte tablet to each glass of water you
consume.
• Stay active to ensure you metabolize snacks and alcohol better. My own trick? I perform
forty air squats every time I use the restroom at a long alcohol-fueled dinner or party, and I
try to walk the room or dance and move as much as possible.
--- END PAGE 669 ---

--- PAGE 670 ---
After the party, before bed•

Mix ½ teaspoon of sea salt, the juice from 1 lime or lemon, 1 tablespoon of blackstrap
molasses, and 1½ cups of water (preferably mineral water or, despite the extra sugar
content, coconut water, as long as you have been careful not to have too much sugar at the
party). Ideally, drink this thirty to forty-five minutes before bed to give yourself enough
time to pee before you fall asleep. Other good electrolyte options are QuintEssential
Hypertonic Elixir, which tastes like salty, salty seawater but is a very rich source of
minerals, and BEAM Minerals, which is available as humic and fulvic acid and can assist
with binding toxins. You can also include up to 1,500 mg of any vitamin C supplement with
this water.
• Consume another 200 mg of magnesium, or a full 400 to 600 mg if you haven’t taken any
magnesium yet.
• Take four capsules of activated charcoal to sop up any toxins in the gut. Contrary to
popular belief, charcoal does not absorb alcohol, but it does absorb toxins, so this step is
only necessary if you’re unsure of the purity of the compounds you’ve been consuming, or
if you have gas and bloating from excess sugars or strange party foods.
• Use melatonin. Alcohol reduces melatonin secretion, which can contribute to annoying
early awakenings when all you want to do is sleep in. If I’ve had a big night in Vegas (quite
rare, but it happens occasionally), I’ll often use a 300 mg melatonin suppository from
MitoZen, and I sleep like a baby afterward!
--- END PAGE 670 ---

--- PAGE 671 ---
In the morning•

Drink the same pre-bed electrolyte- and antioxidant-rich drink from the night before.
• If you’re sleep-deprived, use my ultimate sleep deprivation hack: a serving of an NAD, NR,
or NMN supplement combined with 5 g of creatine.
• Consume a breakfast that includes eggs so that you can get more choline and/or consume a
handful of desiccated liver capsules, or, better yet—although you’ll be hard-pressed to find
pâté at Denny’s or a pancake house—eat a serving of organ meat.
• Exercise lightly (e.g., take a walk in the sunshine) or sit in a sauna. Do anything that gets
you sweating (infrared sauna therapy is best due to the added detox effect). Afterward,
take a cold plunge or a cold shower, or take a five-minute shower in which you alternate
between twenty seconds of cold water and ten seconds of hot water.
• If you’re really, really hungover, try my go-to hangover cure brew. Just combine all of the
following ingredients in a blender until smooth.
• 1 cup coconut water
• ½ avocado
• Juice of ½ lemon
• 1 (1-to-2-inch) piece of ginger, peeled and chopped
• 2 large egg yolks
• 1 heaping teaspoon fresh, live spirulina
• 1 heaping teaspoon chlorella
• Pinch of sea salt
For added efficacy, include 2 to 3 tablespoons frozen broccoli sprouts, a handful of
dandelion greens, and 200 to 300 mg of ginseng, which can accelerate the clearance of
acetaldehyde.
--- END PAGE 671 ---

--- PAGE 672 ---
Finally, if you can’t get into the sunshine because you’re, say, stuck in a maze of Vegas
casinos or don’t have the energy to leave your hotel room, to jump-start your circadian
rhythm, you can utilize the Ayo, the BEACON40, the Re-Timer, or similar blue-light-producing
devices in the morning (or, if you need to stay awake and phase-shift your circadian rhythm
forward, before the actual party) and use blue-light-blocking glasses at night as much as
possible.
Finally, I should mention that I don’t endorse drunkenness. I drink about one serving of
alcohol each night, and—I suspect because I am never tempted to cheat on the weekends after
abstaining every weekday—haven’t been drunk in over twelve years. For more on why
moderate alcohol consumption can be appropriate—including how up to one drink per day is
associated with a lower risk of all-cause mortality, lower risk of the major killers, and
improvements in DNA markers of aging, and how a half a drink a day is safe for the brain and
possibly beneficial because of mild cellular stress—check out the research of Dr. Chris
Masterjohn, which I will link to on the resources page for this chapter. But I also understand
that occasional bouts of partying tend to be a societal norm, and while when I party it’s pretty
rare for me to exceed three servings of alcohol, I want to equip you with all the tools you need
to combat the damage and keep a night or weekend of partying from destroying your
productivity and happiness for days on end.
Avoiding Dangerous Done-for-You Detoxes
Sure, every single day you can consume certain foods and supplements—from cruciferous
vegetables to chlorella—and engage in certain lifestyle activities—from fasting and rebounding to
spending time in a sauna—that help your liver, your lymph, and the rest of your detox organs
perform their jobs better.
But if you find yourself mowing down a shopping-cart-sized blender full of cilantro, chomping
through an enormous mug of chlorella or charcoal each day, jumping on the latest diet or juicing
craze, or getting fooled by fancy parasite cleanses with impressive, somewhat nasty photos of
worms that are really just long strings of mucus released by the colon, detox gets a bit more
complex and downright dangerous. As you learned in chapter 4, my friend Dr. Dan Pompa gave
himself mad hatter’s disease by detoxing the wrong way—specifically by mobilizing toxins and
metals from fat tissue and other storage areas into his body. He experienced the disturbing and
often permanent side effects that can occur if these compounds are simply deposited into other
tissues, like the brain and central nervous system, rather than excreted.
At a recent mastermind meeting of functional medicine physicians whom I consider to be some of
the world’s leading experts in detoxification, including Dr. Pompa, Dr. Chris Shade, and Dr. Joseph
Mercola, the consensus on detox was this: the willy-nilly, daily consumption of compounds
reported to detox your body, especially in the excessive amounts found in most daily detox
supplements, is likely risky. Ironically, many popular compounds used in this type of approach,
including carrots, celery, and curcumin, can inhibit detox pathways when consumed in very high
amounts in the absence of a systematized detox program. On the other hand, a detox system that
--- END PAGE 672 ---

--- PAGE 673 ---
is planned and programmed to guide your body through specific detox pathways in a precise
order is a far more intelligent and less risky approach.
For such a detox program to be effective, the following three principles must be in place:•

Toxin mobilization: Engaging in activities that involve lipolysis (breakdown of fat cells, which
store toxins), including sauna exposure, caloric restriction, fasting, exercise, and rebounding•

Detox: Stimulating and supporting all major detox pathways with both foods and supplements,
such as mung beans, cruciferous vegetables, milk thistle extract, N-acetylcysteine, glutathione,
vitamin C, and green tea polyphenols•

Excretion: Binding and removing the toxins with high-fiber foods, common binders such as
charcoal and chlorella, advanced binders such as clinoptilolite fragments and clay, and activities
such as exercise, sweating, and enemas
There are a few done-for-you detox programs that satisfy these criteria and that I endorse as
effective and safe programs overseen by intelligent, well-informed medical professionals. One is
Dr. Bryan Walsh’s Walsh Detoxification Program, which primarily uses real food and lifestyle
strategies and takes ten days. Another is Dr. Chris Shade’s Detox Qube, a multi-week program that
is usually ordered and overseen by a medical practitioner. Finally, there’s Dr. Pompa’s True Cellular
Detox, a three-month program that includes plenty of lifestyle, nutrition, and supplementation
strategies designed for metal removal. (For more information about these programs, see
BoundlessBook.com/13.)
Supplementing with Glutathione
Glutathione is a vital antioxidant and detoxifier in the body, playing a crucial role in neutralizing
free radicals, supporting the immune system, and dealing with harmful substances. Certain genetic
variations can impact glutathione production, utilization, or recycling, potentially increasing the
demand for supplemental glutathione to maintain optimal levels and function. For instance,
polymorphisms in genes such as glutathione S-transferases (GSTs), glutathione peroxidases
(GPXs), and glutathione reductase (GR) can affect the efficiency of glutathione production or its
ability to neutralize oxidative stress and toxins effectively. Individuals carrying certain variants of
these genes may have reduced glutathione levels or impaired detoxification capacity, necessitating
supplemental support to compensate for these deficiencies. In addition, genetic variations in
genes associated with phase II detoxification pathways, such as N-acetyltransferase (NAT),
cytochrome P450 (CYP), and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes, can influence the
body’s ability to metabolize and eliminate toxins effectively.
Insufficient activity of these enzymes due to genetic polymorphisms can lead to the accumulation
of harmful substances and oxidative stress, increasing the demand for glutathione to support
detoxification processes. After testing my own genetics, I found that I fall into many of these
categories, so I’ve had to pay attention to optimizing my glutathione levels. My teenage sons have
many of these same pathways, so they also use many of the glutathione optimization strategies
outlined below.
It turns out that glutathione injections and IVs deliver far more absorbable glutathione in less time
compared to many glutathione-containing supplements, especially if the glutathione is combined
with phosphatidylcholine. This is because when administered orally, much of the glutathione is
--- END PAGE 673 ---

--- PAGE 674 ---
broken down and oxidized before it can be absorbed. But this doesn’t mean you have to rush out
to grab a handful of needles, a diagram of the appropriate butt-cheek injection location, or a nurse
practitioner to shove an IV needle into a vein on your forearm, especially when you consider that
once it has acted as an antioxidant, glutathione becomes a prooxidant, and you can easily create
excess oxidative stress if using glutathione IVs or injections, particularly if you don’t follow them
with a powerful antioxidant like vitamin C or PQQ.
Even though I don’t prioritize glutathione injections or IVs due to my genetic pathways, I go out of
my way to prioritize oral glutathione supplementation and the consumption of glutathione-rich
foods, along with coffee enemas, which can spark the body’s own glutathione production.
Research has demonstrated that lab animals absorb orally consumed glutathione intact and that
glutathione can cross intestinal cells in humans. And contrary to what many nutritionists preach,
significant amounts of oral glutathione can be absorbed intact if the glutathione is in liposomal
form and is administered sublingually (under the tongue).
Research has shown that taking glutathione sublingually results in better absorption than taking
an encapsulated supplement. Liposomal glutathione administered sublingually can be very
effective. Liposomes are small, fat-like droplets that are very similar to the membranes that encase
your own cells. These membranes protect the contents of the liposomes from the process of
digestion, so by taking glutathione that has been packaged into liposomes, you may be able to
increase your absorption of orally administered glutathione. Liposomal oral glutathione seems to
be taken up particularly well by the kidneys, heart, brain, lungs, skin, and small intestine.
People with insulin resistance, diabetes, chronic inflammation, or infection can’t produce sufficient
glutathione on their own, so glutathione supplements, IVs, or injections may be the best option for
them. An effective glutathione supplemental dose is between 250 and 1,000 mg daily. For oral
administration, I prefer a sublingual, liposomal form, such as Quicksilver Scientific or Cymbiotika
glutathione; the latter also contains several mitochondria-supporting compounds, such as PQQ
and CoQ10. You can also improve your body’s own glutathione synthesis by supplementing with
glutathione precursors or compounds that enhance glutathione recycling.
Your body produces glutathione from three amino acids: cysteine, glutamate, and glycine. The
most important of these when it comes to supplementation is cysteine, as your body has more
trouble creating it. Since cysteine degrades easily, it is best to supplement with N-acetylcysteine
(NAC), which is broken down into a readily available form of cysteine. Perhaps this is why one
recent study found that supplementing with glycine and NAC (GlyNAC) improves glutathione
deficiency, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, physical function, and aging
markers. (One of the few supplements in the antiaging space backed by multiple human studies in
this category is Biostack Labs GlyNAC, which can be taken five days on, two days off as a yearly
detox strategy.)
If you want to include glutathione-supporting foods in your diet, you need to start eating sulfur-
rich compounds. The foods with the highest sulfur content are beef, fish, poultry, broccoli, Brussels
sprouts, cauliflower, kale, watercress, mustard greens, garlic, shallots, and onions. Other ways to
support glutathione production include consuming whey protein, which has a cysteine precursor
for glutathione; turmeric powder or curcumin, which both increase glutathione and glutathione
enzyme levels; and organ meats, avocado, spinach, and okra, all of which are naturally rich in
glutathione.
--- END PAGE 674 ---

--- PAGE 675 ---
Another very good method to deliver large amounts of highly absorbable glutathione into your
system quickly is via a suppository (yep, up the butt), a nebulizer, or an intranasal spray. For these
methods, I recommend Dr. John Lieurance’s glutathione product Glutastat.
THE LAST WORD
Congratulations! You have now learned everything you need to know about what to do when
your digestive tract gets off track, how to hit the reboot button, how to detox your body, and
much more.
As you no doubt now realize, the gut is quite complex, and there are plenty of resources
that had to be omitted from this chapter simply for lack of space. You can find these in
complete detail on BoundlessBook.com/13.
Finally, you are going to find that detoxing your body goes hand in hand with detoxing your
home and workplace. Chapter 20 has everything you need to know about how to fully detox
the air, light, water, and electricity in the important areas of your life. I also suggest paying
close attention to chapter 15, which has plenty more about the immune system, which also
goes hand in hand with gut optimization.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS WEEK
Here is a simple strategy to help your digestive system that you can begin immediately: every
time you eat a meal, chew each bite of food twenty-five times. Yes, twenty-five. Your mouth,
like your stomach, is full of digestive enzymes, such as salivary alpha-amylase, so by taking
your time and chewing, you are giving those enzymes a chance to do their job. You’re also
allowing optimum time for your gallbladder to release bile into your stomach. Chewing
thoroughly can also activate hormones like cholecystokinin that will make you feel fuller
faster, stimulate hydrochloric acid to begin breaking down proteins, and even stimulate your
parasympathetic nervous system so that you’re not eating in a stressed, fight-or-flight state.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a deeper dive into the topics
of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog posts, recommended tools and supplements, and
much more—visit BoundlessBook.com/13.
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 675 ---

--- PAGE 676 ---
14
DIETS SUCK
HOW TO CUSTOMIZE YOUR
NUTRITION TO YOU
I shook my head at the baffling reading on the blood glucose monitor: 140. 140?
That’s the blood glucose level of a diabetic who just chugged a giant Coke—not
the level I’d expected for myself after consuming a handful of roasted
macadamia nuts (without a chocolate coating).
--- END PAGE 676 ---

--- PAGE 677 ---
Could the numbers be lying? An equipment malfunction, perhaps? I
fumbled with my finger, squeezed out another drop of blood, and tested
again. 10, 9, 8 . . . The screen counted down and finally displayed my new
reading: 142. Dang. Even higher.
What the heck? Nuts are not supposed to spike blood sugar. That’s the
realm of cookies, bananas, and soda, not friggin’ nuts. Considering I’d
tested my genes and discovered a higher-than-normal risk of type 2
diabetes, and I was patting myself on the back for having consumed a
high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet for the past three years, this blood sugar
value in response to nuts was even more alarming.
So I picked up the phone and called my friend Grace Liu, a poop
doctor, who not only happens to specialize in just about every issue
pertaining to the gut, diet, and food reactions but also possesses the
results of my food allergy, food intolerance, and digestive inflammation
tests and has a microbiome printout of every tiny shred of bacteria in my
inner tubes.
“Oh, that’s easy!” she exclaimed after I filled her in. “You don’t tolerate
oxalates. Oxalates are in nuts, so you produce the stress hormone cortisol
when you eat nuts.”
I nodded. Of course. Contrary to popular belief, your blood sugar can
massively spike not just when you eat something sugary but also when you
eat something “stressful,” such as something you are allergic to or can’t
digest properly—in my case, the innocent macadamia nut. This happens
because stress causes cortisol to send a message to my liver to break down
stored carbohydrates and dump them into my blood so that I can run from
the lion and live to fight another day. Problem is, I was dealing with a nut,
not a lion, and didn’t need the boost of blood sugar to fuel a speedy
retreat. As a result, my blood sugar shot through the roof, causing rampant
inflammation and blood vessel damage.
--- END PAGE 677 ---

--- PAGE 678 ---
I hung up the phone and sighed. Thank you very much, biochemical
individuality. I should have known. After all, one of the prized books on
my shelf is a 1998 gem by Roger Williams entitled (you guessed it)
Biochemical Individuality. The back cover sums up its argument nicely:
“There is no such thing as the average person—we are all genetically and
biologically unique. But when sperm meets egg, our characteristics are not
locked in stone. Bad genes do not cause disease by themselves—nutrition
and environment can alter the outcome.”
The book, recommended to me at a health conference by Dr. Jeffrey
Bland, a man deemed the “father of functional medicine,” explains the
fascinating diversity that exists from human to human, including
surprising variations in everything from the shapes of our hearts and livers
to the rate at which we excrete fatty acids and amino acids, our natural
enzyme production levels, how well we digest certain foods, and a host of
other elements.
For example, even though they’re found in just about every
multivitamin on the face of the planet, some people don’t actually need to
supplement with any ascorbic acid (vitamin C), vitamin A, or a form of
vitamin B called riboflavin. Why? They harbor intestinal bacteria that
produce ample amounts of each of these vitamins. But the only way to
know if you possess that bacteria is to do the type of simple, at-home poop
testing you will read about later in this chapter.
Take vitamin D as another example. There are well-authenticated cases
of “vitamin D–resistant” people. These folks produce heart-damaging
amounts of calcium and phosphorus deposits in their blood vessels when
they consume the FDA’s current recommendation for this vitamin (about
20 mcg per day). That should be a big warning sign to anyone popping
vitamin D like candy, especially given the health media’s infatuation with
this so-called cure-all vitamin. At the same time, many people—especially
those with darker skin tones, which can limit the amount of vitamin D
--- END PAGE 678 ---

--- PAGE 679 ---
they produce from sunlight—can develop serious health issues, such as
osteoporosis and hormone deficiencies, when they don’t supplement
vitamin D.
But despite the enormous amount of biochemical individuality that
exists from person to person, there are still a plethora of diet books
published each year (particularly close to swimsuit season and New
Year’s) that promise to be the ultimate solution for everything from losing
body fat to banishing acne to beating cravings and building muscle—when
in fact the same ketogenic diet that helped your neighbor shed 20 pounds
can result in rampant inflammation, brain fog, and oxidized cholesterol for
you.
Roger Williams put it quite elegantly:
Genetic influences are far better understood now . . . for major nutrition-
related problems such as alcoholism, heart disease, diabetes, hypertension,
and cancer. Yet we seem frustratingly slow to integrate this knowledge into
clinical practice and common knowledge. Most clinicians still treat and write
about these problems as if inborn differences are unimportant. Professional
and lay authors still recommend restrictive diets they assume are best for
nearly everyone. They debate heatedly about which one of the conflicting
diets is “right”—high-carbohydrate, low-carbohydrate, vegetarian, high-
protein, etc. When will we automatically consider that all these diets likely
have merit, but only for some individuals?
Get that? For dramatic emphasis, allow me to repeat what Williams
says at the end of that paragraph: “All these diets likely have merit, but
only for some individuals.”
So yes, diets suck, which is why I have never written a diet book and
also why I think most diet books are silly marketing ploys (and the
primary way for authors to prey upon our desire to find the holy grail of
dieting; they make oodles of money by publishing a diet book and then a
few months later publish a cookbook to grab even more cash).
--- END PAGE 679 ---

--- PAGE 680 ---
Most diets apply a one-size-fits-all approach that paints an entire
population with a broad nutritional brush without considering genetics;
personal health history; nutrient, vitamin, and mineral deficiencies that
need to be addressed; and, as you have just learned, biochemical
individuality. To optimize the flow of energy through your body, doesn’t it
seem logical to account for the type of gas you put in the tank? You don’t
want to pump unleaded fuel into a diesel engine. A diet that works for one
person leaves another person stripped of the ability to tap into their life
force because it causes food intolerances, brain fog, bloating, and other
chronic food-related problems.
In this chapter, you’re going to discover what happens when diets such
as keto, carnivore, vegan, and others go wrong, exactly how you can
determine your own biochemical individuality, and how to know which
way of eating is perfect for you.
THE KETOGENIC DIET
Let’s start with a look at why a popular diet that many people swear by can
be the wrong choice for some. The ketogenic diet is an extremely high-fat,
low-carb diet that’s championed by fat-lovers as the perfect way to lose
weight, enhance cognition, and increase endurance. And for many people,
it does indeed work for these goals.
I followed a strict ketogenic diet for years while competing in Ironman
triathlons, and I even participated in a fascinating high-fat-diet
experiment called the FASTER Study (an acronym for “fat-adapted
substrate use in trained elite runners”). I and eighteen other elite
endurance athletes followed a strict 90 percent fat-based diet for twelve
months, then appeared at a University of Connecticut lab to subject
ourselves to a series of blood, urine, and stool measurements followed by
a brutal three-hour treadmill run, along with a painful biopsy of muscle
--- END PAGE 680 ---

--- PAGE 681 ---
tissue from the quadriceps and fat tissue from the ass cheeks (imagine a
miniature guillotine shoved into your flanks to cut out tissue samples).
The results of that experiment (which you can read more about on
BoundlessBook.com/14) rewrote exercise physiology textbooks by
revealing that long-term adherence to a high-fat diet nearly doubles the
human body’s fat-burning capacity, both at rest and during exercise,
without harming performance. I still occasionally use a high-fat, very-low-
carb ketogenic diet—and even supplement with exogenous ketones, which
are a drinkable strategy to quickly put yourself into ketosis—for a brain
boost on mentally difficult days.
But when I do fitness and nutrition consulting for people who are
following a ketogenic diet, I have witnessed concerningly high levels of
LDL cholesterol (skyrocketing over 400 mg/dL), along with rampant
inflammation and inflated triglyceride levels, which can be a risk factor for
heart disease and liver problems. These metrics are often accompanied by
issues such as anxiety, joint pain, gastrointestinal discomfort, general
malaise or fatigue, and poor physical performance. How can some people
thrive on keto while others struggle? It comes down to how an individual’s
body processes fat.
When Fat Metabolism Goes Wrong: Why
Keto Isn’t Right for Everyone
Many people have problems metabolizing and utilizing fat that aren’t
related to clinical conditions or missing nutrients but instead are the
result of variations in the genes that encode for fat metabolism. If you
have one of the following four genetic factors, you may not respond well
to a high-fat or ketogenic diet. Indeed, you may not benefit from a
constant state of ketosis at all—especially one achieved by high fat intake
--- END PAGE 681 ---

--- PAGE 682 ---
—and may instead perform better on a low-fat diet or a primarily
Mediterranean-style diet high in monounsaturated fats like olive oil.
FAMILIAL HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA
One relatively common condition affecting fat metabolism is familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH), which affects up to 10 percent of the world’s
population. People with this condition tend to experience a metabolic
firestorm when they follow a high-fat diet because their cholesterol and
inflammatory biomarkers increase dramatically in response to foods like
coconut oil, butter, fatty fish, red meat, and eggs. This condition is also
associated with chest pain during physical activity; fatty deposits around
the elbows, knees, and butt; cholesterol levels high enough to be a true
cardiovascular risk factor; and cholesterol deposits around the eyelids.
While very high LDL cholesterol (typically above 300 mg/dL) is a sign
you may have FH, you can more precisely determine your status by getting
a salivary genetic test and then looking for risk markers such as (1) a TT
polymorphism (genetic variation) on the CETP gene; (2) an AT
polymorphism on the PCSK9 gene; or (3) an AA or AG polymorphism on
the APOB gene. (If polymorphisms and genetic terminology are new to
you, visit BoundlessBook.com/14 for a helpful guide on how to analyze
your raw DNA results.)
When I presented this conundrum of people with FH on a ketogenic
diet to Dr. Chris Masterjohn, one of the brightest guys I know when it
comes to nutrition biochemistry, he explained that the best way to deal
with FH is to “take the one gene for the LDL receptor responsible for
contributing to this condition and try to bring it up to the expression level
that would be found in someone without FH.” He explained that from a
scientific standpoint, this can be accomplished by maximizing the
biological activity of thyroid hormone and suppressing the activity of the
PCSK9 gene, both of which can be achieved by increasing insulin signaling
--- END PAGE 682 ---

--- PAGE 683 ---
through, for example, frequent physical movement, the use of insulin-
sensitizing herbs and spices, and moderation of processed sugar and
starch intake.
POOR ALPHA-LINOLENIC ACID CONVERSION
Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) is a short-chain omega-3 fatty acid found
primarily in plant-based foods, such as flax seeds and walnuts. ALA is an
essential fatty acid because, like essential amino acids, it cannot be
produced in the body, so it must be obtained through food. Plant sources
are popular among vegetarians and vegans because once in the body, ALA
can be converted to DHA and EPA, critical fatty acids that enhance
cognition and brain health and help stabilize a state of ketosis and are
found primarily in animal foods, especially fatty fish. But research suggests
that only 2 to 10 percent of all ALA consumed is actually converted to
DHA or EPA. In addition, the expression of ALA-converting genes, known
as FADS, can vary widely. One variant of the FADS gene increases
conversion while another reduces conversion—so people with one variant
are less able to convert ALA to DHA and EPA than those with another
variant.
The FADS variant that improves ALA conversion is most common in
African, Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi, and Sri Lankan populations. It is
moderately common in European populations (although there is variation
across European populations; the conversion-increasing variant is most
common in southern Europe) and least common in Native Americans and
indigenous Arctic populations. This variation is likely due to the relative
availability of plant sources of omega-3s and genetic adaptations to that
availability: The more an ancestral population relied on plant sources of
fatty acids, the more the population adapted to convert ALA into usable
DHA and EPA. Conversely, the more a population consumed DHA and
--- END PAGE 683 ---

--- PAGE 684 ---
EPA directly from animal and fish sources, the more the conversion-
increasing variant was replaced by the conversion-decreasing variant.
So if you have, say, African or Southern Asian ancestry, you likely carry
the conversion-increasing variant of the FADS gene and don’t need to
consume as much DHA and EPA from animal or fish sources. It is
important to note that this doesn’t mean you don’t need to consume
animal or fish sources at all, simply that you don’t need as much of them
as people of other ancestral heritages do.
If you have far northern European, Iberian, Native American, or
Indigenous Arctic ancestry, you most likely can’t effectively convert ALA
into usable DHA and EPA. Those of British and Northern European
ancestry may have more effective conversion rates, but the conversion-
increasing variant is not as common as in Tuscan and southern European
populations. If your genetic heritage comes from these groups, you need
to get your DHA and EPA directly from meat and fish.
UPREGULATED ELONGATION OF OMEGA-6 FATTY
ACIDS
Omega-6 fatty acids are, like omega-3s, polyunsaturated fatty acids, and
they are found most commonly in poultry, eggs, grains, seeds, nuts, and
most vegetable oils. Omega-6s are precursors to molecules called
eicosanoids, which, when derived from omega-6s, can be pro-
inflammatory, especially when omega-6s are consumed in excess.
Eicosanoids derived from omega-3 fatty acids, on the other hand, are anti-
inflammatory, but humans cannot efficiently convert omega-6s into
omega-3s, so a high intake of omega-6 fatty acids without a proportionally
high intake of omega-3s can lead to rampant cellular inflammation and
weight gain.
Even if you do consume adequate omega-3 fatty acids (a balanced ratio
of omega-3s to omega-6s is 1:1), you may not be able to handle omega-6s as
--- END PAGE 684 ---

--- PAGE 685 ---
well as others. The process of converting omega-6s to inflammatory
compounds is called elongation. The expression of the gene responsible
for elongation varies from person to person, and some people have
upregulated elongation, which results in more inflammatory compounds.
If you have upregulated elongation, a significant amount of the linoleic
acid (an omega-6 fatty acid) you consume in food like seeds and nuts will
be converted to arachidonic acid, a precursor to inflammatory compounds.
To avoid that inflammation, you will need to avoid common ketogenic fat
sources high in linoleic acid, such as poultry, eggs, and nut butters, or, if
you do consume them, you’ll need to increase your intake of omega-3s
from fatty cold-water fish like tuna, mackerel, herring, and sardines. You
can determine the status of your omega-6 elongation with an omega-3 and
omega-6 fatty acid index test, which tells you whether you have excess
inflammatory arachidonic acid levels. These indexes are offered by
companies such as Thorne, OmegaQuant, and Quest Diagnostics.
THE THRIFTY GENE HYPOTHESIS: FTO AND PPAR
VARIANTS
The geneticist James Neel proposed the thrifty gene hypothesis in 1962 in
an attempt to explain why certain populations are more susceptible to
type 2 diabetes; it has also been used to explain why humans tend to
accumulate body fat. The hypothesis claims that in the past, “thrifty
genes” allowed some people to quickly build fat reserves in times of plenty
as a buffer against food scarcity in leaner times. As food became
overabundant in the modern era in developed nations, these genes
continued to allow people to build fat reserves, even though times of food
scarcity were less common. In addition, the calorie-dense foods
responsible for triggering the thrifty genes (think about dishes high in
both sugar and fat, such as butter with potatoes, ice cream, and eggs with
--- END PAGE 685 ---

--- PAGE 686 ---
waffles) are consumed in much higher quantities today than they were in
the past.
Granted, the thrifty gene hypothesis has received much criticism over
the last few decades, and even Neel himself found some evidence that
suggested the hypothesis might not be accurate. But there are indeed
certain genes that cause some people to gain fat more easily than others,
especially in response to high-fat foods. The most common nutrients
associated with genetic obesity are fatty acids, and the two most notorious
genes responsible for storing these fatty acids are the FTO and PPAR
gamma genes.
The FTO gene (which codes a protein associated with fat mass and
obesity) is responsible for regulating body fat and overall weight. Research
suggests that the FTO gene is the primary genetic factor associated with
weight gain and that diet is the primary environmental factor that triggers
the FTO gene. A high saturated fat intake is particularly associated with
FTO-induced weight gain, so if you carry one or two copies of the FTO
rs9939609 polymorphism, you will likely do better on a diet low in
saturated fat, particularly from dairy, butter, coconut oil, and fatty beef,
lamb, and pork.
The PPAR (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor) gene is also
associated with weight gain following a high fat intake. The PPAR gamma
polymorphism is responsible for regulating fatty acid storage, the uptake
of fatty acids, and the growth of new fat cells. A variant of the PPAR
gamma gene has shown significant increases in weight in response to
dietary fat and monounsaturated fatty acid intake, suggesting that the
PPAR gamma gene is one of the primary genes responsible for causing
weight gain. Polyunsaturated fatty acids, such as the omega-6 arachidonic
acid, also activate PPAR gamma, so if you have PPAR gamma (instead of,
say, PPAR alpha), you will probably achieve greater dietary success by
limiting your intake of fats.
--- END PAGE 686 ---

--- PAGE 687 ---
You can find out if you possess either the FTO rs9939609
polymorphism or the PPAR gamma gene with a salivary genetic test and
then searching for these gene variants in your raw results. A growing body
of websites, such as 23andMe, TheDNACompany, SelfDecode, StrateGene,
and Genetic Genie, can make digging through this data a bit easier.
(BoundlessBook.com/14 has a guide to analyzing your 23andMe raw
results, and you can also visit BenGreenfieldFitness.com/rawdata for a
quick list.)
OXIDIZER STATUS
An easy, affordable hair tissue mineral analysis can provide insight into
whether you are a slow or fast oxidizer by analyzing key minerals and their
ratios in hair. This reflects metabolic tendencies linked to how the body
processes carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. Slow oxidizers tend to have
sluggish adrenal and thyroid activity, leading to slower metabolic
processes, and tend to burn carbs inefficiently, leading to blood sugar
imbalances and low energy. Fast oxidizers exhibit higher adrenal and
thyroid activity, resulting in faster metabolic processing of nutrients. They
can burn carbs quickly and may experience energy dips if they don’t refuel
often. To analyze your status, visit GoLifeNetwork.com or work with a
practitioner like Matthew Coffman or my friend Dr. Leland Stillman.
LOOKING BEYOND KETO
So if you have one of these genetic or oxidation factors and can’t thrive on
keto, what should you eat? Much to the chagrin of ketogenic zealots, it all
comes down to (drumroll please) eating a low-fat, fiber-rich, high-
carbohydrate diet and replacing saturated fat with polyunsaturated fat. A
good approach is to eat similarly to the ancestral protocol common among
the inhabitants of the island Kitava, who happen to possess the FH gene
but do not experience heart disease. This diet is rich in fiber-dense
--- END PAGE 687 ---

--- PAGE 688 ---
carbohydrates, such as coconut meat, starchy tubers, and fresh fruit
(notably, none of these are processed, refined carbohydrates).
How to Do Keto the Right Way
It may seem strange that some people don’t do well on keto. After all, our
ancestors were often in a state of ketosis, as are many hunter-gatherer
tribes today; so are many people in Blue Zones—parts of the world where
people tend to live longer than average. But they all achieve ketosis via
natural habits such as frequent fasting, low intake of processed sugary or
starchy foods, high plant intake, and “drowning” real, whole foods with
healthy fats such as extra-virgin olive oil. This stands in stark contrast to
the modern, somewhat bastardized version of ketosis, often called “dirty
keto,” which involves buying ketone supplements that cost $15 a serving;
eating ungodly amounts of butter, coconut oil, and other saturated fats;
eating surprisingly sparse amounts of actual, real food; and spending many
precious minutes each day hunched over a ketone monitor in a form of
endless self-quantification.
As long as you don’t have one of the genetic factors listed earlier, a
ketogenic diet can indeed be an effective method for enhancing focus,
boosting physical and mental energy, and improving physical
performance. But even if you respond well to a carbohydrate-restricted or
fat-rich diet, it is easy to make mistakes that may prevent you from
entering a state of ketosis, cause you to accumulate nutrient deficits, and
give you low, sluggish energy (particularly during workouts) on a strict
ketogenic diet.
Two main issues often arise on a ketogenic diet. The first, stemming
from a tendency to focus on animal foods and avoid plant foods, is the loss
of key nutrients, such as phytochemicals, antioxidants, fiber, and plant-
based vitamins. For example, the phytochemicals contained in kale,
--- END PAGE 688 ---

--- PAGE 689 ---
spinach, blueberries, raspberries, collard greens, Swiss chard, and sweet
potatoes are responsible for xenohormesis. Recall from chapter 3 that
hormesis is a phenomenon in which exposure to low doses of compounds
that could be toxic or lethal in higher doses results in a beneficial effect,
such as improved health, muscle growth, or longevity. Eliminating plants
from your diet because they’re carbohydrate-based, as many do on keto,
means eliminating these phytochemicals and the benefits they bring.
These same plants are also sources of antioxidants that are crucial for
neutralizing free radicals, which can cause a host of physiological and
neurological problems, including neurodegeneration and damage to
muscle tissue. Vegetables and fruits are some of the densest sources of a
full spectrum of antioxidants you can consume. They also—unlike butter,
coconut oil, and hefty cuts of fat-streaked meat—include fiber. Fiber is
important for satiety, maintaining healthy digestive function, and feeding
robust populations of beneficial gut bacteria (although it’s worth noting
that, paradoxically, in people with compromised guts, fiber can increase
issues such as gas, bloating, and constipation). Finally, plants are potent
sources of a wide range of vitamins, minerals, and micronutrients,
including vitamin A, vitamin C, B vitamins, calcium, potassium, and iron.
While some vegetables, particularly starchy tubers like sweet potatoes and
white potatoes and sweet fruits like bananas and apples, are too high in
carbohydrates to be strictly keto-friendly, most vegetables, such as dark
leafy greens and cruciferous vegetables, are keto-friendly and can be
consumed in relatively high quantities.
Of course, one wrench thrown into this equation is the potential for
other hormetic stressors—such as exercise, cold thermogenesis, sauna,
sunlight radiation, and even the heterocylic amines and other charred
compounds formed during the cooking of meat—to allow for adequate
hormesis even in the absence of high plant intake, a theory proposed by
Dr. Paul Saladino in the first of our four carnivore diet podcast episodes
--- END PAGE 689 ---

--- PAGE 690 ---
(I’ll link to all of them on the online resources page for this chapter).
However, there is very little long-term research comparing the hormetic
effects of a plant-based diet to those of a carnivore diet.
The second problem that can accompany a low-carb, ketogenic diet is
a cluster of symptoms known collectively as the “keto flu,” also referred to
as carbohydrate withdrawal. Keto flu can manifest as any or all of the
following symptoms:
Brain fog Irritability
Headaches Muscle soreness
Chills Nausea
Sore throat Poor focus
Confusion Stomach pains
Dizziness Sugar cravings
Insomnia
Keto flu typically begins twenty-four to forty-eight hours into a
ketogenic diet and can last anywhere from a few days to several weeks.
The flu is caused by three changes that can occur as your body shifts from
glucose metabolism to fatty acid metabolism. First, as you cut out
carbohydrates, your insulin levels drop. This signals your kidneys to flush
sodium out of your body, which can result in losing up to 10 pounds of
water weight in just a few days. The accompanying loss of muscle glycogen
and minerals, along with low insulin levels, can cause dizziness, nausea,
headaches, muscle cramping, diarrhea, and constipation.
Second, there are diet-induced changes to thyroid hormones. The
hormones T3 and T4 are produced by the thyroid gland and regulate body
temperature, metabolism, and heart rate. Thyroid function relies heavily
--- END PAGE 690 ---

--- PAGE 691 ---
upon adequate carbohydrate intake, so as you cut back on carbohydrates,
levels of T3 and T4 may fall, resulting in brain fog and fatigue.
Third, at the same time as your T3 and T4 hormone levels fall, your
cortisol levels can rise. This is because extreme carbohydrate restriction
signals to your body that glucose is a precious commodity, and your body
responds by attempting to increase glucose levels via increased levels of
stress hormones like cortisol. This can result in irritability and insomnia.
So how can you beat these nutritional deficiencies and carbohydrate
withdrawal symptoms? The following are seven tactics for getting the
most out of a low-carb, ketogenic diet without experiencing significant
reductions in physical or cognitive performance.
1. CONSUME VEGGIES AND TAKE SUPPLEMENTS.
Most vegetables are keto-friendly. There is no reason you can’t liberally
consume kale, collard greens, Brussels sprouts, and Swiss chard and
moderately consume low-glycemic-index fruits such as blueberries,
raspberries, and blackberries. You can also supplement the
phytochemicals, antioxidants, and fiber you get from these whole-food
sources via prebiotics, probiotics, and antioxidants like GSH (glutathione)
and turmeric extract (curcumin), along with a quality multivitamin.
Microgreens, which are the shoots of leafy greens such as arugula, Swiss
chard, and mustard picked just after the first leaves have developed, can
help modulate cholesterol levels and lower inflammation. Microgreens are
simple to grow at home in a sunny window or under an LED grow light.
Sprouts, which I introduced in chapter 13, can work similarly. For a
shortcut to getting more from vegetables with fewer starches, look into
powdered vegetable extracts and greens powders, such as Dr. Thomas
Cowan’s or Organifi.
In addition to eating more vegetables and microgreens, you should
consider consuming the following supplements:
--- END PAGE 691 ---

--- PAGE 692 ---
• Choline, which helps your liver process fat and prevents nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease.
• Magnesium, which improves bone health, immune system function,
and nerve and muscle function. It also helps minimize muscle cramps,
dizziness, and fatigue.
• Potassium, which is necessary for proper cellular function. It also
minimizes cramps, constipation, and muscle weakness.
• Sodium, which, as mentioned above, is dumped by your kidneys as
insulin levels drop. If you are performing heavy training sessions, you
need to maintain sodium levels because you lose a lot of sodium
through sweat. Sodium also reduces fatigue, headaches, and thirst.
• Creatine, which will allow you to perform high-volume, high-intensity
workouts without relying on high levels of muscle glycogen (since
these stores will be depleted as you restrict carbohydrate intake). This
is known as a carbohydrate-sparing effect.
2. CONSUME MORE FATS, ESPECIALLY MCT OIL.
Consuming more of the right types of fat may accelerate your adaptation
to a ketogenic diet. MCT (medium-chain triglyceride) oil, which is derived
from coconut oil, is particularly potent. Most fatty acids must travel
through your lymphatic system to your heart, muscles, and adipose tissue
before entering the liver to be metabolized. But MCT oil goes straight to
the liver to be immediately metabolized into energy, and just adding MCT
oil to your diet may allow you to avoid the keto flu altogether. You can also
add coconut oil to your morning coffee and eat more foods rich in healthy
fats, such as grass-fed beef, fatty cold-water fish, and eggs. Extra-virgin
olive oil, coconut oil, and MCT oil can also be drizzled liberally on almost
any dish. Just remember to include plants, too, as these can eliminate the
--- END PAGE 692 ---

--- PAGE 693 ---
potential for a high intake of oils (particularly saturated fats) to become
inflammatory.
Is It Healthy to Put Fat in Your Coffee?
You are no doubt familiar with the craze of dumping butter, coconut oil, MCT
oil, or ghee into what your grandparents would have consumed as a no-frills,
plain ol’ cup of coffee.
There is definitely something to this trendy practice. When blended with
fats, cognitively enhancing cholesterols found in the mighty coffee bean,
including cafestol and kahweol, can cross the blood-brain barrier, increasing
coffee’s cognitive benefits and extending the mental boost to a level beyond
that which caffeine can provide. In addition, adding fats to coffee can keep
you satiated for long periods of time, boost ketone production if you use
MCT or coconut oil, provide anti-inflammatory effects and feed beneficial
bacteria in the gut if you use butter, and even elevate metabolic rate slightly
if you use MCT oil (due to the thermogenic effect of combining caffeine and
MCT oil).
So I am a fan of blending fat into coffee. But you can’t consume oodles of
saturated fat in large doses without taking some steps to mitigate the
potential damage. For example, the long-chain fatty acids found in coconut
oil can cause a rise in inflammatory T cells that, if left unchecked, can lead to
and exacerbate autoimmune disease or gut discomfort. The short-chain
--- END PAGE 693 ---

--- PAGE 694 ---
fatty acids found in vegetables can reverse this damage, so if you do add
concentrated amounts of fat to your coffee, make sure to consume several
servings of vegetables throughout the day, especially antioxidant-rich
greens, herbs, and spices. In other words, don’t have fatty coffee for
breakfast, sardines and an avocado for lunch, and a rib-eye steak and
mashed potatoes for dinner and expect your cholesterol, inflammation, and
other biomarkers to respond favorably. A better scenario would be a fatty
coffee for breakfast, a giant salad for lunch, and boatloads of roasted
vegetables with dinner.
Keep in mind, too, that you are often drinking many, many calories in a fatty
coffee beverage—remember, fat has twice as many calories as protein or
carbohydrate—so it counts as a full meal, and consuming it along with, say, a
big plate of bacon and eggs isn’t the best idea, assuming you care about the
size of your waistline. Finally, if intermittent fasting is your thing, be aware
that a cup of high-calorie fatty coffee will definitely take you out of a fasted
state, although, because it is unlikely to spike glucose or insulin levels, it is
one of the better choices for staying “semi-fasted.”
Now, don’t get me wrong; a big black cup o’ joe is fine, but occasionally it’s
fun to spin the brain’s dials with inventive deliciousness. So here are three of
my favorite fatty coffee recipes to get your creative wheels churning: two
hot, for those chilly fall or winter days or when you crave the comfort of a
hot brew, and one cold, for a pre- or postworkout pick-me-up or a
cognition-enhancing treat on a warm summer day. Pro tip: For all these
recipes, I use a smaller NutriBullet blender. A big countertop blender is
unnecessary, unwieldy, and leaves too much of your coffee goodness stuck
to the sides of the blender jar.
COFFEE-CACAO SIPPER
Prepare yourself for an intense chocolate experience with a hint of java.
The Ceylon cinnamon helps control blood sugar, and though the collagen is
optional, I recommend it for active individuals. The cardamom or rosemary
is also optional but will enhance the coffee’s antioxidant properties.•

12 to 16 ounces brewed coffee, hot
• 1 scoop unflavored collagen peptides (optional)
• 2 tablespoons cacao powder
--- END PAGE 694 ---

--- PAGE 695 ---
• 1 tablespoon almond or other nut butter
• 1 tablespoon coconut butter or coconut manna
• 1 teaspoon Ceylon cinnamon
• Drop of butterscotch toffee–flavored or vanilla-flavored liquid stevia
• Pinch of cardamom or dried ground rosemary (optional)
Place all the ingredients except the toppings in a blender and puree
until smooth, adding water and ice to achieve your desired texture.
After blending, top with or stir in the cacao nibs and unsweetened
coconut flakes.
CRUNCHY COFFEE FROSTY
This drink is like a milkshake-coffee combo with a bit of a superfood crunch
at the end. I’ll occasionally break off a few chunks of a nice, very dark
chocolate bar and stir that in instead of the cacao nibs.•

8 to 12 ounces brewed coffee, chilled
• 4 ounces full-fat coconut milk or coconut cream
• 2 tablespoons cacao powder
• 1 teaspoon ground Ceylon cinnamon
• Drop of butterscotch toffee–flavored or vanilla-flavored liquid stevia
• Cacao nibs, for topping
• Unsweetened coconut flakes, for topping
Place the ingredients in a blender and blend for 60 to 90 seconds,
until well combined and smooth. If you dig these recipes, check out
Boundless Cookbook and Boundless Kitchen for plenty more.
GHEE-COCONUT-CACAO COFFEE
This wonderful morning brew keeps me satiated for hours, and the cacao
offers a nice boost of dopamine, too. I occasionally use two packets of Four
--- END PAGE 695 ---

--- PAGE 696 ---
Sigmatic mushroom extract instead of coffee.•

8 ounces brewed coffee, hot
• 2 tablespoons cacao tea (I recommend the MiCacao brand, which is a
delicious mix of cacao shells and nibs)
• 1 tablespoon coconut butter or coconut manna
• 1 tablespoon ghee (optional, but if you don’t use it, I’d double up on the
coconut butter or coconut manna)
• Drop of butterscotch toffee–flavored or vanilla-flavored liquid stevia (I
prefer Omica Organics)
Place the ingredients in a blender and blend for 1 minute, until smooth
and oh-so-frothy. Oh, and be careful when you open the lid: this stuff
can get a bit fizzy under pressure. Just ask my wife, who has—perhaps
more than once—had to help me clean a coffee explosion off the
kitchen walls.
3. IMPLEMENT A CYCLIC KETOGENIC APPROACH.
Unless you’re using a ketogenic diet to treat a health condition such as
epilepsy or Alzheimer’s, you don’t necessarily need to stay in ketosis
indefinitely. Occasional and even regular dips into ketosis via strategies
like fasting, occasional carbohydrate refeeds, and carb cycling are
sufficient for providing the benefits of a ketogenic diet without requiring
you to eliminate carbs for months at a time. While you can, especially if
you aren’t a hard-charging athlete, certainly remain in a state of ketosis for
years at a time without experiencing any adverse effects (assuming you eat
a healthy ketogenic diet that includes plant foods), you can also get the
same benefits from brief, frequent forays into ketosis.
For example, you can consume all of your carbohydrates at the end of
the day, especially if you have a hard exercise session in the late afternoon
--- END PAGE 696 ---

--- PAGE 697 ---
or early evening. This exercise session ensures you are highly sensitive to
glucose, so that the glucose you do eat is stored as muscle glycogen. If you
fast for twelve to sixteen hours after this meal, you will still be able to
enjoy the fat-burning and brain-boosting benefits of ketosis without
depleting your energy. Many of my athletic clients perform evening carb
refeeds of up to 200 g of carbohydrates every day and spend most of their
time in ketosis. Most of my other clients perform at least a weekly carb
refeed, typically on their most physically active day of the week to reduce
any excess glucose response.
The Carnivore Diet
The carnivore diet falls into the same general category as the ketogenic diet
because it is a very-low-carbohydrate protocol that can potentially set you
up for many of the same deficits or issues people experience when going
keto. The difference between a carnivore diet and a ketogenic diet is that
although a carnivore diet can (and should) be ketogenic, it is higher in
protein and lower in (or devoid of) many of the common staples of a
ketogenic diet, such as coconut oil, seeds, and nuts.
On a strict carnivore diet, one consumes meat (preferably nose-to-tail), fish,
water, and little else, although some variations allow for animal-derived
foods such as butter, dairy, and eggs. So breakfast might be a cut of wild
salmon, lunch a large rib eye, and dinner a serving of rack of lamb.
However, eating exclusively meat can disrupt your microbiome, particularly
because the lack of fiber can cause a shortage of short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs), which your gut bacteria use as fuel to maintain the integrity of the
intestinal wall. Research has shown that an all-meat diet can lead to SCFA
deficits. But an interesting study found that cheetahs are able to ferment
collagen from bones and cartilage into SCFAs; humans on a carnivore diet
who consume bone broth, bone marrow, and other cartilaginous sources,
such as many of the newer bone broth powders with added cartilage, may
be able to do the same.
--- END PAGE 697 ---

--- PAGE 698 ---
In addition, many of the benefits of fiber are attributable to its fermentation
by bacteria that produce SCFAs, especially one called butyrate, in the colon.
However, it turns out that SCFAs have metabolic properties that are very
similar to those of a ketone called beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB). In the
presence of low carbohydrate intake, the liver’s production of BHB may
reduce or eliminate the need for butyrate, which is produced from a higher-
fiber diet. This can be especially good news for people who experience gas,
bloating, or other gastrointestinal distress from a high consumption of
seeds, nuts, grains, or vegetables (particularly roughage and raw veggies).
Therefore, a well-formulated ketogenic or low-carbohydrate carnivore diet
may provide many of the benefits of fiber, without a high carbohydrate
intake or the unpleasant side effects that some people experience from high
fiber intake. In other words, if you are in nutritional ketosis from a ketogenic
or carnivore diet, it may not be necessary to consume a lot of fiber to
achieve the health effects attributed to fiber.
However, one recent meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies found that
higher fiber intakes were associated with a reduced risk of mortality from all
causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer, according to the dose-response
analyses. Each 10 g increase in total daily fiber intake (up to 40 g) was
associated with a 15 percent, 20 percent, and 10 percent lower risk of all-
cause mortality, CVD mortality, and cancer mortality, respectively. This is
one of many studies that suggest the near-elimination of fiber may not be
doing you many favors in the longevity department.
Another recent longevity study used methylation data to show that a high
polyphenol intake can slow aging. Participants consumed foods like green
shakes, walnuts, berries, and green tea and reduced red meat intake, once
again highlighting the fact that eliminating certain key food compounds
from a diet may actually accelerate aging. Could eating bone, cartilage, and
ketones mitigate these issues? It’s never been studied.
Next, since red meat is high in the amino acids cysteine, tryptophan, and
methionine, which in excess can be pro-cancer and pro-aging, anyone on the
carnivore diet should prioritize getting adequate glycine, proline, and
hydroxyproline, all of which can balance out the other amino acids and
support a strong gut lining. This is another good reason to consume bone
broth, collagen, glycine, essential amino acids, and organ meats, which are
high in these particular amino acids.
--- END PAGE 698 ---

--- PAGE 699 ---
Finally, because it includes so little (or no) plant matter, the carnivore diet
tends to be low in vitamins C and E, and, if dairy is not included, also vitamin
K2 and calcium. If a carnivore diet doesn’t include organ meats, it also
becomes low in vitamin A, folate, manganese, and magnesium, which are
crucial compounds for normal, healthy metabolic function.
In reality, it is rare to find a long-lived, healthy population that subsists
entirely on meat, especially muscle meat. For example, several Asian, Latin
American, and African tribal cultures that are often thought of as
carnivorous actually consume the intestines of ruminant animals like goats,
sheep, deer, and cows, which contain high amounts of the vegetables and
fiber that those animals consumed—a literal stomach salad! These include
dishes such as the Spanish zarajos, the Filipino dinuguan, the Korean
gopchang, and the Latin American chinchulines.
Many argue that some ancestral populations were carnivorous. While it’s
true that many of our ancestors thrived on large quantities of animal
products, every single one of the commonly cited carnivorous groups also
took significant advantage of plant foods. For example, as my friend Chris
Kresser notes in his excellent write-up on the carnivore diet:•

The nomads of Mongolia ate plenty of meat and dairy products but
consumed wild onions and garlic, tubers and roots, seeds, and berries.•

Gaucho Brazilians consumed mostly beef but supplemented their diet
with yerba mate, a tea rich in vitamins, minerals, and phytonutrients.•

The Maasai, Rendille, and Samburu tribes of East Africa primarily
consumed meat, milk, and blood but occasionally ate herbs and tree
barks. Women and older men in these communities consumed ample
amounts of fruit, tubers, and honey.•

The Russian Arctic Chukotka thrived on fish, caribou, and marine
animals but always paired these animal foods with local roots, leafy
greens, berries, or seaweed.•

The Sioux of South Dakota ate large amounts of buffalo but also
consumed wild fruit, nuts, and seeds that they came across as they
hunted buffalo herds.•

The Canadian Inuit subsisted primarily on walrus, whale meat, seal, and
fish but also foraged wild berries, lichens, and sea vegetables and
fermented many of these plant foods as a preservation method.
--- END PAGE 699 ---

--- PAGE 700 ---
Granted, one could argue that many of these populations turned to these
plants only in the absence of animal foods, and that they—and modern
humans—could thrive on eating fish and animals nose-to-tail in the absence
of such plant matter. However, this may not be sustainable for the planet,
accessible for many people, or enjoyable (since it would require getting rid
of a rich, tasty, and satisfying tradition of consuming plant compounds such
as coffee, red wine, sourdough bread, sweet potato fries, beet salad with
goat cheese, and all of your other favorite foods that are plant derived).
Finally, researcher Richard Wrangham presents good evidence that the
relatively large brain and small gut of the human didn’t happen from eating
more meat (which the carnivore diet enthusiasts propose) but from eating
tubers and root vegetables.
All things considered, if I were to eat a carnivore diet, I would not only
prioritize organ meats, skin, gristle, bone marrow, and bone broth, but I
would also add:
• Small amounts of root vegetables and tubers, along with pureed,
mashed, or canned pumpkin and sweet potato purees, preferably
skipping the skins of these compounds and any excess fiber
• Homemade fermented yogurt made from coconut milk and the L. reuteri
probiotic (see chapter 15 for a recipe)
• Raw, organic honey as a sweetener
• Small, antioxidant-rich, low-sugar berries, such as blueberries,
lingonberries, bilberries, and blackberries
• Bitter, tannin-rich teas and organic coffee
• Organic dried insects such as crickets, grasshoppers, caterpillars, and
ants (which have extremely high nutritional value and can be purchased
from websites such as BenGreenfieldFitness.com/edibleinsects)
• Seeds and nuts, if tolerated by the gut and prepared via the ancestral
practices of soaking, fermenting, or sprouting
• Sprouts and microgreens
• Nutrient-dense vegetable powders that offer plenty of phytonutrients
without excess roughage and fiber, such as Dr. Thomas Cowan’s heirloom
vegetable powders
• Twelve-to-sixteen-hour daily intermittent fasting to ensure that mTOR
pathways aren’t excessively activated
--- END PAGE 700 ---

--- PAGE 701 ---
• Consumption of my friend Dr. Joseph Mercola’s “autophagy tea” before
my nightly fast, to limit mTOR activation and increase autophagy (1
teaspoon pau d’arco powdered tea, ½ teaspoon hydroxycitrate and
garcinia (HCA/garcinia powder), ½ teaspoon quercetin powder, ½
teaspoon glycine powder, ½ teaspoon chamomile powder)
For a deep dive into the ins and outs and dos and don’ts of a properly
structured nose-to-tail carnivore diet, including its sustainability, ethics, and
my own approach to this diet, please listen to my interview with Dr. Paul
Saladino at BenGreenfieldLife.com/carnivore.
4. GET GOOD SLEEP.
Sleep helps regulate cortisol levels, which rise as thyroid hormone levels
drop in response to carbohydrate restriction. As you sleep, levels of the
fat-burning hormones leptin and adiponectin rise, which further stabilizes
appetite and improves your adaptation to a fat-based diet. Review chapter
7 for recommendations on optimizing your sleep.
5. PERFORM LIGHT EXERCISE FOR A FEW DAYS.
Hard exercise elevates cortisol levels, which are already elevated from the
process of adapting to a ketogenic diet. Since excessively high cortisol
levels can signal insulin to shovel the food you eat into fat cells (which is
--- END PAGE 701 ---

--- PAGE 702 ---
the opposite of what you want to achieve with a ketogenic diet), perform
lighter exercise sessions until you adapt to burning fat. Do some yoga, hit
the sauna, go for a swim or paddleboard session, or embark on an easy
sunshine walk or hike. Incidentally, if you perform this activity in a fasted
state before eating breakfast, it will boost your fat-burning capacities even
more and make your shift into ketosis go more smoothly.
While you don’t want to overdo any hard exercise sessions, lifting
heavy weights can help prevent loss of muscle on a high-fat, lower-protein
ketogenic diet. Lifting weights sends signals to your muscles to enter an
anabolic, muscle-building state without taking you out of ketosis. Ideally,
these initial weight-lifting sessions should be short and intense rather
than high-rep or high-volume.
6. TAKE ACTIVATED CHARCOAL.
Adipose tissue can act as a storage depot for toxins like molds, BPA, and
pesticides. As you burn stored body fat while on a ketogenic diet, these
toxins can be released back into your bloodstream and, if left alone, can be
reabsorbed into more sensitive tissues like the brain and other vital
organs. Consuming activated charcoal, which binds to toxins, will help
your body flush these toxins out. (Chapter 13 also describes other effective
methods for truly detoxing your body as you burn fat.)
7. TAKE EXOGENOUS KETONE SUPPLEMENTS.
By definition, the goal of a ketogenic diet is to get your body to generate
ketones, molecules produced during fat-burning that your body uses for
fuel. But you can also mainline exogenous ketones into your body with the
use of ketone supplements. These can help reduce fatigue and boost
energy by quickly raising ketone levels in your blood. While exogenous
ketones aren’t a replacement for a true state of nutritional ketosis, since
you aren’t necessarily limiting sugar and carbohydrates and instead are
--- END PAGE 702 ---

--- PAGE 703 ---
just drinking your way into ketosis, they can help you get through the keto
flu during the first few days or weeks of a carbohydrate-restricted diet. If
possible, choose liquid ketones over powdered ketone salts. The powdered
versions are made by adding ketones to salts, such as sodium, calcium,
magnesium, and potassium, and the amounts you need to consume to get
into ketosis can cause gut distress due to the high salt intake.
A PLANT-BASED DIET
Heavy consumption of animal products, such as the steaks, burgers,
chicken breasts, giant slabs of fish, and massive omelets that often
characterize a Western diet, can certainly be detrimental to the
environment and, particularly when it comes to high intake of meat, may
even be detrimental to your health or longevity. For example, people who
are overmethylators may not be able to consume as much red meat due to
meat’s high content of methyl groups (I’ll explore this in more detail in
chapter 19). Several observational studies suggest that eating a lot of red
meat may increase the risk of diabetes, heart disease, certain types of
cancer, and premature death. Admittedly, observational studies cannot
prove causality, and scientists are still not entirely sure if high red meat
intake itself is harmful or if other factors related to high red meat intake
are responsible, such as an overall lower-quality diet, low consumption of
fruits and vegetables, or high intake of heavily processed meats or fast
food. Nevertheless, certain components of red meat, especially those
found in processed or overcooked meat, are indeed linked to adverse
health effects. While researchers have hypothesized that eating plenty of
herbs, spices, fruits, and vegetables may partially offset the harmful effects
of high red meat intake, this doesn’t justify a 16-ounce rib-eye steak every
night for dinner just so long as you have a side of kale.
--- END PAGE 703 ---

--- PAGE 704 ---
One controversial study reported that a diet too rich in meat, eggs,
milk, and cheese could be as bad for you as smoking. High intake of dietary
animal protein in people under sixty-five was linked to a fourfold increase
in risk of death from cancer or diabetes and nearly double the risk of dying
from any cause over an eighteen-year period. These negative effects were
almost eliminated when the protein came from plant sources, such as
legumes and whole grains. Based on results from such studies, Valter
Longo, a fasting and nutrition researcher and director of the Longevity
Institute at the University of Southern California, advises that people
should restrict themselves to no more than 0.8 g of protein a day for every
kilogram of body weight.
Finally, a dominant characteristic of many Blue Zones residents and
ancestral hunter-gatherer tribes is that during certain parts of the year,
meat or excess protein is restricted, similar to the “Meatless Monday”
habit many diet-conscious health enthusiasts have adopted.
So, should you not eat meat and instead adopt a plant-based diet?
While eating only plants may seem like an effective option, a diet devoid
of meat is accompanied by several problems. First, it is just as easy to eat
poorly on a plant-based diet as it is on an omnivorous diet. Vegetarians
can gorge themselves on ice cream, Twinkies, Taco Bell, Domino’s pizza,
and McDonald’s milkshakes all day long. Even vegans can stuff their faces
with crap like fast-food french fries, potato chips, and highly processed
“meat” products made from soy and wheat and still technically be eating a
plant-based diet. Second, certain nutrients can only be acquired via the
consumption of animal products, including these:
• Creatine, which increases muscular power output and enhances
cognitive function
• Vitamin B , which maintains healthy myelin sheaths to protect your
12neurons
--- END PAGE 704 ---

--- PAGE 705 ---
• DHA, which is vital for proper cognitive development and cell
membrane function
• Carnosine, which enhances antioxidant activity in the brain to protect
it against oxidative damage
• Taurine, which plays a role in preventing heart disease
If you are a vegetarian, you are likely missing out on at least one of
these critical nutrients, and if you eat the types of junk foods listed above,
not only are you creating nutritional deficiencies in your diet, but you are
filling those gaps with inflammatory compounds like rancid vegetable oils
and excessive levels of sugar.
But let’s say you already eat a healthy vegetarian diet, with an
emphasis on real, whole foods. What should you do to make sure you’re
getting all the nutrients your body needs? Here are my top ten
suggestions.
Try to Include Eggs and Dairy
While eggs and dairy will break a strict vegan diet, they can fill in plenty of
nutritional gaps without requiring you to eat meat. Eggs provide long-
chain omega-3 fatty acids, including ALA. The best eggs are pastured or
from chickens on a diet designed to boost levels of omega-3s. Eggs also
provide the most bioavailable food-based protein on the planet. Our
bodies absorb and use 50 percent of the protein from eggs, the highest
proportion of all food-based protein sources. Eggs contain high levels of
choline, which is necessary for the metabolism of fat in the liver, as well as
vitamin B and retinol, a form of vitamin A that our bodies use far more
12 readily than plant-based vitamin A.
Assuming you don’t have a dairy intolerance, dairy is a potent source
of healthy fatty acids, minerals like calcium, and highly bioavailable
--- END PAGE 705 ---

--- PAGE 706 ---
proteins like whey and casein. If you do have a sensitivity to milk, try
consuming fermented dairy products, such as yogurt, kefir, and hard aged
cheeses like Pecorino Romano, Gouda, and Parmigiano-Reggiano. The
fermentation process breaks down lactose and adds probiotics and creates
new nutrients like vitamin K , which shuttles calcium into your teeth and
2bones. Vitamin K is particularly critical for a healthy heart and skeletal
system and is notoriously absent in a plant-based diet. Especially if you are
forgoing dairy, I highly recommend supplementing vitamin K. For a full
vitamin K complex, I’m a fan of Tri-K by Designs For Health, which is a
blend of vitamins K and K , along with geranylgeraniol (GG), that works
1 2to promote optimal delivery of vitamin K (in the form of MK-4) to
2 tissues, supporting normal blood clotting, bone mineralization, and
arterial elasticity. This is important because both forms of vitamin K are
important to overall health. Vitamin K is the naturally occurring form
1 found predominantly in leafy green vegetables, whereas vitamin K (as
2 MK-4) is found in pastured eggs, grass-fed butter, meat, and some cheeses.
Vitamin K is essential for normal blood clotting, while vitamin K (as MK-
1 2 4) activates a protein that binds newly absorbed calcium and helps
integrate it into bones and teeth while discouraging calcium deposition in
the arteries.
Take Taurine, Creatine, and Carnosine
These micronutrients are found only in meat and animal foods. Taurine is
an amino acid that fights free radicals and protects your vision and is
crucial for brain development, healthy blood pressure, and blood glucose
stability. Your body can synthesize taurine from a combination of other
amino acids, but this can be difficult for vegan athletes to pull off in
adequate volume. There are vegan taurine sources out there, such as NOW
--- END PAGE 706 ---

--- PAGE 707 ---
Foods Vegan Taurine Powder (trust me, it’s a much healthier alternative to
Red Bull). I recommend 1 g per day.
Creatine plays a crucial role in the production of ATP, the molecule
that supplies energy to all the cells in your body. Naturally produced in the
body from other amino acids, creatine is also found in meats, eggs, and
fish and is commonly deficient in active people, the elderly, and people
who eat a primarily plant-based diet. With increases in exercise or muscle
damage, your physiological need for creatine is increased. Research
suggests that creatine supplementation can increase your muscles’ work
capacity and power output while enhancing your lean body mass and
physical endurance. Outside of the athletic population, creatine has been
shown to reduce muscle breakdown and even support cognitive function,
especially in the elderly. Because creatine stores high-energy phosphate
groups in the form of phosphocreatine, it releases energy to aid cellular
function during stress. This effect causes strength increases after creatine
supplementation and can also benefit the brain, bones, muscles, and liver.
I recommend 5 g per day, preferably in one to three doses and mixed into
warm water or another warm liquid to maximize absorption. You don’t
need anything fancy: dirt-cheap creatine monohydrate will do.
Carnosine is made of two amino acids, histidine and alanine. Most
carnosine research has shown its potential as an antiglycation agent and
athletic performance aid. A carnosine deficiency can lead to premature
aging, impaired mental health, decreased muscle tone, and vulnerability to
certain diseases, such as cancer and diabetes. Like creatine and taurine,
carnosine is not produced by plants. Instead, it’s synthesized in animal
tissue, particularly brain and muscle. In fact, one study demonstrated that
vegetarians have less than 50 percent of the amount of carnosine in their
muscle tissue that omnivores do. The limiting factor in carnosine
production is the amino acid beta-alanine, and while you can supplement
--- END PAGE 707 ---

--- PAGE 708 ---
with carnosine, beta-alanine supplements have also been shown to
increase muscle levels of carnosine on their own.
Take Niacin and Thiamine
Niacin, otherwise known as vitamin B , is notoriously lacking in plant-
3based diets. Severe niacin deficiency can cause dermatitis, dementia,
diarrhea, and death (a cluster of effects known as the “4 Ds” of the disease
pellagra). Thiamine, or vitamin B , is necessary for proper neuronal
1function and even digestion. The most effective vegetarian sources of
niacin and thiamin are peanuts and sunflower seeds, but to get enough of
these nutrients from these sources, you would need to consume quantities
that can lead to other health problems, such as reduced absorption of iron,
zinc, and calcium due to high levels of phytic acid. Alternatively, you can
eat mushrooms to get your daily niacin. For example, two cups of grilled
portobello mushrooms provides over 75 percent of your daily niacin
requirement. However, more niacin is not better: high levels of niacin, an
essential B vitamin, may raise the risk of heart disease by triggering
inflammation and damaging blood vessels, according to new research. Try
not to exceed 300 mg per day of supplemental niacin.
Consume Algae
While eggs contain high levels of long-chain omega-3 fatty acids like ALA,
there are vegan forms of omega-3, such as algae in the form of spirulina
and chlorella, that provide some EPA and DHA. These fatty acids are
critical for neuronal growth, cellular function, and cognitive development.
Take Iodine
--- END PAGE 708 ---

--- PAGE 709 ---
Plant-based diets are particularly lacking in iodine. The best natural and
vegetarian sources are sea vegetables, such as nori, kelp, kombu, and dulse.
In a pinch, you can consume a daily dose of liquid iodine such as Lugol’s
(aim for 400 to 1,200 mcg).
Properly Prepare Grains, Legumes, and
Nuts
Fermentation and soaking or sprouting can make grains, legumes, and
nuts more digestible and their nutrients more bioavailable. See
BoundlessBook.com/19 for instructions.
Maximize Iron Absorption
Iron found in plants is less bioavailable than the iron in meat. You can
improve iron absorption by consuming vitamin C. Combine foods such as
Swiss chard, spinach, beet greens, lentils, beans, and quinoa with foods
like tomatoes, bell peppers, lemon juice, strawberries, oranges, papaya,
kiwis, pineapple, and grapefruit. You should also moderate coffee and tea
consumption with iron-rich foods since both of these beverages reduce
iron absorption. It’s important to know that one cause of chronic iron
deficiency anemia is low levels of copper. This is because about 90 percent
of copper in the blood is bound to ceruloplasmin, with the rest bound to
albumin and amino acids. Ceruloplasmin oxidizes (removes an electron
from) iron so that it can be transported by transferrin (an iron transport
protein) and used to form new red blood cells. Less copper means less
ceruloplasmin, so if you want to maintain healthy iron levels, you can use
a copper supplement such as Pure Encapsulations copper glycinate and/or
prioritize copper-rich foods such as bee pollen, oysters, nuts, seeds,
shiitake mushrooms, lobster, liver, leafy greens, and dark chocolate.
--- END PAGE 709 ---

--- PAGE 710 ---
Take Vitamin D
Cholecalciferol, or vitamin D , is essential for bone health. Although
3vitamin D is found in plants in the form of vitamin D , it is nowhere near
2as potent as vitamin D , which is the form found in fish and dairy
3products. Intake of vitamin D on a plant-based diet is often below the
recommended range, and this inadequate intake can reduce bone mineral
density, depress immune system function, and cause higher levels of
inflammation. If you want to keep your bones and teeth strong and give
yourself adequate hormone and steroid precursors, I recommend 35 IU of
vitamin D per pound of body weight per day. This could be tough if you
3 are a strict vegan, because most supplemental vitamin D is derived from
3 wool, and most vegan versions contain vitamin D , the less potent form.
2Garden of Life is one of the few vegan D brands out there. Although it’s
3 more expensive, a newer form of vitamin D called calcifediol, found in the
supplement Dvelop, can increase vitamin D levels up to three times faster
than regular vitamin D but is not vegan.3 
Take Vitamin B12
Vitamin B is vital for cell division, metabolism, and maintenance of the
12 nervous system. Vegans have been shown to be significantly deficient in
vitamin B . This can cause weakness, numbness, and an increase in an
12amino acid called homocysteine that can increase the risk of heart disease,
dementia, and Alzheimer’s. B deficiency can also cause peripheral
12 neuropathy and cognitive impairment, eventually leading to Alzheimer’s,
dementia, and Parkinson’s. I recommend a sublingual liposomal vitamin
B spray for fast absorption of this vitamin.12
--- END PAGE 710 ---

--- PAGE 711 ---
Be Careful with Soy
In addition to often being genetically modified, unfermented soy contains
digestive irritants and digestive enzyme inhibitors like lectins, phytates,
and protease inhibitors. Sure, most of these problematic compounds can
be rendered harmless by fermenting soy and consuming it in forms such
as miso, natto, and tempeh, but it’s best to avoid processed foods and
unfermented forms of soy, such as edamame, soy milk, and tofu. Soy also
contains high levels of compounds called goitrogens that prevent your
thyroid from using iodine correctly. Consuming a lot of soy could lead to
hypothyroidism. Finally, soy contains plant estrogens in the form of
isoflavones, which can raise estrogen levels and reduce testosterone levels.
Women with estrogen dominance and men and women with testosterone
deficiencies certainly shouldn’t eat soy.
It is certainly possible to thrive on a plant-based diet. You just need to
be careful to fill in the gaps and pay far greater attention to proper food
preparation and combinations so that you unlock and consume the
vitamins, minerals, and nutrients that are notoriously lacking in a modern
plant-based diet.
In addition to those listed above, several other nutrients, from zinc to
selenium to glycine, are also often absent in a plant-based diet, but the
guidelines above address most of the major compounds that research has
shown to be lacking in a plant-based diet.
THERE’S NO ONE-SIZE-FITS-ALL
DIET
Even outside a specific diet like keto, which doesn’t work for people who
have certain genetic factors, examples of individual, idiosyncratic
--- END PAGE 711 ---

--- PAGE 712 ---
reactions to foods abound. At the beginning of this chapter, I described my
own reaction to the oxalates in nuts and explained how some people don’t
benefit from supplementing with vitamin C, vitamin A, or riboflavin—and
for some people, supplementing with vitamin D can be dangerous.
Another example is sulfur. Foods rich in sulfur—including garlic,
cruciferous vegetables (such as kale, broccoli, and cauliflower), and egg
yolks—are often touted as some of the healthiest compounds you can eat,
and it’s true that sulfur is important for detoxification, gut-lining integrity,
lowered risk of cancer, and oxidation reduction. But unfortunately, some
people may be “over-sulfured,” a concept explored in the book The
Wildatarian Diet by Teri Cochrane, and this state is further aggravated by
the nearly inescapable presence of the chemical glyphosate on foods.
Typically, sulfur reactions are due to a variation in CBS—not the TV
channel, but a gene family that provides instructions for the enzyme
cystathionine beta-synthase, which plays an important role in the
breakdown and metabolism of sulfur. Telltale signs of sulfur sensitivity
include deleterious reactions to garlic, eggs, wine, and dried fruits that
have sulfites added to them, along with joint pain, inflammatory bowel
disease (Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis), irritable bowel syndrome,
and neurotransmitter imbalances. As you can imagine, this is a serious
issue, especially considering that several popular dietary plans encourage
us to consume as many sulfur-containing foods as possible, and that
juicing and blending with sulfur-rich vegetables such as kale and cabbage
is quite common and encouraged. In other words, while the advice to eat
more sulfur may be fine for many people, those with genetic
vulnerabilities in sulfur metabolism can be harmed by this dietary
practice. (For more on sulfur sensitivities, look up the works of Dr. Greg
Nigh at ImmersionHealthPDX.com and Heidi Turner at FoodLogic.org.)
Or consider glutathione. Many medical practitioners do not realize
that the body carefully monitors and regulates glutathione levels. When
--- END PAGE 712 ---

--- PAGE 713 ---
glutathione is consumed, the body’s feedback systems sense that it has
plenty of glutathione on board, so it can stop making glutathione through
the process of methylation. This means people who have a genetic
susceptibility for poor methylation, which can be tested for, can
unwittingly turn off their ability to methylate, which is counterproductive!
Another example of biochemical individuality (and one big reason
why, despite the prevalence of diet books, we have failed so miserably to
control the obesity epidemic) is the wild variation in blood sugar
responses to foods like cookies, bananas, sushi, and whole-grain bread.
The latest research on this phenomenon, detailed in nitty-gritty specifics
in Paleo icon Robb Wolf’s book Wired to Eat, suggests that the capacity to
extract energy from food differs dramatically from person to person
because the interactions between one’s genes, microbiome, diet,
environment, and lifestyle are extremely complex. It also suggests that
common measurements of the sugar content of foods, such as the
glycemic index, may be less useful than individualized measurements of
blood sugar responses to different foods.
One six-month study, called “Food4Me,” investigated 1,500
participants in seven European countries. The participants were randomly
divided into two groups: one was given personalized dietary advice based
on genetic data, and one was told to follow standard dietary prescriptions,
such as eating lots of fruits and vegetables (I have always been confused
about why pineapples and pears are lumped together with collard greens
and kale), lean meats (I run away from lean meat because I have never
once field-dressed an animal and found meat devoid of fat), and whole
grains (which can spike your blood sugar more than a Snickers bar). The
participants in the personalized diet group fared far better in terms of
important longevity blood biomarkers and weight than those in the one-
size-fits-all diet group.
--- END PAGE 713 ---

--- PAGE 714 ---
Coffee is another perfect example of why we need customized diets.
Current guidelines advise consuming no more than four or five cups of
coffee per day. This is fine for the subset of the population who are
genetically fast caffeine metabolizers, but for many people who have a
particular variant of a gene called CYP1A2, having more than two cups of
coffee per day vastly increases the risk of heart attack and hypertension.
Scientists are beginning to tease out all these connections and have
now linked at least thirty-eight genes to nutrient metabolism. Roger
Williams wasn’t aware of these genes when he wrote Biochemical
Individuality (although he hypothesized about genetic influence on the
propensity to thrive on specific diets), but they are now known to hinder
or help the absorption and metabolism of different nutrients. These genes
include MTHFR (folate metabolism), FTO (body weight and fat
composition), TCF7L2 (blood sugar regulation), APOE ε4 (cholesterol),
and FADS1 (fatty acid metabolism). This means that your genetic makeup,
microbiota, health history, and living environment all play a role in
determining whether you should consume more or less choline, vitamin C,
fatty acids, starches, caffeine, and folate.
From the failures of a high-fat diet to individual blood sugar responses
to carbohydrates and genetic variations in the need for major vitamins,
minerals, and nutrients, the importance of dietary customization is
enormous.
The million-dollar question is, how can you customize your diet?
HOW TO CUSTOMIZE YOUR DIET
We live in a magical modern era in which the same kind of self-
quantification and lab testing that highfalutin CEOs would have paid tens
of thousands of dollars for at fancy longevity institutes decades ago is now
available for the general population at a fraction of the cost. Let’s take a
--- END PAGE 714 ---

--- PAGE 715 ---
look at some of the best methods for figuring out how much carbohydrate,
fat, and protein you should eat, which supplements you should and should
not take, and how many calories you should consume.
Blood Testing
A good blood test can locate holes in your diet that need to be filled by
measuring health markers, such as blood sugar response to certain foods,
mineral status, thyroid status, cholesterol status, red and white blood cell
levels, vitamin B levels, acidity, alkalinity, and vitamin D status (vitamin D
can be toxic if your levels are adequate and you are simply taking it
because you heard you should). Some blood tests can even determine food
allergies and intolerances, although most of these are inaccurate and will
give you an exhaustive “false positive” list of foods you shouldn’t eat.
For blood tests, I recommend a comprehensive blood panel that goes
beyond what most doctors usually order, combined with a micronutrient
blood test. At BenGreenfieldLife.com, I have a helpful recommended
testing page that lays out the best options. For the advanced blood test,
you usually need to drive to a nearby lab for a blood draw, although
companies like Thorne are developing a state-of-the-art microneedle that
will allow you to test painlessly in the comfort of your own home. For food
allergies, the companies Cyrex and Zoomer offer the gold standard in
testing. After a simple blood test, rather than sending you a dizzying and
frustrating laundry list of hundreds of foods to avoid, they provide a list of
just a few foods to which you are guaranteed to be allergic or intolerant.
Stool Testing
Your blood won’t necessarily tell you what’s going on in your gut, but a
stool panel allows you to detect the presence or absence of certain types
--- END PAGE 715 ---

--- PAGE 716 ---
of bacteria, yeast, fungi, parasites, and digestive inflammation, all of which
can then be used to determine whether you need to take certain probiotics
or cleansing compounds or whether you should avoid fermentable
substances such as simple sugars, starches, and FODMAPs (review chapter
13 for information on FODMAPs). This type of test can be important
because poor digestion and nutritional malabsorption can lead to immune
dysfunction, nutritional insufficiencies, various chronic diseases, food
allergies, and other toxicities. The best one currently available is Genova
Diagnostics’ three-day GI Map since it tests on multiple days and allows
for glimpses into day-to-day fluctuation of gut health rather than
providing a one-time snapshot. This test provides what I consider to be
the most comprehensive look at the gut environment, parasites, and
bacterial balance, using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) laboratory
techniques to amplify DNA sequences, with results delivered within two
weeks.
For an even deeper dive into gut health, I recommend combining the
GI Map test with a gut microbiome analysis, which provides extensive raw
data that includes bacterial balance and the ability to screen for stealth
infections sometimes not detected by a PCR. One of the better tests on
the market is the Thorne Gut Health Test. For under $200, it provides a
metagenomics-based analysis of the gut, along with a detailed report that
includes microbial functions, vitamin biosynthesis, and short-chain fatty
acid–producing capacity. You can even download the raw data as an Excel
file, which allows you or your practitioner to look for bacterial balance and
other infections that other gut-screening methods may not detect. Results
take a bit longer: about six to eight weeks.
Saliva Testing
--- END PAGE 716 ---

--- PAGE 717 ---
You can test your DNA via a simple and inexpensive at-home saliva
collection. This is a good way to determine not only what your ancestors
traditionally ate but also how your genes affect everything from your
antioxidant needs to your blood sugar response to whether you’re
sensitive to lactose or gluten, and much more. While 23andMe primarily
delivers ancestry data along with a few health insights, you can download
your raw genetic data from their website and then upload the results to a
more in-depth and extremely affordable service such as MyHeritage,
StrateGene, Promethease, Genomelink, or GEDmatch to take a deeper
dive into your health-related genetic results. You can also go to
BenGreenfieldLife.com and listen to my podcast interviews with the
physicians at companies such as Thorne, Tree of Life, and Youtrients,
which, for a slightly higher price, test for a far larger number of genetic
variables called SNPs. Practitioners like Dr. Ben Lynch at StrateGene, Dr.
Bob Miller at Tree of Life, and Dr. Mansoor Mohammed at the DNA
Company in Ontario, Canada, can help you make even more sense of the
data and personalize your diet based on your genes in a very precise
manner.
Urine Testing
A urine test called an organic amino acids evaluation is optional but can be
helpful for identifying small nutritional deficiencies that can add up and
become detrimental over time. (For example, a slight drop in uric acid
excretion over ten years can mean getting or not getting painful gout in
your older years.) These nutritional deficiencies can cause a variety of
chronic health conditions, and if you struggle with poor sleep, less-than-
stellar workouts, brain fog, appetite cravings, sore joints, or any other
mysterious problems, this profile can help uncover issues with
micronutrients and other small components that a basic blood test won’t
--- END PAGE 717 ---

--- PAGE 718 ---
reveal. You can determine your levels of organic acids, fatty acids, amino
acids, vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants via an in-home urinalysis and
blood-drop test, then use that information to prevent the types of
problems mentioned above. I am also a fan of the DUTCH urine test,
which can give you an accurate analysis of testosterone, estrogen, cortisol,
melatonin, DHEA, and other hormones.
Exercise Testing
A resting metabolic rate test determines the amount of energy (in
calories) your body uses while at rest. This measurement is calculated by
analyzing the amount of oxygen your body uses and the amount of carbon
dioxide your body produces. Almost all the energy your body produces is
created through aerobic (oxygen-utilizing) metabolism: oxygen is
combined with carbohydrates and fats to make ATP (cellular energy) in
your body’s tissues, and carbon dioxide is produced as a metabolic by-
product. An exercise metabolic test can tell the same kind of data relevant
to exercise: for example, how many calories you burn at any given heart
rate. Armed with both sets of information, you can figure out precisely
how many calories you need to eat to maintain a healthy weight and
perform at peak capacity. I recommend you Google the name of your city
with the phrase “metabolic testing.” Many universities, health clubs, and
medical institutions offer these tests to the general public, and newer at-
home breath devices like the Lumen offer a resting version.
The Testing Protocol I Recommend
This may seem like a dizzying array of tests, but it isn’t that much once
you systematize them. For example, I recommend the following protocol
for everyone:
--- END PAGE 718 ---

--- PAGE 719 ---
• Comprehensive blood test and micronutrient blood test one to four
times yearly
• Gut test and microbiome test once yearly, or when symptoms arise
• Urine test (if you have symptoms the other tests can’t identify)
• Metabolic test once in your lifetime (or when your body composition
or fitness dramatically changes)
• DNA test once in your lifetime
Yes, the total cost for this range of tests may be higher than for a
typical fifteen-minute visit to your overworked doctor. But these costs
pale in comparison to what you will shell out for medical care and
insurance during your lifetime if you accumulate nutritional deficiencies;
chronic diseases, such as obesity, cancer, diabetes, Alzheimer’s, dementia,
or colitis; constipation; and the host of other nasties that can manifest in
the human body when the fuel you give it isn’t tailored to your
biochemical individuality. In addition (perhaps this is my inner propeller-
hat-donning nerd talking), it’s pretty cool to keep your finger on the pulse
of everything going on inside your body, provided you resist the
temptation to become obsessive-compulsive by adding a microgram scale
to the kitchen counter for weighing every last shred of Parmesan cheese.
I will take a much deeper dive into the world of self-quantification in
chapter 16, and in chapter 21, I’ll introduce many of the diets that I
endorse (along with sample dishes for breakfast, lunch, dinner, and
snacks) and explain how to decide, based on your lab tests, which diet is
perfect for you.
YOUR DIET AND YOUR
ENVIRONMENT
--- END PAGE 719 ---

--- PAGE 720 ---
No discussion of diet would be complete without mentioning the impact
your dietary choices have on the environment. Harvesting and preparation
techniques, treatment of animals, food processing, pesticide use, the
harvesting and shipping scalability of different foods (like tree nuts and
eggs), and growing methods all significantly impact the local and global
environment, which, in turn, impacts the quality of the food we eat.
Indeed, experts suggest that, in America, food production and
consumption practices have a greater effect on our well-being than any
other human activity.
Contrary to popular belief, healthy food isn’t simply synonymous with
high-quality, nutrient-dense food. Instead, an ideal healthy diet needs to
be part of a sustainable production and consumption system that benefits
not only human health but also the natural resources involved, the
ecosystem in which the food is produced, and the food sources
themselves. With a finite amount of land, water, and resources, along with
a growing population and a deteriorating food system modeled around
mass production, the need to produce and consume food in a more
sustainable way has never been more pressing. If we accept the status quo,
we will likely remain in an ecological overshoot until the earth can no
longer handle it.
One of the most useful concepts I discovered while researching this
issue came from Christian Peters, a nutrition professor at Tufts
University. According to Peters, an ethical synergy occurs when a dietary
decision benefits both our health and the environment. An ethical
dilemma occurs when a dietary decision benefits personal health but is
detrimental to the environment. For example, consuming more legumes is
an ethical synergy: it would likely improve our health and allow us to be
more efficient with land and resources. Consuming fewer processed
sugars is also an ethical synergy because it would likely improve health
and reduce unnecessary land use. On the other hand, consuming more fish
--- END PAGE 720 ---

--- PAGE 721 ---
and fish oil is an ethical dilemma: it could potentially improve health but
would have a negative impact on fish populations and the environment,
especially if the fish and fish oil are not sustainably sourced, which most
are not. Increasing meat consumption is also an ethical dilemma: it could
potentially improve health (in certain people), but it also means using
resources more inefficiently, especially in a myopic era in which we do
things like eat only muscle meat rather than the entire animal, as our
ancestors used to, or stay closed-minded to alternative protein sources
such as algae or insects.
These concepts of ethical synergy and ethical dilemmas got me
thinking more about why people make certain food choices. I believe there
is a powerful factor that we are currently not harnessing to its full
potential, especially in the US: how our food choices affect the greater
good.
One of the most common problems I hear from my coaching clients is
that they lack the motivation each day to make the right nutritional
choices. I think this is because, in the nutrition arena, we often emphasize
our self-interest a little too much, which blinds us to the rest of the world.
Consider all the actions we do with the greater good in mind. We
donate blood; we volunteer; we bring meals to people who’ve recently lost
a loved one. We don’t do these things for money or celebrity status, and
we often don’t have to resort to white-knuckled willpower. We do them
because these behaviors align with the people we want to be and make us
feel more hopeful, grateful, needed, and inspired. And all of this points to
the powerful notion that when a cause is bigger than ourselves, we are
more likely to stick with it in the long term.
As a nutrition professional, I am often tempted to look at food through
a lens that considers only nutrients and calories. While these are indeed
important, I challenge you (and myself!) to broaden this perspective to
--- END PAGE 721 ---

--- PAGE 722 ---
include the environment as well. You can achieve this by implementing
the following strategies.
1. Identify Your Minimum Effective Dose of
Animal Products.
Unless you’re following a strict carnivore diet for something like
autoimmune issues, don’t myopically focus on animal foods as the only
way to get your protein and nutrients. Instead, focus on eating more
tubers, root vegetables, legumes, whole grains, and seeds. While they’re
nutrient-dense, tree nuts and eggs can pack more of an environment-
harming punch (especially when they aren’t organically grown tree nuts
and pasture-raised eggs), so consume only moderate amounts of these.
Don’t forget alternative protein sources, particularly insects, and
vegetarian strategies such as combining lentils and rice to get all nine
essential amino acids. Finally, sprouts can be a powerful nutritional
source. For example, the high-protein sprouting mix that I use from The
Sprouting Company contains fava bean, mung bean, and yellow pea and
offers up to 20 g in one serving of highly digestible sprouted seeds.
2. Minimize Food Waste.
Use leftovers, plan meals, compost your food scraps, freeze and dehydrate
foods, learn to can and/or ferment food, give food scraps to livestock or
pets, make trips to your local homeless shelter or soup kitchen to donate
extra food, and buy visually unappealing fruits and veggies (which are
higher in nutrients anyway). Minimize your intake of processed foods,
which cause metabolic food waste due to their relative lack of nutrients.
For example, after the big Thanksgiving feast, rather than scrapping all the
turkey bones, turkey liver, and turkey heart, I used the bones to make a
--- END PAGE 722 ---

--- PAGE 723 ---
giant vat of bone broth with black pepper, turmeric, salt, and saffron, and
then dredged the organ meats in coconut flour and butter and fried them
in olive oil. Remember that there is a creative and tasty way to eat just
about anything.
3. Eat a Variety of Foods.
Try new foods regularly. For example, when you go out to eat, order dishes
with strange or unfamiliar ingredients. Eating a variety of foods enhances
your likelihood of selecting a nutritionally adequate diet and increases the
likelihood that you won’t deplete one single food source (imagine what
would happen to the world’s spinach crops if everyone suddenly decided
the only dark leafy green they were going to eat in their salads was
spinach). Hunter-gatherer tribes and people in many longevity hot spots
around the world eat 130 to 150 different plant varieties and foods
throughout the year; most Westernized diets include a paltry 30 plant
species.
Getting Started
BoundlessBook.com/14 has links to plenty of websites that contain more
information and practical tips for implementing these and other
environmentally friendly sustainability practices. Here are a few to get you
started:
• Monterey Bay Aquarium Seafood Watch (SeafoodWatch.org) can help
you make more sustainable seafood choices.
• Water Footprint Calculator (WaterCalculator.org) can help you learn
more about how much water your household uses.
--- END PAGE 723 ---

--- PAGE 724 ---
• The Cornucopia Institute’s Organic Dairy Scorecard
(cornucopia.org/scorecard/dairy/) ranks dairy brands by sustainability.
• The Cornucopia Institute’s Organic Egg Scorecard
(cornucopia.org/scorecard/eggs/) ranks egg brands by sustainability.
• BuyingPoultry.com rates poultry products by how the animals are
treated.
• EatWild.com has a directory of local farms and ranches selling grass-
fed, humanely raised meat, eggs, and dairy.
• LocalHarvest.com helps you find local farms and farmers markets.
• BetterWorldShopper.org is a database that tracks companies in a range
of areas, including the environment and animal protection.
• CarboTax.org asks a series of questions to help you compare your
climate impact to that of the average American.
• The Global Footprint Network’s ecological footprint calculator
(footprintcalculator.org/signup) asks a series of questions to help you
identify your environmental footprint.
• Consumer Reports’ Green Choice initiative (ConsumerReports.org)
provides information on products’ environmental impact.
• The Climatarian Challenge app (LessMeatLessHeat.org/app) gives you
a budget of “carbon points,” calculates the carbon footprint of your
meals, and subtracts the appropriate number of points from your
budget—the goal is to get through a month on just the budgeted
points.
• Seatopia is a direct-to-consumer seafood subscription box of healthy,
sustainable farm-raised seafood that is certified mercury-safe, free
from antibiotics, and omega-rich.
• Ancient Crunch produces seed-oil-free tortilla chips and potato chips
with clean ingredients and minimal processing.
--- END PAGE 724 ---

--- PAGE 725 ---
WHAT ABOUT KIDS?
Feeding kids can be a daunting task. After all, they are not just miniature
adults. Their blood-brain barriers are far more permeable than those of
adults, they lay down new bone on a daily basis, their cells are rapidly
dividing, and their metabolisms are rampant. But kids do have the same
cellular metabolism mechanics as adults and require the same set of
nutrients that adults do, including the following.
Calcium
Kids produce new bone tissue on a daily basis. In fact, minimizing the
effects of age-related bone loss begins during childhood and particularly
puberty, when bone tissue undergoes massive spikes in growth. Kids from
four to eight years old need 1,000 mg of calcium per day, and kids from
nine to thirteen years old need 1,300 mg per day. It is crucial that calcium
be accompanied by adequate levels of vitamin D and vitamin K.
The source of calcium is also important. I personally was raised on a
half to full gallon of processed, homogenized, pasteurized 2 percent cow’s
milk each day, and I suffered gastric distress regularly as a child and
adolescent. In raising my own children, I have realized that kids (and
adults) digest organic raw dairy, goat’s milk, camel’s milk, and A2 dairy
(dairy that doesn’t have A1 protein, which some people are sensitive to)
far more easily than commercial cow’s milk, and without risk of gut
damage unless a true food allergy is present. The best sources of calcium
are sardines with the bones, hard cheeses like cheddar and pecorino, raw
milk, full-fat fermented dairy products like yogurt and kefir, and dark leafy
greens like collard greens, kale, and Swiss chard.
--- END PAGE 725 ---

--- PAGE 726 ---
Iodine
Iodine is an essential nutrient (meaning it is not produced by the body; it
must be ingested from an outside source) and is necessary for proper
thyroid hormone production. Thyroid hormone regulates growth factors,
such as growth hormone, that contribute to cognitive and physical growth.
Iodine deficiencies are associated with stunted height as well as lower IQ
scores. Kids from four to eight years old need 90 mcg per day, while kids
from nine to thirteen years old need 120 mcg per day. The best sources are
seaweed (kombu, kelp, and nori have the highest content) and milk. For
example, my children often strike off to school with sardines, anchovies,
mackerel, or herring wrapped in nori.
Iron
Iron supports neurological development and blood cell formation. Kids
from four to eight years old need 10 mg per day, while kids nine to thirteen
years old (for girls, prior to menarche) only need 8 mg per day. The best
sources are red meat, organ meats such as chicken liver, and shellfish
(especially clams, if your kid has a taste for shellfish). Meat is a better
source than plants because the iron bound to heme—the non-protein part
of hemoglobin and the molecule that carries oxygen in the blood—is more
bioavailable than iron that is not bound to heme. Iron from non-meat
sources, such as spinach, lentils, beans, and cashews, should be combined
with high sources of vitamin C, such as citrus fruits and dark leafy greens,
to improve the bioavailability of the iron. For example, another frequent
lunchbox item for our children is thinly sliced chunks of steak; organic elk,
bison, buffalo, or beef jerky; Braunschweiger; pemmican; or headcheese;
along with kiwis, orange slices, and steamed greens.
--- END PAGE 726 ---

--- PAGE 727 ---
Zinc
Zinc supports physical growth and immune system development. Research
suggests that 5 to 6 mg of supplemental zinc per day can reverse delayed
growth in kids. Other research suggests that zinc supplementation in zinc-
deficient kids under the age of five can reduce diarrheal infections and
pneumonia. Kids from four to eight years old need 5 mg per day, while kids
from nine to thirteen years old need 8 mg per day. The best sources are
red meat (particularly lamb), oysters, crab, and lobster.
Vitamin A
Severe vitamin A deficiency can cause night blindness and permanent
blindness and mild deficiency increases the risk of upper respiratory tract
infection, while adequate amounts can enhance eye health, bone health,
and balanced hormones. Kids from four to eight years old need 400 mcg
per day, while kids from nine to twelve years old need 600 mcg per day.
The best sources are liver, cod liver oil, eggs, full-fat dairy, sweet potatoes,
kale, spinach, and carrots. A mess of scrambled eggs with cheese, sweet
potatoes, and kale is a typical breakfast for our kids, and dinners include
roasted carrots, yams, or steamed greens.
Vitamin B12
Vitamin B is critical for the growth and maintenance of myelin sheaths,
12 the protective coats that encase your neurons’ axons. If these sheaths
deteriorate or you don’t consume sufficient vitamin B , the result is
12cognitive decline or poor cognitive development. The B requirement for
12 kids from four to eight years old is 1.2 mcg per day, while for kids from
nine to thirteen years old, it’s 1.8 mcg per day. The only sources of vitamin
--- END PAGE 727 ---

--- PAGE 728 ---
B are animal products like red meat, poultry, fish, and shellfish, so if you
12 are raising a plant-based eater, they will definitely need to supplement
with B .12
Vitamin C
Vitamin C supports collagen formation, connective tissue health, recovery
from injury, and immune system function. Kids from four to eight years
old need 25 mg per day, while kids from nine to thirteen years old need 45
mg per day. The best sources are fruits and vegetables, such as oranges,
lemons, limes, kale, broccoli, Brussels sprouts, and cauliflower. Whole
foods are, of course, far superior to concentrated juices.
Vitamin D
In the absence of frequent exposure to unfiltered sunlight, vitamin D must
be obtained through diet. Kids of all ages need 15 mcg per day. Along with
the mighty mushroom, the best dietary sources are meat, fish, eggs, and
cod liver oil. Research suggests that animal-based sources of vitamin D are
about five times more effective than the supplemental form vitamin D3.
My own children eat meat and mushrooms, but they also supplement with
vitamin D because their genetic testing revealed that, in response to
sunlight, they naturally produce lower amounts of vitamin D than most
people do.
Vitamin K2
Vitamin K is responsible for the proper absorption of calcium and for
2 shuttling calcium into your teeth and bones. Effective doses for adults
--- END PAGE 728 ---

--- PAGE 729 ---
tend to range between 50 and 200 mcg per day, and since vitamin K is
2 very safe to consume, it is fine for kids to consume the low end of that
range. The best sources are natto (a Japanese fermented soybean dish),
egg yolks, grass-fed butter (particularly Green Pastures X-Factor Butter
Oil), cream, ghee, liver, gouda cheese, kefir, sauerkraut, and emu oil. (Emu
oil contains over fifty times more vitamin K than chicken liver or cheese,
2 four times more than duck fat, twenty-five times more than cream and
butter, and ten times more than ghee and egg yolks. Walkabout Australian
Emu Oil is a good brand.)
Choline
Choline assists the liver with processing fat and toxins and acts as a
precursor to the neurotransmitter acetylcholine, making choline a critical
part of enhancing memory formation and skill acquisition. Kids from four
to eight years old need 250 mg per day, while kids from nine to thirteen
years old need 375 mg per day. The best sources are egg yolks and liver.
(Getting the impression that your child should be eating eggs and organ
meats?)
EPA and DHA
Omega-3 fatty acids are crucial for brain development. EPA and DHA in
particular are responsible for improving memory, mood, neuronal health,
and learning. Research suggests that 250 to 500 mg of combined EPA and
DHA can be especially beneficial. In addition to a high-quality fish oil (my
sons take Kion Omega), the best sources are cold-water fatty fish like
salmon, mackerel, and herring, as well as salmon roe (which kids love on
rice crackers). (Check out chapter 4 again for more information and tips
on EPA and DHA consumption.)
--- END PAGE 729 ---

--- PAGE 730 ---
Saturated Fat
Your and your child’s cells are encased by membranes, and each of these
membranes is composed of saturated fat, which is a more stable fatty acid
that’s less prone to oxidation. Saturated fats are also responsible for
shuttling proteins between cells, stimulating the release of
neurotransmitters, and forming memories. Saturated fat is found in dairy
products like butter, ghee, full-fat milk, and cheese, and in fatty cuts of
beef, pork, and lamb. It is important to remember that cell membranes
also depend on other fats, particularly oleic acid, which is found in high
quantities in extra-virgin olive oil. Many of the plants, tubers, eggs, and
other foods recommended in this section can be dipped, drowned, dosed,
and soaked in a good olive oil.
Cholesterol
Cholesterol is necessary for the production of steroid hormones, such as
estrogens and progesterone, and vitamin D. While the liver naturally
produces cholesterol, consuming dietary sources of cholesterol like egg
yolks and shrimp allows your kids to also consume other beneficial
nutrients, such as choline, omega-3 fatty acids, and protein.
Prebiotics and Probiotics
By producing postbiotics, probiotics provide kids with vitamins and
nutrients and make existing nutrients more bioavailable. They also
support healthy digestive processes and even secrete mood-stabilizing
neurotransmitters like serotonin. Probiotics are found in fermented,
“living” foods like raw dairy, natto, kimchi, sauerkraut, and kefir.
--- END PAGE 730 ---

--- PAGE 731 ---
Prebiotics in the form of soluble and insoluble dietary fiber allow
beneficial gut bacteria to thrive and promote healthy bowel movements.
Prebiotics are found in high quantities in jicama (Mexican yam),
Jerusalem artichoke, garlic, onions, leeks, underripe bananas, and
dandelion greens. Seed is a good brand for a kid-friendly prebiotic and
probiotic combo (for more on the Seed formulation, see chapter 13).
Dealing with Picky Eaters
I realize that at this point you may be wondering how the heck you are
going to get your kid to eat sardines, liver, and natto. I got lucky. From the
time our kids were very young, my wife and I would often “mommy bird”
our food, chewing—or cutting with a knife and fork—the same natural
whole foods that we consumed into tiny, edible bits and spitting it onto
our children’s plates. So our kids grew up with palates accustomed to real
food. In addition, we never created kids’ versions of dinner while the
adults ate the grown-up food. If the adults were eating bacon, onions,
liver, and Brussels sprouts for dinner, the kids had no other options: there
was no separate macaroni and cheese or frozen pizza for them to eat so
they could avoid the real, wholesome food. If they didn’t want to eat what
we were having, that was their choice, and they could go to bed with
growling stomachs. It was always the same at restaurants, and now my
kids turn down the kids’ menu of chicken wings, breaded vegetables,
sliders, and mini pizzas and instead opt for a nice cut of fish or steak with
roasted vegetables from the adult menu. (Admittedly, this comes back to
bite us when the restaurant check arrives.)
Of course, I realize that you may not have gotten so lucky as to start
your kids at such an early age, and I know that kids can be picky eaters, so
any diet plan for children should be enhanced with some practical tips to
overcome this obstacle.
--- END PAGE 731 ---

--- PAGE 732 ---
• Encourage your kids to take at least five bites of a dish before deciding
they don’t like it. If you have multiple kids, make it a competition to
see who can eat the most of the dish.
• Egg yolks can be added to everything from spaghetti sauce to mac and
cheese without changing the flavor.
• When they contain the right ingredients (like kale, green bananas, egg
yolks, kefir, Brazil nuts, cod liver oil, and frozen fruit), smoothies are
an excellent way to provide essential nutrients in dessert form.
• Smoothie leftovers can be made into ice pops.
• Instead of cooking rice in water, cook it in bone broth, add some trace
minerals such as a pinch of salt, and throw in some kelp granules for
added iodine.
• Although they’re nutrient-void on their own, rice crackers are great
vehicles for tuna salad, liver pâté, cheese, and hummus.
• Fish sauce made from fermented fish is full of glutamate, which can
help picky kids develop a taste for the umami flavor of many novel
foods. We began including fish sauce in our children’s dishes at an
early age, and as a result, they developed an Asian-like palate and
appreciation for this flavor, which is seldom found in Western diets.
• Sticking scallops or steak on toothpicks or skewers instantly makes
them fun to eat.
• Bribing kids with small prizes for eating healthy food can work
temporarily.
Supporting the symmetry, growth, and beauty of children via
nutritional strategies is a topic I will explore in detail in chapter 17, but in
the meantime, here is one last tip: kids require a lot of energy, so don’t
limit (or let them limit) their caloric intake unless there is a valid medical
reason. For even more on feeding kids right, check out my podcast with
--- END PAGE 732 ---

--- PAGE 733 ---
“The Food Babe” Vani Hari (on the online resources page for this chapter)
and/or read her book Food Babe Family.
THE LAST WORD
I’ll finish with one important consideration: your diet can fluctuate and
change as your body and your gut transform. For example, many people
who have digestive issues, bathroom troubles, or other health complaints
need to fix their gut, heal their digestive tract, or detox with an extremely
clean and restrictive diet that eliminates common problem foods such as
dairy, grains, nightshades, soy, seeds, and nuts—even the healthy, organic,
natural versions of these foods (the Autoimmune Paleo diet, or AIP, is
perhaps my favorite such diet). But once the gut is healed, these foods can
gradually be reintroduced and enjoyed, and Great-Grandma’s Brussels
sprouts casserole once again becomes a reality you can enjoy.
Finally, for plenty more tasty ideas, kitchen and cooking hacks, and
recipes, check out my books Boundless Cookbook and Boundless Kitchen.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Order a genetic test. It’s simple and affordable to have a genetic test kit
delivered to your home from any of the companies mentioned in this
chapter, drip a bit of saliva into a tube, and within just a couple of weeks
get a report that allows you to see your ancestry and identify genetic
variables that will affect your diet. You can also go to
BenGreenfieldFitness.com/rawdata to find a host of websites that allow
you to import your genetic data and learn plenty more about how you
--- END PAGE 733 ---

--- PAGE 734 ---
should eat, supplement, exercise, and much more. So what are you waiting
for? Go forth and salivate.
Finally, check out chapter 21 for my rundown on over a dozen popular
diets and how to choose which one may serve as a foundation for you
upon which you can apply the self-quantification principles from this
chapter.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/14. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 734 ---

--- PAGE 735 ---
15
NEVER GET SICK
--- END PAGE 735 ---

--- PAGE 736 ---
HOW TO BUILD AN UNSTOPPABLE
IMMUNE SYSTEM
I watched from the porch as my tiny twin sons toddled across the goat pen in
our backyard, cooing and laughing as our dwarf goats dished out gentle head
butts and high-pitched bleats. My eyes narrowed as I observed young Terran
place his hand in a pile of steaming goat dung, then smear it across his lips and
cheeks. Ten years earlier, I would have broken into a dead sprint across the lawn
to save him from certain intestinal death, but now I simply smiled: a proud papa
confident that his children would grow up with unstoppable immune systems.
Heck, this same proud papa now throws open his refrigerator every two weeks
to drink pig whipworms and rat tapeworms.
See, in my bouts with intestinal invaders—from parasites contracted
during a triathlon in the jungles of Thailand, to a series of nasty
Vietnamese gut bugs that left me bedridden for weeks, to flesh-eating
MRSA from barbed wire wounds sustained in a Spartan Race—I have had
to fight uphill battles against immune system assailants and have picked
up some handy tips along the way. The key takeaway? The more bacteria to
which you are exposed (within reason, of course), the stronger your
immune system becomes. Hence my nonchalant reaction to my children’s
interacting with goat fecal bacteria.
You no doubt already have an intimate relationship with your immune
system. You probably care about it, or at least think about it with some
frequency. You regularly wash your hands, take vitamin C, and eat plenty
of fruits and vegetables. But somehow you find yourself sniffling,
coughing, and sneezing more frequently than you would like, even when
it’s not flu season. For hard-charging high achievers, this issue often
strikes in the middle of an important work project, a family vacation, a
bout of travel, or a crucial block of workouts or training sessions.
--- END PAGE 736 ---

--- PAGE 737 ---
Just think of a few of the ho-hum, standard, old-school pieces of advice
for beating off an illness:
• Take oodles of vitamin C and zinc.
• Get plenty of bed rest and don’t exercise.
• Avoid exposure to cold temperatures.
• Use antibiotics or a Z-Pak to fight off viruses.
• Get regularly vaccinated for the flu and other viral pandemics.
The problem is, most of these strategies simply don’t work and may
wind up weakening your immune system even further. For example, some
supplements can help, but you need to take a high-enough dose in a form
that your body can absorb when you’re sick. Exercise can actually facilitate
the detox process, while staying sedentary will keep lymph fluid stagnant,
and antibiotics will wipe out the good gut bacteria that support the
healthy environment your body needs to heal.
The immune system just isn’t as simple as it seems, so in this chapter,
you will discover the inner workings of human immunity and little-known
in-the-trenches methods to strengthen your immune system and bounce
back from sickness fast, including how to channel the power of your
emotions, beliefs, and thoughts to heal your body.
Immunity Tips from the Experts
Over the years, I have collected a host of immunity tips from several
physicians who specialize in outside-the-box thinking. Here are a few of my
favorites that aren’t addressed elsewhere in this chapter (and see here for a
directory of some of my favorite physician friends).
“For travel, I would go with colloidal silver spray for topical antimicrobial
activity, and DHEA, 20 mg for women and 50 mg for men, to boost immune
function the day before and the day of travel. Science identifies DHEA as an
--- END PAGE 737 ---

--- PAGE 738 ---
immune modulator, but the dose is just a personal guess (and a touch of
expectation/placebo).”
—Justin Mager, MD
“At the first sign of a viral infection (fever, chills, body aches, runny nose), I
advise . . . a dose of Oscillococcinum, a homeopathic remedy. Although
Oscillo doesn’t prevent the flu or colds from occurring, clinical studies have
shown that it reduces [the duration] of illness.”
—Yasmin Nibbe, MD, FAAP
“I have recommended many natural remedies for colds and flu and tried
most for myself. Aside from being healthier to prevent these infections, the
most effective single remedy is simply sitting in the sun to provide the body
with a ‘shot’ of vitamin D. Even in most winter locations, fifteen to twenty
minutes of sun exposure to as much skin as possible will work wonders to
ward off illness.”
—Phil Maffetone, PhD
“One incredibly powerful means of preventing colds is the use of colloidal
silver gel as an antibacterial immune defense barrier.”
—Jeff Spencer
“For shoring up your immune function during cold and flu season, here’s rule
#1: do not overeat. In fact, if you feel you have been exposed to a bug or feel
something coming on, then light fasting is an excellent idea. Digestion takes
more energy than just about any other daily human activity. Placing an
excessive burden on your digestive processes diverts energy and resources
that might otherwise be devoted to better quality immune function....
Avoiding sugar and starch in particular is critical.”
—Nora Gedgaudas
“Oral or transdermal sodium bicarbonate, oral iodine, and oral or
transdermal magnesium, along with selenium, would be number one. A
Biomat is essential too—especially if you get the flu.”
—Mark Sircus, OMD, DM
“Fever is part of the body’s normal response to infection. . . . Hippocrates
knew this when he said, ‘Give me a fever and I can cure any disease.’
Suppressing the fever may interfere with healing and prolong the infection . .
. A technique called ‘wet sock hydrotherapy’ (google it) can support the
immune system and dramatically decrease healing time.”
--- END PAGE 738 ---

--- PAGE 739 ---
—Toby Hallowitz, ND
IMMUNITY 101
The complex immune system has six components:
• The lymphatic (lymph) system, which is a network of organs, nodes,
vessels, and tissues that transport lymph fluid throughout the body.
Lymph fluid contains infection-fighting white blood cells, and the
organs and nodes are where toxins, waste, and other unwanted debris
are filtered.
• The respiratory system, which consists of a series of organs, including
the mouth, lungs, pharynx, larynx, and trachea, that take in oxygen and
expel carbon dioxide. Airways are covered in a mucus layer that traps
pathogens and other particles before they can reach the lungs. Tiny
hairlike muscular projections called cilia propel the mucus layer.
• The skin, which is the human body’s largest organ and serves as a
barrier to the external environment. The skin’s immune system
contains an estimated twenty billion T cells (a type of white blood
cell), which control skin microbes and educate the immune system as
a whole.
• Lymphocytes, small white blood cells that seek out and destroy
pathogens and orchestrate an immune response. The two types of
lymphocytes are B cells, which make antibodies that attack bacteria
and other toxins, and T cells, which help destroy infected or cancerous
cells. Killer T cells are a subgroup of T cells that kill cells that are
infected with pathogens or are otherwise damaged. Helper T cells
determine which immune responses the body has to a particular
pathogen.
--- END PAGE 739 ---

--- PAGE 740 ---
• The spleen, which stores white blood cells and platelets, filters blood,
and recycles old red blood cells. It also helps fight certain kinds of
bacteria.
• The gut, which harbors many different kinds of bacteria and other
organisms that make up what’s called the gut microbiome. Good
bacteria help control harmful colonies of bad bacteria, fight pathogens
by producing antimicrobial substances, and affect the pH of the gut
environment to provide a chemical barrier against harmful microbes.
Gut flora also regulate inflammation and activate immune functions.
As a matter of fact, 60 percent of the immune system is found in the
gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT), which is located just outside
the intestinal lining. In addition, the intestines are lined with immune
cells called mast cells, which coordinate the immune system’s and
nervous system’s responses to toxins and infectious agents.
--- END PAGE 740 ---

--- PAGE 741 ---

--- END PAGE 741 ---

--- PAGE 742 ---
Little-Known Diet Strategies to Hack Your
Killer Cells
Natural killer (NK) cells are a type of lymphocyte and are critical to the
immune system. They are produced in your bone marrow, lymph nodes,
spleen, tonsils, and thymus gland and then enter into the circulation to
control tumor formation, microbial infection, and tissue damage. People
lacking adequate NK cells have been shown to experience more frequent
viral infections, including herpes and HIV, to have a higher level of senescent
“zombie” cells, and to die prematurely from cancers.
Circulating NK cells remain in a resting, inactive state until they are activated
by inflammatory cytokines and invade any tissues that possess pathogen-
infected cells. The NK cells then secrete cytokines such as interferons and
TNF-alpha and release a membrane-disrupting protein called perforin, which
causes the death of the target cell. Impairment of and deficits in NK cells are
associated with cancer, viral infections, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid
arthritis, lupus, and advanced aging.
Research-proven ways to modulate the normal activity of NK cells include
many of the same antiaging strategies and compounds you will learn more
about in chapter 19, including these:
• Exercise
• Massage
• Curcumin
• Zinc
• Selenium
• Astaxanthin
• Melatonin
• Astragalus
• Spirulina
• Eleuthero
• Blueberry
• Echinacea
• Thymus peptides (particularly epitalon and thymosin alpha-1)
--- END PAGE 742 ---

--- PAGE 743 ---
When I interviewed nutritionist Jonathan Clinthorne on my podcast, he also
highlighted a few other little-known, research-proven methods for increasing
NK cell activity, including these:
• Avoiding the synthetic forms of folic acid often found in B vitamins,
multivitamins, and folic acid–fortified foods such as cereals and
packaged/processed foods. Always use the natural form of folate called
5-methyltetrahydrofolate.
• Regular consumption of aged garlic extract (approximately 2.5 g daily),
especially during cold and flu season or intense periods of exercise or
travel stress
• Avoiding frequent oscillations in calorie intake—both too few and too
many calories have been found to suppress NK cell function. This is not
to say that intermittent fasting or alternate daily fasting suppresses killer
cells, but rather that long-term calorie deprivation or frequent excess
calorie intake should be avoided.
Finally, although it is not available in the US, nor is it FDA approved, several
overseas clinics are offering a type of immune system upgrade via NK cell
infusions, typically to cancer patients but also increasingly popular in the
age-reversal community for those who want to address the lowering of NK
cells and thymus gland degradation that can occur with age. This protocol
involves obtaining NK cells from a healthy donor or drawing billions of white
blood cells from the blood in your own body, washing them, sterilizing them,
growing them, combining them with cytokines to speed up the process of
cell expansion, and finally infusing them back into your body. For this
protocol, look up practitioners such as Dr. Matt Cook, who offers this
protocol in Mexico City, Dr. Adeel Khan in Cabo and Dubai, or Dr. Rafael
Gonzales and Dr. Eduardo Ulloa at the World Stem Cell Clinic in Cancun.
--- END PAGE 743 ---

--- PAGE 744 ---
The immune system can also be divided into two distinct but
complementary systems: the cell-mediated (also called innate) immune
system and the adaptive (also called humoral) immune system. Innate
immunity is your body’s first line of defense and protects you from a range
of pathogens via the following:
• Physical and chemical barriers, such as the skin, the mucosal
epithelium, and gastric and respiratory chemicals
• Blood proteins
• Immune cells, such as natural killer cells, macrophages, heterophils,
thrombocytes, eosinophils, and basophils. These protector cells engage
in phagocytosis (devouring other cells) to eliminate invaders.
When the cell-mediated immune system is overwhelmed by invaders,
your adaptive immune system kicks into high gear. This is the part of your
immune system that allows you to encounter different bacteria and
--- END PAGE 744 ---

--- PAGE 745 ---
foreign invaders throughout your life and become more resilient as a
result. It acts by learning to recognize specific features of a given pathogen
—such as chicken pox—then eliminating the pathogen, and then creating
a memory of the pathogen so that the next time you encounter it, you
don’t get sick. The primary cells of your adaptive immune system are
lymphocytes.
To make things just a bit more complex, the adaptive immune system
can also be broken down into adaptive humoral immunity and adaptive
cell-mediated immunity. Adaptive humoral immunity is the primary line of
defense that eliminates extracellular pathogens (invaders acting outside of
your cells) and their toxins and involves the activity of antibodies in your
blood, which are responsible for identifying pathogens. These antibodies
are produced in different parts of your body, such as the gastrointestinal
and respiratory tracts. On the other hand, adaptive cell-mediated
immunity involves the activity of T cells to eliminate intracellular
pathogens (invaders inside your individual cells) that antibodies can’t
reach. Both T cells and antibodies protect you by identifying and
remembering certain features of each pathogen and recognizing the
pathogen when you encounter it in the future, so that you adapt and
develop a stronger overall immune system. The most important way you
can support proper cell-mediated immunity is by not deactivating your
natural immune system response with vaccinations and antibiotics but
instead by allowing the natural immune response to take its course and
letting the body simply be equipped to heal itself.
Taking these multiple components of the immune system into
account, creating unstoppable immunity begins with moving lymph fluid
throughout the body, keeping the respiratory system ready, limiting
pathogens passing through the skin, keeping white blood cells elevated,
strengthening the spleen, and repairing and maintaining proper gut health.
You can fortify these defenses every day with various strategies while also
--- END PAGE 745 ---

--- PAGE 746 ---
ensuring you limit the amount of antibiotic-resistant and pathogenic
invaders you come into contact with and simultaneously exposing yourself
to the “good germs”—all strategies you will discover in this chapter.
The Importance of Letting Your Body Heal
By Dr. Thomas CowanItself
Over the years many patients have asked me how to take care of their
immune systems. My response is always that—in contrast to what we
generally believe—we don’t have an immune system. Rather, we have two
distinct immune systems. Only when these two immune systems are working
together harmoniously do we have the possibility of being in robust health.
The way to understand the functioning of our two immune systems is to
examine what happens when we encounter a simple viral infection.
Take chicken pox, for example. When we are first exposed to the virus that
causes chicken pox, we have no immunity against it, so it enters through our
respiratory tract and infects thousands or perhaps millions of cells. These
infected cells are distorted and dysfunctional and must be eliminated from
the body. The elimination of these infected cells is the job of our first
immune system, the cell-mediated immune system, otherwise known as the
innate immune system. This system relies upon nonspecific defense
mechanisms that activate either immediately or soon after a toxic or
bacterial attack begins in your body. The nonspecific defense mechanisms
include chemical defenses in the blood, immune cells like white blood cells,
and even physical barriers, like your skin. The job of the cell-mediated
immune system is to target infected cells, digest them, and eliminate them
through the various elimination channels of the bowels, lungs, nasal
passages, skin, etc. The crucial point here is that what we generally call
being “sick,” such as having a fever, mucus, cough, or rash, is actually the
working of the cell-mediated immune response. A virus or toxin only
stimulates the activity of this crucial innate immune response.
I know that this is so because you can infect someone with a virus, then
inhibit the activity of their cell-mediated response and innate immune
system, and they will never show any signs of sickness! They could die of the
--- END PAGE 746 ---

--- PAGE 747 ---
infection, but there will be no fever, no mucus, no outward signs of being
sick. On the other hand, we can use various chemical stimulators of the cell-
mediated response, with no infection needed, and we will show all the signs
we typically associate with being sick. Fascinating, eh? This cell-mediated
response is crucial to our health. It is how we detoxify, it is how we clear
diseased cells and tissues from our bodies, and it is how we eliminate
unwanted toxins and microorganisms from our bodies. Without a robust
cell-mediated response, we are like a house that is unable to take out its
garbage: over time we become more and more toxic.
The cell-mediated response usually lasts seven to ten days, after which we
are restored to good health. But the body in its wisdom has realized it would
be no good to keep going through the same illness over and over in our
lives, so it has developed a second immune system, called the humoral or
antibody-based immune response. The humoral immune system recognizes
a certain unique protein associated with a particular virus or any other
foreign assailant (called the antigen) and makes antibodies to that specific
antigen. As a result of the antibody production, from that time on we are
able to clear the infection from our bodies without ever having to involve
the innate immune cell-mediated response. Since the humoral response has
no outward symptoms, we will never again get “sick” in response to
--- END PAGE 747 ---

--- PAGE 748 ---
infection from that same microorganism. When these two systems—the
innate and humoral immune systems—work together as they are meant to,
your immune system is almost 100 percent foolproof, and it is extremely rare
for a person to suffer the same viral disease more than once in their lives.
Up until the twentieth century, prior to the era of vaccinations, it never
happened that we made a humoral response without at least some prior
innate immune cell-mediated activity. Remember: in a normal immune
response, we first have to clear the infection and only then can our immune
system remember what happened. Vaccines changed all that because the
theory behind vaccines is that we can develop immunity to a microorganism
even if we bypass the cell-mediated response. Vaccines are essentially
engineered to create minimal or no cell-mediated response and to only
stimulate an antibody response.
There are many problems with this unnatural approach. The first is that toxic
chemicals, like aluminum, must be used to stimulate an antibody response in
the absence of cell-mediated activity. Second, the immunity from this
antibody approach is never lifelong, as proven by the continual need for
booster shots. Third, and most crucially, a strategy of downplaying the cell-
mediated immune system in favor of repeated stimulation of antibodies is
guaranteed to produce a nation of people who suffer from chronic
autoimmune disease and cancer. Autoimmune disease is defined as the state
in which a person has developed excessive antibodies to their own tissues
and includes conditions such as low thyroid, celiac disease or gluten
sensitivities, acne and eczema, inflammation, joint pain, and much more.
Conventional medicine says we don’t know the etiology of this excessive
antibody activity, but many studies have proven that repeated vaccination
leads directly to this high-antibody disease state. Sure, there are other ways
to develop autoimmune diseases, but vaccinations certainly are not helping.
And then there’s cancer. The case of cancer being related to a suppressed
cell-mediated response was dramatically demonstrated by a sarcoma (a
virulent type of bone cancer) specialist named William Coley in the early
part of the twentieth century. Coley was able to cure thousands of cancer
patients simply by injecting them with a bacterial toxin that stimulated a
high fever response. Fever is the quintessential sign of an activated cell-
mediated immune response, and intensely stimulating fever for about a
month is a powerful enough therapeutic maneuver to cure even some end-
stage cancer patients. There can be no better demonstration of the value
--- END PAGE 748 ---

--- PAGE 749 ---
and power of our cell-mediated immune system, and the body’s innate
ability to heal itself through built-in immune system mechanisms, than the
story of Coley’s toxins.
We are in a dangerous time in the history of medicine. We are the first
medical system in the entire long history of human beings that has waged
war on our cell-mediated immune system. A system that ignores the healing
power of fever and acute illness is a medical system that will produce a
nation of chronically sick people. It is far past time to reevaluate how we do
medicine and how we care for our vital two-part immune system.
Note from Ben: All of Dr. Cowan’s books are excellent, but I especially
recommend that, for the topic of immunity, you read Vaccines,
Autoimmunity, and the Changing Nature of Childhood Illness and Cancer
and the New Biology of Water. For more on the body’s ability to be able
to heal itself and the importance of allowing conditions such as a fever
to run their course, look up the work of Dr. Rudolf Steiner. It is from Dr.
Steiner’s work that I first learned that Western allopathic medicine has
spread the belief that fever is symptomatic of sickness. Fact is, it’s
--- END PAGE 749 ---

--- PAGE 750 ---
actually a symptom of healing. When many people get a fever, they
reach for Motrin, Tylenol, or other over-the-counter drugs, but this does
nothing except prevent your body’s immune response from doing its job
while letting the infection itself run rampant.
Instead of suppressing a fever, one of the most effective ways to ensure
your or your child’s health is to let an illness run itself out. This concept
may go against conventional advice, but normal childhood illnesses like
measles, chicken pox, colds, and mumps are crucial for a child to build a
powerful immune system. Preventing them with vaccines or suppressing
them with antibiotics and other drugs keeps their immune systems from
getting stronger.
Finally, to learn more about how medicine took a very wrong turn from
finding the root cause of illness to masking the symptoms, I recommend
the books Undoctored by Dr. William Davis and Unconventional
Medicine by Chris Kresser.
HOW TO BUILD AN UNSTOPPABLE
IMMUNE SYSTEM
Now that you’re armed with a basic road map to the immune system and
an understanding of why dealing with illness is far more complex than
simply popping pills and getting some rest, I’m going to equip you with
fourteen of my top strategies for building an unstoppable immune system.
1. Lymph Flow
Your lymph system is one of two major circulatory systems in your body.
Its primary role is to transport immune cells and dead cellular debris
--- END PAGE 750 ---

--- PAGE 751 ---
through the body to where they can be removed or recycled. While most
members of the allopathic medical research community have focused on
investigating the vascular system or developing pharmaceutical drugs and
antibiotics for the immune system, the health of the lymph system seems
to be given far more attention by the holistic and ancestral medicine
community.
Think of the lymph system like the drains in your home: when there is
a clog in any of the pipes, you experience odors and flooding, along with
the accumulation of particles such as hair and food that then become a
breeding ground for bacteria. In the same way that you must be careful
what goes down the drain and also maintain your pipes in order to avoid a
clog, you must do the same for your lymph system.
A congested lymph system can lead to the accumulation of waste,
debris, dead blood cells, pathogens, toxins, and cancer cells, along with the
inadequate flow of crucial compounds such as white blood cells and fat-
soluble vitamins. Since, unlike the cardiovascular system, the lymph
system does not have a heart to pump its fluids, the flow of lymph fluid
depends on the motions of the muscles and joints during physical activity.
In addition to engaging in low-level physical activity throughout the day
and occasional vigorous exercise sessions, the best ways to ensure that
your drains don’t get clogged include the following:•

Rebounding and vibration: While anyone visiting my house,
including the guy who mows the lawn and the woman who delivers the
mail, may think I’m a complete freak of nature, in the spring and
summer I sneak outside each morning and bounce up and down on my
mini trampoline for ten minutes. During the colder months, I perform
a similar activity on a vibration platform in my gym. When I travel, I
simply perform full-body qigong shaking when I wake in the morning.
(For a video of this shaking technique, visit BoundlessBook.com/15.
The g-forces generated during rebounding, the vibration that occurs
--- END PAGE 751 ---

--- PAGE 752 ---
when standing on a vibrating platform, and the motion of the muscles
and joints during whole-body shaking all increase lymph flow and
lymph fluid drainage and filtration via the six hundred to seven
hundred lymph nodes spread throughout your body.•

Chiropractic care: According to chiropractic medicine, when
something is obstructing the organs and structures in the upper part of
the chest—such as a problem with the spine or rib cage—it can
prevent the lymph system from properly collecting and removing
toxins. This makes sense because the rib cage actually operates as a
major pump for lymph fluid. A chiropractor can help correct any
anatomical displacements to improve lymph flow. Adjusting the torso
and thoracic region can also improve oxygen delivery to cells.•

Sweating: Perspiration is one of the primary mechanisms by which
your body eliminates toxins. Although exercise can, of course, cause
perspiration, infrared saunas are also an excellent method of
circulating lymph flow via sweat.•

Dry skin brushing: Dry skin brushing involves gently moving a coarse
brush along the skin in the direction of the heart. This is a perfect
activity when you’re in an infrared sauna, and I keep a simple,
affordable brush on the floor of my sauna at all times.•

Hydration: Just as your blood needs water, so does your lymph fluid. I
make it a habit to consume at least half my body weight in pounds in
ounces of water per day (so, at 170 pounds, I drink at least 85 ounces
of water, or about 2.5 liters). I usually drink purified and mineral-rich
water and add the occasional squeeze of lemon or shot of apple cider
vinegar. Along with the decoction tea on here, Dr. John Douillard
recommends a lymph rehydrating technique that involves sipping
warm water every fifteen minutes throughout the day for two
--- END PAGE 752 ---

--- PAGE 753 ---
consecutive weeks, which stimulates lymph flow, relieves lymph
congestion, and improves a sluggish immune system.•

Massage: Foam rolling, deep tissue therapy, and massage all improve
the flow and drainage of lymph. I often get my massage on top of a
BioMat, Bioacoustic Mat, or PEMF mat to enhance the flow even more.
Herbal lymphatic drainage can also be very effective, especially for
those with chronic illnesses.•

Loose clothing: Tight-fitting garments can place unnecessary
restriction on lymph vessels—especially underwire bras, since lymph
nodes are highly concentrated around the chest region to drain fluid
from the breasts, arms, and chest. This goes for men too: guys I highly
respect, such as wellness pioneer Paul Chek and Finnish health icon
Veli-Jussi Jalkanen, both wear very loose-fitting clothing somewhat
reminiscent of medieval tunics and cloaks or Scottish kilts. At least go
boxers, not briefs, fellas.
Here’s a quick summary of the best practices for lymph flow:
• Engage in low-level physical activity throughout the day and
occasional bouts of vigorous exercise.
• Stay well hydrated with pure water.
• Practice whole-body shaking or rebounding on a trampoline or
vibration platform every day.
• Use a sauna (preferably infrared) one to five times per week, and dry
skin brush for at least one of those sauna sessions.
• Visit a chiropractic doctor two to four times a month.
• Get a full-body massage two to four times a month or regularly make
love to your foam roller.
• Consider a Panchakarma treatment once per year.
--- END PAGE 753 ---

--- PAGE 754 ---
Panchakarma: Ayurvedic Detox
Stephen Cabral, the author of The Rain Barrel Effect and a former podcast
guest, first introduced me to Panchakarma, an ancient Ayurvedic
detoxification ritual.
Panchakarma is a Sanskrit word that means “five actions” or “five
treatments.” The protocols used in traditional Panchakarma are:
• Vamana (emesis—an induction of vomiting by drinking an herbal
solution)
• Virechana (purgation—similar to an herbal colonic)
• Niroohavasti (an enema using an herbal decoction)
• Nasya (infusion of medicine through nostrils)
• Anuvasanavasti (an oil enema)
While these protocols may sound like a trip to a medieval torture chamber,
there are other, gentler cleansing methods included in modern
Panchakarma:
• Shirodhara (gently pouring a warm mixture of herbs and oil over the
forehead)
• Garshana (dry skin brushing with either a wool or silk glove)
• Swedana (an herbal steam bath, during which the head and the heart are
kept cool while the rest of the body is heated)
• Udvartana (an herbal paste lymph massage)
• Shiro-Abhyanga-Nasya (a combination of a deep head, neck, and
shoulder massage and facial lymph massage, followed by inhalation of
therapeutic aromatic steam, and a nasal and sinus “nasya” cleanse with
herbal nasal drops)
• Pinda Swedana (a massage treatment using rice cooked in milk and
herbs)
There are many suggested benefits of Panchakarma, including enhanced
detoxification, improved digestion, and better skin health, but increased
immunity is one of the more studied effects.
--- END PAGE 754 ---

--- PAGE 755 ---
Herbal Lymphatic Drainage
A major part of the lymphatic system is the interstitium, which is a network
of connective tissue that surrounds nearly every organ system in the body,
particularly the digestive and respiratory systems and under the skin.
Although it was previously thought to be simply dense connective tissue,
researchers have now discovered that the interstitium consists of a series of
interconnected fluid-filled sacs, and, along with being the primary source of
lymph fluid, is a major fluid compartment for the entire body. Addressing
this component of the lymphatic system is critical for many important lymph
functions, including immune system tasks, the delivery of triglycerides as
fuel for between-meals energy, picking up and processing proteins and fats
that are too large to enter the bloodstream, draining waste from every tissue
in the body, including the heart and digestive system, and draining nearly 3
pounds of plaque and other toxins from the brain each year.
My friend John Douillard at the LifeSpa clinic in Boulder, Colorado, is an
Ayurvedic physician who specializes in lymph fluid circulation and
detoxification, and he recommends several herbs to boost and detoxify the
lymphatic system:•

Red root: This herb helps decongest lymphatic vessels and offset the
age-related development of fibrous tissue. Red root cleans out the
intestinal lymphatic ducts that direct protein and fat into the blood. This
can help reduce swelling in the limbs, heaviness after big meals, and
postprandial “food comas.”•

Ocotillo stem: Native tribes of the southwestern US have traditionally
used this compound to boost lymphatic detoxification processes.•

Stillingia root: Stillingia, or queen’s root, aids in decongesting lymphatic
vessels and mucous membranes. It also boosts the lymphatic system’s
detox capacities.• 
Astragalus: This plant is particularly helpful for cleaning out the skin-
associated lymphatic tissue, as well as supporting the lymphatic system
as a whole. It also helps calm an overreactive immune system, since a
congested or toxin-laden lymphatic system can cause hypersensitivity
and overstimulate the sympathetic nervous system.
--- END PAGE 755 ---

--- PAGE 756 ---
• Ginger root: In Ayurvedic medicine, ginger is known as the “universal
spice.” In addition to cleaning and boosting the lymphatic system, it also
clears metabolites from the kidney’s collecting ducts.
Although you can purchase many of these herbs from sources I’ve vetted
and personally use, such as Mountain Rose Herbs, Kauai Farmacy, and New
Flower farms, LifeSpa also sells “done-for-you” herbal cleansing products
(you’ll find links to them at BoundlessBook.com/15). In addition, you can
look into the homeopathic lymphatic drainage tinctures made by the
company Pekana, which aid in the detoxification and drainage of the
lymphatic system and the major organs of elimination, including the liver
and kidneys.
2. Thieves Oil
There’s this old tale of four thieves. During the fourteenth century, when
the bubonic plague was running rampant through Europe and Asia, these
four thieves became notorious for robbing dead bodies of all their
possessions—yet the thieves miraculously never contracted the highly
infectious plague. According to lore, after they were caught and charged,
the court magistrate offered them a deal: in exchange for a reduced
sentence, they could share their secret to immunity from the plague. The
thieves took the deal and told of a blend of medicinal herbs they
consumed daily, specifically cloves, lemon, cinnamon, eucalyptus, and
rosemary. Hundreds of years later, this blend of aromatic herbs was
proven to be a potent way to kill airborne bacteria, enhance the activity of
white blood cells, and increase lymph fluid circulation.
Whether or not the story is true, the “four thieves” remedy was
developed into an herbal formulation in Europe between 1413 and 1722.
Because of its touted protective benefits, herbalists have passed along its
recipe for hundreds of years, and it typically involves a combination of
--- END PAGE 756 ---

--- PAGE 757 ---
various herbs and spices, most often cinnamon, eucalyptus, rosemary,
cloves, and lemon.
Several variations of this formulation have been passed down through
the years. Thomas Jefferson is said to have fancied a version that consisted
of vinegar spiked with lavender, rosemary, sage, wormwood, rue, mint, and
garlic to keep his presidential body infection-free. In contrast, the Scientific
American Cyclopedia of Preparations gives this formula:
4 oz dried rosemary tops
4 oz dried sage
2 oz dried lavender
5 oz fresh rue
1 oz camphor dissolved in vinegar
¼ oz sliced garlic
1 oz bruised cloves
1 gallon strongly distilled wine vinegar
Digest for 7 or 8 days, with occasional agitation:
pour off liquor: press out the remainder, and
filter the mixed liquids.
Even with the variation in ingredients, there are multiple research-
proven benefits of thieves oil. For example, multiple research studies have
shown that allicin, a compound released when a garlic clove is crushed,
smashed, or chopped, can boost immunity against viruses, and that aged
garlic extract can reduce the severity of colds and flus by enhancing the
function of immune cells. Following are more of the proven benefits of
thieves oil.
CLEANING THE AIR OF MICROBES AND MOLDS VIA
DIFFUSION
--- END PAGE 757 ---

--- PAGE 758 ---
An experiment was done to see if the aerosol use of essential oils could
alleviate some of the microbial causes of sick-building syndrome, a cluster
of symptoms such as chronic fatigue, frequent headaches, and illnesses, all
traceable to exposure to a polluted or moldy indoor environment. The
researchers used a blend of clove, lemon, cinnamon bark, Eucalyptus
radiata, and rosemary and found that this blend did inhibit certain
microbes. The researchers concluded that “thieves [oil] can significantly
reduce the number of aerosol-borne bacteria and may have application in
treating air for enclosed environments and preventing transmission of
aerosol-borne bacterial pathogens.”
A follow-up field study also found that diffusing this same blend of
essential oils decreased airborne black mold. Mold management will be
addressed in greater detail in chapter 20, but it’s quite an important
consideration for the immune system because mold can significantly
contribute to the development of a hyperactive immune system, an issue
discussed in detail in Dr. Neil Nathan’s book Toxic.
RESPIRATORY SUPPORT
One key ingredient in thieves oil, eucalyptus oil, is well known for its
respiratory support when inhaled or taken orally. One article in Alternative
Medicine Review states: “Application by either vapor inhalation or oral
route provides benefit for both purulent and non-purulent respiratory
problems, such as bronchitis, asthma, and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). There is a long history of folk usage with a good safety
record. More recently, the biochemical details behind these effects have
been clarified. Although other plant oils may be more microbiologically
active, the safety of moderate doses of EO and its broad-spectrum
antimicrobial action make it an attractive alternative to pharmaceuticals.”
In another study, Eucalyptus globulus was tested for cytotoxicity and
antibacterial activity against common pathogens linked to respiratory
--- END PAGE 758 ---

--- PAGE 759 ---
infections. The study demonstrated that the pathogens, including
influenza, pneumonia, Staphylococcus, Klebsiella, and adenovirus, were
highly susceptible to eucalyptus oil. Cinnamon bark oil has also been
shown to inhibit gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria associated with
various infections and to be toxic to various fungi related to respiratory
tract infections.
ANTIMICROBIAL ACTIVITY
Probably one of the most famous uses of thieves oil, besides its aromatic
applications, is to eliminate microbes. The antimicrobial effects of
essential oils are vast. The Journal of Biological Chemistry explains that
cyclic hydrocarbons found in essential oils, including aromatics, terpenes,
and alicyclic compounds, likely have a direct toxicity effect on the cell
membranes of certain bacterial species.
One study tested the antimicrobial activity of the essential oils from
clove and rosemary. The authors reported that after testing clove and
rosemary essential oils against Staphylococcus epidermidis, Escherichia coli,
and Candida albicans, they found that “both essential oils possessed
significant antimicrobial effects against all microorganisms tested.”
An in vitro study that tested twenty-one selected essential oils against
six bacterial species (Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Proteus vulgaris, Bacillus subtilis, and Staphylococcus aureus)
found that nineteen of the oils showed antibacterial activity against one or
more strains of the microbes tested. They reported: “Cinnamon, clove,
geranium, lemon, lime, orange and rosemary oils exhibited significant
inhibitory effect. Cinnamon oil showed promising inhibitory activity even
at low concentration, whereas aniseed, eucalyptus and camphor oils were
least active against the tested bacteria. In general, B. subtilis was the most
susceptible. On the other hand, K. pneumoniae exhibited a low degree of
sensitivity.”
--- END PAGE 759 ---

--- PAGE 760 ---
MICROBIOME SUPPORT
The oils in the thieves blend have been shown in many studies to prevent
microbial infections of the gut when ingested, and there is evidence that
any disturbance of the microbiome or “killing off ” of good bacteria is
unlikely due to the immune-modulating effects of the oils. A 2012 article
provided support that essential oils can work synergistically with
probiotics to have complementary antimicrobial effects with practically no
side effects.
I fell in love with thieves oil when I used it topically to successfully kill
the flesh-eating bacteria (MRSA) that I contracted while swimming in
dirty water with open wounds during a triathlon. Here are just a few
suggestions I have for the use of thieves:
• Apply a few drops to open cuts and wounds to prevent infection and
promote healing.
• Mix with a tablespoon of water, gargle, and swallow for a sore throat.
• Put a drop on your thumb and apply to the roof of your mouth for a
headache.
• Breathe in the vapors when you have lung congestion.
• Put a few drops in any oil-pulling oil to maintain healthy teeth and
reduce cavities.
• Apply a drop or two to gums and teeth for pain relief from toothaches.
• Mix one or two drops with a tablespoon of raw honey for cough relief.
• Use it in an essential oil nebulizing diffuser and breathe it in for sinus
headaches.
• Buy a Füm pen and breathe in thieves (or any other essential oil, such
as oregano oil, peppermint oil, or lavender oil) just as you would with a
vape pen. The Füm essential oil “pens” are an effective, all-natural way
to breathe in oil compounds without the use of a vaporizer or diffuser.
--- END PAGE 760 ---

--- PAGE 761 ---
They come with done-for-you essential oil cores of nonaddictive
natural plant extracts, or you can use your own mixes.
3. Echinacea
Echinacea is, like thieves, an incredibly versatile immune-supporting
compound. It has been shown in research to relieve upper respiratory
symptoms such as inflammation, whooping cough, and the common cold,
and a fascinating meta-analysis from the University of Connecticut
showed that echinacea, when taken during cold and flu season, could cut
the likelihood of getting a common cold by over half and also reduce the
duration of the common cold by almost one and a half days!
But the benefits of echinacea go far beyond coughs and colds. For
example, like a regular sauna practice, intake of echinacea increases the
expression of heat shock proteins and also boosts white cell counts. Heat
shock proteins are typically induced when cells are exposed to
environmental stressors, such as heat, inflammation, and oxidative stress.
They play a role in the assembly and transport of newly synthesized
protein within cells and also remove denatured proteins, so they’re
important for preventing cell damage and repairing cells after injury. They
are also important in antigen presentation and the activation of
lymphocytes and macrophages. Antigen presentation is especially
important after a viral infection, as it signals to the body that an antigen is
“foreign” and “non-self.” It has been proposed that heat shock proteins
are part of the body’s adaptive immune response because their circulation
in the bloodstream signals danger to the host.
Echinacea also boosts the immune system by stimulating
phagocytosis, the process by which white blood cells and lymphocytes
attack invading organisms such as parasites and bacteria. Echinacea also
stimulates the production of T cells and macrophages in the bloodstream
--- END PAGE 761 ---

--- PAGE 762 ---
while enhancing the concentration of interferon, interleukin,
immunoglobulin, and other natural immune compounds in the blood.
Echinacea intake also protects red blood cells against oxidative
damage. The membranes of the red blood cells contain high
concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids that are highly susceptible
and sensitive to free radicals, but echinacea can act as a free radical
scavenger (although, whether you use antioxidants or any other method to
quench free radicals or reactive oxygen species, there is a law of
diminishing returns—see the sidebar on the next page).
Echinacea is also a proven performance-enhancing aid, particularly for
aerobic and endurance athletes and athletes competing at high altitudes
(for similar reasons, it is quite good for altitude sickness). This is because
echinacea has been shown to stimulate macrophage activity, which can
result in an increase in prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) secretion. PGE2 is a
protein that stimulates the production of serum erythropoietin (EPO).
EPO, which you may recognize as a banned performance-enhancing drug
in its exogenous form, is a hormone that is secreted by the kidneys to
stimulate stem cells in bone marrow to develop into red blood cells. In
addition, PGE2 has been shown to stimulate the release of granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) from smooth muscle
cells, which causes it to act as a growth factor for new red blood cells.
Echinacea works best as an immune booster when taken in the early
stages of a cold or upper respiratory tract infection because it can shorten
the duration of both colds and flus. Effective doses range from 900 to
1,500 mg per day split into three doses.
Are Antioxidants Actually Bad for You?
You have no doubt heard that free radicals can damage cells and that
reactive oxygen species (ROS) should be ruthlessly mitigated with
--- END PAGE 762 ---

--- PAGE 763 ---
antioxidants. But the fact is that some amount of free radicals and ROS are
necessary for a number of cellular pathways involved in cellular growth,
survival, and proliferation, and in metabolism and blood vessel formation. It’s
certainly true that, for example, cancer cells generate higher levels of ROS
that are essential for that cancer to grow, and this is likely why cancer cells
express elevated levels of a large number of cellular antioxidants, to protect
against oxidative or stress-induced cell death.
If ROS were only toxic, antioxidants would be great, but since ROS can help
with immune function, antioxidants may blunt adaptive immunity. In fact, in
the case of sepsis, which is a systemic infection accompanied by significant
amounts of inflammation and autoimmunity, antioxidants have been shown
to make the situation worse. And in trials, high doses of antioxidant vitamin
E do not show a benefit for cancer and in fact show possible harm.
In addition, activation of the innate immune system requires ROS signaling.
This signaling is necessary for surveillance receptors of the immune system
and the release of protective pro-inflammatory cytokines, which then cause
an appropriate immune response.
Decreasing ROS levels too much has been shown to inhibit activation of
proper immune responses, eventually leading to immunosuppression. At the
same time, excessively elevated ROS levels can contribute to autoimmunity
by increasing the release of proinflammatory cytokines and proliferation of
too many adaptive immune cells.
Finally, if you consume high doses of antioxidants after exercise, they can
turn off the beneficial genetic transcription response to exercise, which can
limit the number of mitochondria you can produce and the potential for new
muscle fiber generation.
So what’s the takeaway? Consume antioxidants, but not too many of them,
and be especially careful consuming antioxidants before, during, and after
exercise—particularly antioxidants in concentrated supplement forms. In
addition, while taking antioxidants when you’re sick is good, this doesn’t
necessarily mean that more antioxidants are better. Unfortunately, research
has yet to show what the magic amount of antioxidants is to support a
balanced ROS seesaw, but my general rule is to take small amounts each
day, eat a moderate amount of wild plants and other whole-food antioxidant
--- END PAGE 763 ---

--- PAGE 764 ---
sources, and then to allow my body to create its own antioxidants via
normal signaling pathways.
4. Zinc
During cold and flu season, if you see me mumbling with a mouthful of
what appears to be a breath mint, it is more likely a zinc lozenge, and it is
one of the four to six zinc lozenges that I dissolve in my mouth daily if I
have been exposed to sickness.
Zinc is hands down one of the best, if not the best, immune-hacking
supplements. If you read the medical literature, this is one modality that
has been shown to work over and over again.
Zinc is a micronutrient found in many foods, like meat, cheese, and
especially seafood, particularly oysters. If you’re wondering just how
important this micronutrient is, since 1963, scientists have learned of over
three hundred enzymes and over one thousand transcription factors that
require zinc for proper function. And, not only does zinc modulate cell-
mediated immunity, but it also has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory
properties that can provide a potent cure for the common cold. But I
wouldn’t suggest simply running out to your local drugstore and grabbing
a bottle of any old zinc. The type and the dose matter significantly.
While zinc itself is essential for immune function, zinc lozenges, which
are best if you’re trying to stave off or shorten a cold, appear to work
through a different mechanism entirely. When you pop a zinc lozenge into
your mouth, it begins to release ionic zinc, which is the key to its antiviral
activity. Dissolving a lozenge slowly in the mouth provides a steady release
of free ions into the pharyngeal region in the nasal cavity, which can have a
greater effect on reducing respiratory and nasal symptoms associated with
sickness than taking a zinc capsule or tablet. In fact, studies have shown
that zinc lozenges can decrease the duration of a cold by five to seven days
--- END PAGE 764 ---

--- PAGE 765 ---
(if you think about how long a cold usually lasts, that’s almost getting rid
of the cold!).
But you must ensure you are consuming the correct type of high-dose
zinc lozenge. First, make sure it doesn’t contain any additives that would
prevent proper dissolution and ionization. I also suggest avoiding any
lozenges that contain citric acid, as this commonly added compound can
bind tightly to zinc ions, preventing them from being released. Instead,
look for a form of zinc called zinc acetate, which is twice as effective as
zinc gluconate. Avoid effervescent lozenges, which also can reduce the
production of ionic zinc.
Finally, for zinc to actually do its job, you need to start taking it right
away—at the first sign of symptoms, when you feel you have been exposed
to sickness. That’s because it works by interfering with a virus’s
replication. So you essentially have only two or three days before it’s too
late to use zinc. After you’re already sick, zinc can’t do much to help your
sniffles.
In summary, here’s my recommended protocol for using zinc:
• As soon as you realize that you have cold symptoms, pop a zinc acetate
lozenge (a good brand is Life Extension).
• Let it dissolve in your mouth for twenty to thirty minutes.
• Pop a new lozenge every two to three hours until your symptoms are
gone.
Alternatively, for more of a preventative approach, you can use Kion
Immune, which is a precise dose of vitamin C and zinc bisglycinate
chelate, a form of zinc that doesn’t irritate the gut.
5. Elderberry
--- END PAGE 765 ---

--- PAGE 766 ---
One of the highlights of my year is when the old elderberry tree in the
forest behind our house comes into full production and creates oodles of
elderberries, which my wife collects, ferments, and turns into a dark,
dense, immune-boosting elderberry wine. Elderberry teas, tinctures, and
supplements are all excellent options to have on hand in your medicinal
pantry and combine quite well with many of the other compounds
discussed in this chapter.
The anthocyanins in elderberries have been shown to have potent
immunostimulant effects. In fact, a 2016 study showed that elderberry
supplementation can vastly reduce the duration and symptoms of colds in
air travelers. Another study found that when the elderberry extract is used
within the first forty-eight hours of the onset of flu symptoms, it shortens
the duration of symptoms by an average of four days.
Because of its sweet, tart, and refreshing taste, elderberry juice is an
excellent alternative to elderberry wine, especially if you don’t have time
to make the wine. Good brands include River Hills, Biotta, Biona, and
Wyldewood Cellars—all of which have a tart and tannic flavor, with a mild
sweetness. An elderberry tincture is another good option. There’s a DIY
elderberry tincture recipe in my book Boundless Kitchen. Effective doses of
elderberry extract range from 600 to 900 mg per day. As a word of
caution, the elderberry plant is poisonous aside from the berries, so
should you choose to prepare an elderberry treatment yourself, be sure to
use only the berries and to prepare them properly via a process such as
fermentation.
6. Colostrum
Ever since I discovered the ability of colostrum to keep the gut lining from
becoming permeable during workouts and races in hot weather, which can
result in gut distress and endotoxemia, I have been a fan of using this
--- END PAGE 766 ---

--- PAGE 767 ---
supplement. Turns out, it’s also beneficial whenever I’m exposed to any
type of immune system assailant.
Colostrum, the first secretion of the mammary glands in both humans
and animals, serves as a form of passive immunity, transferring antibodies
from mother to infant. Colostrum provides a substantial dose of
antibodies such as IgA, IgG, and IgM, all of which help to fight pathogens
in the intestinal tract. The growth factors in colostrum stimulate the gut
to patch up the gaps in the intestinal lining that lead to leaky gut (and then
to autoimmune disorders). In fact, infants have greater intestinal
permeability at birth, but their gut lining quickly becomes less permeable
due to the intake of colostrum from their mother’s breast milk. Later in
life, excess inflammation and damage from toxin exposure, glyphosate,
processed foods, rancid vegetable oils, and other assailants can cause the
gut to become permeable again. Research shows that colostrum can
restore a leaky gut lining to normal permeability levels, and also shows
that athletes who pop colostrum prior to exercising in hot weather can
completely banish the gastric distress that so notoriously accompanies
exercise in the heat.
Because of its ability to support a leaky gut, colostrum is fantastic for
controlling the rampant, full-body inflammation and overactivity of the
immune system that so often comes with leaky gut. As a matter of fact,
one protocol for managing autoimmune conditions, as outlined by Dr.
Thomas Cowan in his book Vaccines, Autoimmunity, and the Changing
Nature of Childhood Illness, is this:
• Follow the GAPS diet (see GAPSDiet.com).
• Implement low-dose naltrexone, one of the most underrated
medications for modulating immune system issues (see The LDN Book
by Linda Elsegood for details).
--- END PAGE 767 ---

--- PAGE 768 ---
• Take the liquid supplement ION*, whose active ingredient, lignite, can
improve gut permeability (see chapter 13 for more details).
• Use a colostrum supplement to repair the gut lining.
• Include glandular extracts (such as organ meats, liver capsules, and
thyroid glandular), which help modulate the immune system.
Colostrum is also fantastic for building muscle, as it is a potent growth
hormone precursor and enhances levels of insulin-like growth factor 1—
compounds that many bodybuilders inject with a needle but that you can
easily get with a natural colostrum supplement. I get my colostrum in
powdered form from grass-fed cows, and you can find it at GetKion.com.
Effective doses range from 20 to 60 g per day. Pro tip: Let it dissolve in
your mouth for 30 to 60 seconds before swallowing, because your salivary
enzymes help activate the growth factors in colostrum.
7. Bone Broth
I often consume the equivalent of a full cup of bone broth with lunch or in
my morning Wendy’s Frosty–like smoothie (see the recipe below). But I
triple or quadruple my bone broth consumption anytime I want to boost
the health of my immune system, such as during cold and flu season, when
there’s nearly always a pot of bone broth on the stove with other immune-
supporting goodies thrown in, such as sulforaphane-rich sprouts, chaga
mushroom extract, powdered vegetable extracts, a bit of the decoction tea
on here, or a dropperful of oregano oil.
My Perfect Wendy’s Frosty–esque Morning
Smoothie
--- END PAGE 768 ---

--- PAGE 769 ---
• 8 to 12 ounces bone broth, or 1 cup frozen bone broth (such as Kettle and
Fire)
• Large handful of ice
• 2 teaspoons ground Ceylon cinnamon
• 1 drop Omica Organic vanilla stevia
• 2 scoops of a good protein powder (I prefer Organifi, Thorne, Ancient
Nutrition, or Living Fuel brands)
• Juice of ½ lemon (this enhances collagen absorption from the bone
broth)
For topping (optional):•

Coarse sea salt
• Fermented cacao nibs
• Spirulina
• Unsweetened coconut flakes
Blend on high for 3 minutes (this long blend time is key for proper
consistency). Top with coarse sea salt, fermented cacao nibs, spirulina
bits, and unsweetened coconut flakes, if desired.
There is a reason why native peoples have been consuming bone
broths for thousands of years, why your grandmother’s chicken soup
always seemed to cure what ailed you, and why there’s a South American
proverb that claims “bone broth raises the dead.” Whether bone broth is
as magical a healing aid as it is touted to be remains to be proven by
robust research, but nonetheless, there are numerous health benefits to
simply drinking liquid that has been simmering with the marrow and joint
bones of beef, chicken, lamb, and even fish for twenty-four to forty-eight
hours.
--- END PAGE 769 ---

--- PAGE 770 ---
Bone broth contains substances that are vital to the innate immune
system, such as the amino acids arginine (which is critical for immune
system and liver function), glutamine (which assists with cellular
metabolism), and glycine (which aids in glutathione production and
improves sleep quality). The marrow in bone broth contains lipids called
alkylglycerols that are crucial for the production of white blood cells.
These same alkylglycerols also appear in colostrum and have been shown
to control the growth of cancer cells. According to research by Dr.
Matthias Rath, the collagen in bone broth may also prevent cancer tumor
metastasis, and the gelatin in bone broth is beneficial for autoimmune
diseases related to a leaky gut. The glycosoaminoglycans found in bone
broth can similarly help restore a healthy intestinal lining. The
chondroitin sulfate in bone broth has both anti-inflammatory and
immunoregulatory effects.
Proceed with caution if you purchase packaged bone broth, as not all
bone broth is created equal. Almost every company selling bone broth
online—even the ones using grass-fed and organic ingredients—are
freezing their broth and shipping it with lots of dry ice and harmful
Styrofoam containers. Furthermore, many do not even list bones on the
ingredients label. If bones aren’t on the label, the broth won’t contain
nutrients from bone marrow, such as collagen, immune-boosting
alkylglycerols, or omega-3 essential fatty acids. Select high-quality bones,
such as beef, chicken, or fish bones, preferably from organic, pasture-
raised, or wild-caught sources.
It’s simple to make your own bone broth. Just place the bones left over
from chicken or turkey, beef marrow bones, oxtails, beef feet, or beef neck
bones (many of these odd cuts are available for a very good deal from your
local butcher) in a stockpot or slow cooker and cover them with water.
Add a splash of apple cider vinegar to help extract minerals from the
bones. Optionally, include aromatics like onions, garlic, carrots, celery,
--- END PAGE 770 ---

--- PAGE 771 ---
and herbs for added flavor. Bring the mixture to a boil, then reduce the
heat to a simmer and let it cook for at least 12 to 24 hours, or even longer
for richer flavor and increased nutrient extraction. Skim off any foam or
impurities that rise to the surface during cooking. Once done, strain the
broth to remove the solids, then let it cool before storing it in the
refrigerator or freezer.
Although it’s best to make your own bone broth at home, one good,
shelf-stable, done-for-you brand is Kettle & Fire. They maintain strict
standards to deliver bone broth made from the bones of cattle that are
humanely raised, with no antibiotics or hormones, 100 percent grass-fed
and grass-finished.
For a nourishing morning breakfast, you can experiment with Dr.
Thomas Cowan’s healing broth recipe. The following is adapted from his
excellent book Cancer and the New Biology of Water:•

Heat a generous amount of grass-fed ghee in
a saucepan over medium heat, then add 1 to 2
tablespoons of turmeric powder and stir
until it dissolves.
• Add 3 to 7 vegetables of choice (the sprouting
mixes from The Sprouting Company are my
favorites, especially the high-protein mix)
and/or a blend of vegetable powders and
sauté until the vegetables are soft.
• Next, add 1 to 2 cups of bone broth. Turn the
heat down to low and simmer for 1 to 2
minutes, then stir in a generous portion of
powdered vegetable extract.
• Finally, ladle the broth into a bowl and add 1
tablespoon each of naturally fermented miso
--- END PAGE 771 ---

--- PAGE 772 ---
and natto.
For this recipe, I recommend a vegetable powder blend like ashitaba,
burdock, low-oxalate greens, or the savory Threefold Blend of powdered
vegetable extracts from Dr. Cowan’s website, which I’ve linked to on
BoundlessBook.com/15.
Finally, note that those with histamine sensitivities or mast cell issues
may need to proceed with caution when it comes to bone broth and
fermented foods—pay close attention to any symptoms you experience
after eating them.
8. Fermented Foods
If you open my refrigerator, you will see that the entire top shelf is chock-
full of mason jars packed with fermented vegetables—from sauerkraut to
pickles to kimchi and beyond—along with homemade coconut yogurt,
water kefir, dairy kefir, natto, miso, and plenty of other fun fermentation
products.
My lunchtime salad and side dish at dinner often include a heaping
tablespoon of these ferments, such as sauerkraut or kimchi, a dollop of
yogurt, a fermented pickle, a teaspoon of miso, or a glass of my wife’s
homemade kombucha or kefir. When I began incorporating these types of
fermented foods and probiotics into my diet, my frequent seasonal colds
dwindled. I was getting sick once a year rather than once a month. By
supporting my gut bacteria, I was drastically improving my immune
system.
It is estimated that three-quarters of your immune system resides in
your gut. Indeed, immunity begins with the bacteria in our digestive tract,
as these creatures play vital roles in nutrient absorption, mucosal barrier
function, support of gut lymphoid tissue, and immune function.
--- END PAGE 772 ---

--- PAGE 773 ---
For example, take lactic acid bacteria, also known as Lactobacillus
paracasei, which is found in naturally fermented foods like sauerkraut and
yogurt. It produces the enzyme lactocepin, which is able to destroy
immune system messengers called chemokines. In a healthy gut,
chemokines guide white blood cells to an infection, but in individuals with
inflammatory bowel disease, they can exacerbate an autoimmune
response. Consuming sources of lactic acid bacteria can thus reduce
autoimmune symptoms.
Another strain of bacteria, the probiotic bifidobacteria, secretes
gamma-aminobutyric acid. Macrophages, which are immune cells that
engulf bacteria and virus-infested cells, contain butyric acid receptors
that, when activated by the acid, can reduce the production of
inflammatory compounds. The cell walls of bifidobacteria also contain a
dipeptide that activates the synthesis of lymphocytes, which are immune
cells that produce antibodies and are responsible for acquired immunity.
Scientists have also examined the effect of kefir, which is probiotic-rich
fermented milk, on the immune systems of rats. The rats were given kefir
daily for twenty-eight days and then injected with a cholera toxin. The rats
that had been eating a daily dose of kefir exhibited significantly higher
antibodies to the toxin than the control group.
To get more details on supporting natural, healthy gut flora, revisit
chapter 13. In addition, I recommend combining a high intake of a wide
variety of fermented foods with daily use of gut-nourishing compounds
like colostrum, L-glutamine, or the supplement ION* (introduced in
chapter 13). Over the last sixty years, there has been a steady loss of
biodiversity in our gut membrane’s bacterial ecosystem, and a large part of
this is due to factory farming, processed foods, and widespread antibiotic
use. This loss of biodiversity has left our gut membrane walls vulnerable.
But the most potent of the common causes of the damage to the gut wall
in our diet is glyphosate—an ingredient in weed killers—because it
--- END PAGE 773 ---

--- PAGE 774 ---
triggers the activation of a protein called zonulin. Zonulin is produced in
the gut, where it opens the tight junctions between cells in the intestinal
lining, then circulates systemically and can open the blood-brain barrier,
kidney tubule systems, and blood vessel walls.
ION* is a liquid supplement that delivers bacterial metabolites to
promote a healthy firewall of tight junctions in the gut wall and blood-
brain barrier and rapidly increases production of the enzymes that break
down zonulin. Although I always buy organic, because of the widespread
prevalence of glyphosate toxins even in organic food, I take ION* several
times per day. (For discount codes, see BoundlessBook.com/15.)by Dr. William Davis
DIY Antiaging Yogurt
Note from Ben: This yogurt may look familiar because it’s a twist on the SIBO
yogurt recipe found in chapter 12, but it’s made with just one bacterial strain
instead of three.
I’ve been discussing this idea of making yogurt by starting with a specific
strain of Lactobacillus reuteri ATCC PTA 6475, based on the detailed studies
conducted at MIT and elsewhere, both experimental animal and human, that
have suggested dramatic effects. Those effects include

• Complete shutdown of appetite, an “anorexigenic” effect, that can be
used to facilitate intermittent fasting or break a weight-loss plateau
• An increase in metabolic rate, which also contributes to weight loss
• A dramatic increase in skin thickness and skin collagen, along with
acceleration of skin healing, a surrogate for overall youthfulness and
health. I’m a big fan of dietary collagen, such as those in collagen
hydrolysates, bone broths/soups, slow-cooking meats, the skin on
chicken and fish, etc. This L. reuteri strategy amplifies this effect
considerably.
• Increased oxytocin. A doubling of oxytocin levels was observed in mice.
This effect is responsible for the extravagant skin benefits, reduced
insulin resistance, dramatic increases in testosterone in males, increased
--- END PAGE 774 ---

--- PAGE 775 ---
estrogen in females (magnitude unclear), and thicker and more plentiful
hair (though the consistency of this effect is not yet clear). Other studies
have demonstrated substantial weight loss, especially from visceral fat,
along with increased muscle mass and increased bone density.
Put all these effects together—reduced appetite, increased skin health,
increased bone density, fat loss, muscle gain, etc.—and you have one of the
most powerful antiaging, youth-preserving strategies I have ever come
across.
Because the most robust data were generated using the ATCC PTA 6475
strain of L. reuteri (and, to a lesser extent, the DSM 17938 strain), I have been
confining my efforts to this strain. Other L. reuteri strains may mimic these
effects, but we don’t know that for certain, as the studies have not been
performed. Strain specificity can be a crucial factor. After all, all of us have
several strains of E. coli in our intestines that live quietly and don’t bother
anyone. But get exposed to selected strains of E. coli from contaminated
produce, and you develop life-threatening diarrhea that can be fatal,
especially in children. Same species (E. coli), different strains—strain
specificity can be a critical factor.
So we start with L. reuteri ATCC PTA 6475 provided by the Swedish
company BioGaia, which has somehow locked this species up with patents.
Their product is called Gastrus and combines the ATCC PTA 6475 strain with
the DSM 17938 strain. Problem: there are only 100 million CFUs (live
organisms) per tablet. I have not observed any substantial health benefits by
ingesting the tablets.
However, the counts can be increased with fermentation in the presence of
prebiotic fibers, so I have been amplifying bacterial counts by making
yogurt. Just as ingesting prebiotic fibers increases bacterial counts in your
intestines, so it goes in yogurt as well.
This yogurt is thick and delicious, and given its extraordinary thickness of
the end-product, it is likely that trillions of CFUs are present, sufficient to
convert the soupy liquid of your starting coconut milk to rich yogurt that’s
thick enough to stand up on a plate. People who consume ½ cup per day of
this preparation are reporting the effects listed above.
There are probably many ways to make this yogurt and yield the bacterial
counts you desire, but this is how I do it.
--- END PAGE 775 ---

--- PAGE 776 ---
•

1 quart organic half-and-half, cream, whole milk, canned full-fat coconut
milk, goat’s milk or cream, or sheep’s milk or cream (see Note)
• 1 tablespoon inulin or another prebiotic, such as sucrose, glucose, or
potato starch
• 10 tablets BioGaia Gastrus, crushed
1.

In a large glass or ceramic bowl, combine 2 tablespoons of the half-
and-half with the inulin and crushed probiotic tablets. Mix thoroughly
and make sure the inulin and sugar are dissolved. Then add the
remaining half-and-half and stir to combine well.2.

Turn the oven to 300°F for 60 to 90 seconds, just until it reaches a
desert-hot temperature. Place the yogurt in the oven and turn the
oven off.3. 
After 4 to 6 hours, turn the oven back to 300°F for 60 to 90 seconds,
then turn it off again. The goal is to keep the temperature at 100°F
for around 24 hours; this method isn’t precise, but it works fine when
using dairy for fermentation.
NOTE: If you use coconut milk, you will need to add 1 tablespoon sugar
because there is no lactose to ferment in coconut milk. Don’t worry, the
sugar is fermented to lactic acid, so there’s little sugar in the yogurt. Just as
the cucumbers you grow in your garden were fertilized with cow manure but
ripe cucumbers contain no cow manure, so the final fermented yogurt
should contain little to no sugar.
In addition, fermenting coconut milk is much fussier than fermenting dairy,
and you’ll need to have more precise control over the temperature. It’s best
--- END PAGE 776 ---

--- PAGE 777 ---
to use a yogurt maker, Instant Pot, sous vide device, rice cooker, or any
other device that allows you to maintain a constant temperature. (I used a
yogurt maker with good results.) Any of these devices can also be used to
make this yogurt with dairy.
To make more batches, reserve a few tablespoons from the original batch
and use it in place of crushed tablets, since your yogurt should contain
plentiful microbes. The first batch tends to be a bit thinner with curdles, but
subsequent batches tend to be thicker and smoother.
There are some uncertainties:
• Is there a reduction in bacterial counts or contamination by air organisms
when you make yogurt from prior batches? Some people have “re-
seeded” their yogurt by adding a few more crushed tablets of probiotic
after several rounds of yogurt-making.
• We’ve arrived at the dose of ½ cup by trial and error, as judged by the
anorexigenic effect that results when oxytocin levels increase. But is that
the ideal dose? Don’t know yet.
• Can we improve on taste, texture, and bacterial counts by altering
fermentation temperature, choice of prebiotic, or other conditions?
Despite the uncertainties, I am witnessing some dramatic changes in the
people trying this yogurt.
Note from Ben: : I get a thick texture and taste by stirring in 4 heaping
tablespoons of organic Great Lakes unflavored beef gelatin and 4
dropperfuls of Omica Organics vanilla stevia to the mix, then
refrigerating it for one day after fermentation. For a step-by-step audio
demonstration of the yogurt-making process we use for this recipe, go
to my sons’ podcast at GoGreenfields.com and listen to the coconut
yogurt episode.
9. Decoction Tea
--- END PAGE 777 ---

--- PAGE 778 ---
If I ever get a bout of gut issues, one of the first things I do is make myself
a big ol’ cup of Dr. John Douillard’s decoction tea, which contains slippery
elm bark, marshmallow root, and licorice root (you’ll find the recipe on
the next page). The combination of these herbs softens and soothes
mucous membranes all the way from the throat to the stomach to the
small and large intestines, flushes the lymph system, and allows good
bacteria to multiply while providing adaptogen-like effects that protect
these bacteria from stress and environmental irritants.
To understand why this particular tea works so well, it’s important to
understand that the environment of the intestinal tract that supports
beneficial microbes is very delicate. For intestinal villi to function well,
they cannot be too dry or too wet (excessive mucus production, for
example, will hamper their function). John Douillard has been using his
decoction tea in his Ayurvedic health practice for almost thirty years to
correct both dry and overly damp mucous membranes. When these herbs
are cooked down into a concentrated tea, the soluble fiber from the roots
and barks are released. This fiber is naturally slimy and soothes dried-out
intestinal mucosae. The fiber also feeds beneficial intestinal microbes as a
natural prebiotic. This is a critical part of the tea’s restoration effect: it
creates an environment that allows healthy microbes to proliferate while
restoring the function and environment of the intestinal villi and gut
mucosa, so nutrients can be digested and assimilated optimally. Think of
this tea as coating your entire digestive tract with a mucilaginous,
microbe-boosting layer. When this happens, new intestinal skin can grow,
a healthy intestinal environment can be restored, and microbes can
repopulate.
The first ingredient in the tea—licorice—is a classic Ayurvedic herb
that’s used as a natural lubricant for the intestinal and respiratory airways.
Licorice lubricates and coats mucous membranes and, as an adaptogen,
protects them from stress and environmental irritants and pollens. In
--- END PAGE 778 ---

--- PAGE 779 ---
addition, glycyrrhizin, found in licorice root, can inhibit the replication of
influenza virus while also reducing virus-associated inflammation.
The next ingredient, slippery elm bark, has long been used in
Ayurvedic medicine for digestive and intestinal concerns because of its
lubricating and gut-defending properties. It has also been shown to
support healthy antioxidant activity in the intestinal tract.
Finally, the chopped marshmallow root is perhaps the most slippery of
the three herbs in this formula. It has been shown to support the health of
the stomach lining and to protect the intestinal tract from irritants, such
as the toxic form of carrageenan found in many packaged foods. It has
even been approved in Europe for clinical use to improve the integrity of
the gastric, oral, and pharyngeal mucosae.
The key to the success of this tea is to consume it every day for a
month or two, 1 tablespoon every two hours, apart from a meal. You must
also use chopped, not ground, herbs (if you use ground herbs, you will
basically make a muddy tea, and it won’t work).
Here’s how to make the tea: Boil 1 to 2 tablespoons each of organic
chopped licorice root, organic marshmallow root, and organic slippery elm
bark in a pot filled with 2 quarts of water. If you can let it simmer
overnight, uncovered, until about 2 cups of water remain, it’s even better,
but if not, that’s okay. Strain the mixture, save the liquid, and discard the
herbs. This should make 2 cups to sip on throughout the day.
10. Vitamin C
Although vitamin C is often celebrated as a powerful antioxidant, the
benefit of vitamin C for the immune system is, at first glance, less than
stellar. For example, several studies have shown that vitamin C
supplementation has little or no effect on colds. Most of these studies
involved supplementation at small doses or supplementation after the
--- END PAGE 779 ---

--- PAGE 780 ---
onset of colds. But other studies do indeed show benefit from larger doses
and from taking vitamin C prior to the onset of illness. Some newer
studies confirm that 1,000 mg per day of the right type of vitamin C can
shorten the duration and mitigate the severity of colds while also
preventing colds from developing, especially in people with low vitamin C
levels.
In addition, many of the negative studies done on vitamin C look at a
form known as ascorbic acid. Ascorbic acid is actually a synthetic form of
vitamin C that is typically made from genetically modified corn, and it
lacks the beneficial bioflavonoids present in whole-food forms of vitamin
C. Also, keep in mind that approximately 80 percent of the world’s vitamin
C supplements come from China, where the manufacturing and quality
controls aren’t as stringent as in the United States. There is even some
concern that the vitamin C we consume so much of in supplement form
and that is often used as an additive in processed food is tainted with
impurities such as heavy metals.
But contrary to popular belief, there is little difference between the
various forms of vitamin C as far as bioavailability is concerned. According
to the Linus Pauling Institute, natural and synthetic vitamin C are
chemically identical and have the same effect on vitamin C levels in the
blood. The same can be said for powders, tablets, capsules, liquids, and
food forms of vitamin C. So your primary concern should be the purity
and quality of a vitamin C supplement, not its bioavailability.
To find a good-quality vitamin C product, look for an all-organic food-
based supplement or a USP-grade vitamin C, produced in a GMP-certified
facility (GMP stands for “good manufacturing practices,” and supplements
produced at such a facility will be higher quality and safer). A few good
products that fit these criteria include Whole Foods Market Food-Sourced
Vitamin C, Jigsaw Health Adrenal Cocktail, American Nutraceuticals
Vitality C, Kion Immune, and OrthoMolecular Buffered C Capsules.
--- END PAGE 780 ---

--- PAGE 781 ---
If you take more than 500 mg of vitamin C orally, you’ll likely
experience stomach upset. But you may not get any extra benefit from a
dose higher than 500 mg in any case. Dr. Mark Levine, chief of molecular
and clinical nutrition at the National Institutes of Health and author of a
research project proposing increasing the recommended daily amount of
vitamin C, said: “At 100 milligrams all the tissues are saturated, at 200
milligrams, the blood plasma is saturated, but at 500 milligrams dose, then
absorption levels appear complete, and rate of absorption begins to
decrease.” Dr. Andrew Weil, an alternative medicine physician, reduced his
recommended dosage of vitamin C, from 2,000 to 6,000 mg divided into
three doses a day to only 200 to 500 mg divided into two doses per day. He
made this change after he examined two studies that showed lower levels
of ascorbic acid more than adequately saturate the body’s tissues and are
sufficient to protect against cancer, heart disease, and other chronic
illnesses. And a review of clinical trials published in the Journal of the
American Medical Association concluded that 200 mg a day is the
maximum humans can absorb when taken orally. But aside from the
potential stomach upset, you don’t need to worry if you do take higher
doses because vitamin C is water soluble, and anything not used by the
body quickly passes out. Ultimately, based on all this evidence, I suggest
taking 200 to 500 mg of oral vitamin C during cold and flu season.
Of course, the best, most natural sources of vitamin C have a single
thing in common: they are all plant foods! Although most mammals can
produce vitamin C in the liver, humans (and, oddly enough, guinea pigs)
cannot, but plants provide a rich, highly bioavailable source of vitamin C.
All citrus fruits, including orange, grapefruit, lime, and lemon, are
excellent sources of vitamin C. Many non-citrus fruits are also rich in
vitamin C, including papayas, strawberries, pineapples, kiwis, cantaloupes,
and raspberries. Green leafy vegetables such as Swiss chard and
cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli and cauliflower are also excellent
--- END PAGE 781 ---

--- PAGE 782 ---
sources, as is parsley, which provides over half of the recommended daily
amount of vitamin C.
Occasional IV therapy to deliver higher doses of vitamin C, also
sometimes called mega-dose vitamin C therapy, involves administering
large amounts of vitamin C through an intravenous drip. An IV vitamin C
protocol involves the slow infusion of vitamin C at doses on the order of
0.1 to 1.0 g ascorbate per kilogram of body weight, which can mean getting
15 to 100 g of vitamin C! Of course, it would be impossible to consume this
amount of vitamin C orally without severe gastric upset, but high plasma
ascorbate concentrations can be safely achieved with IV infusions. In the
past decade, the popularity of this tactic has exploded among functional
medicine practitioners. It can be used to combat infections, treat
rheumatoid arthritis, enhance collagen synthesis, and manage
autoimmune diseases, and it has generated the most interest for its
potential use in adjunctive cancer care.
11. Oregano Oil
When I was sixteen, my father suddenly began smelling like a giant Italian
pizza. See, dear Dad had read a book by Dr. Cass Ingram called The Cure Is
in the Cupboard, in which he discovered a potent herb that he used to heal
a fungal infection of his foot. From that point on, I would hear him drone
on and on about the wonders of oregano—which is considered to be the
healing “hyssop” alluded to in ancient scriptures—at the dinner table, and
I slowly became well versed in something called “oil of oregano.” I later
added it to my travel kit and immune system protocol as an absolute
must-have—I use it all the time, from dripping it into my mouth before
airplane travel to sprinkling it on my feet after using the shower at a health
club or gym to cleaning external wounds, scrapes, and cuts with it.
--- END PAGE 782 ---

--- PAGE 783 ---
Dr. Ingram in his book claims that wild oregano oil (unlike the
standard thyme-based oregano oil found in most grocery stores) can help
to reverse digestive complaints; boost the immune system; cleanse the
body of fungi, yeasts, bacteria, and viruses; and protect against common
illnesses.
So what makes oregano oil so special? Oregano (Origanum vulgare) is
an herb that is a member of the mint family and has been valued for over
2,500 years in folk medicine for treating colds, indigestion, and upset
stomachs. PubMed, a database of published medical and life sciences
literature, lists almost two hundred studies on the beneficial properties of
oregano oil and over eight hundred studies showing the benefits of
carvacrol, one of the primary ingredients of oregano, for bacterial
infections, fungal infections, parasites, viruses, inflammation, allergies,
tumors, indigestion, candida, small intestine bacterial overgrowth, and
even to reduce side effects from medications and drugs.
Carvacrol and thymol provide oregano’s antiseptic and antioxidant
properties. In addition, the terpenes in oregano, pinene and terpinene,
contribute to its antiseptic, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and anesthetic
properties. Two long-chain alcohols, linalool and borneol, provide
additional antiseptic and antiviral qualities. Finally, the esters linalyl
acetate and geranyl acetate act as antifungal agents. It is the combination
of these components working together that makes oregano such a potent
protector of the immune system.
Good uses for oregano oil include these:
• Using it on skin to kill fungal infections or remove warts
• Applying several drops to wounds or infections (including MRSA and
staph) externally
• Consuming one or two dropperfuls per day during cold and flu season,
or when traveling (if the taste is too overwhelming, dilute in water
--- END PAGE 783 ---

--- PAGE 784 ---
with a bit of stevia)
• Adding tea tree oil and lavender to it, then placing several dropperfuls
in a spray bottle filled with water to kill household mold
• Using a few drops on your toothbrush in addition to your toothpaste
or when you can’t find your toothpaste
If you add oregano oil to your immune system arsenal, I recommend
that you look for an oregano oil that has a natural carvacrol level of over
80 percent. The fake stuff at the grocery store or on a bulk supplement
website typically consists of thymol or is harvested from thyme, which
doesn’t have the same potent effect as an oil high in carvacrol. Finally,
should you purchase the 100 percent pure version of oregano oil, be
cautious. It is extremely caustic and can burn the skin or mouth, so you
must mix it into a carrier oil that both dilutes it and maintains its
bioavailability (almond is a good carrier oil).
12. Mushrooms
Mushrooms are a nutritional powerhouse, providing B vitamins, minerals,
fiber, protein, antioxidants, and beta-glucans and other bioactive
molecules that fight harmful bacteria, viruses, and toxins. Many
mushrooms are also immunomodulators that stimulate the immune
system’s defense mechanisms.
For example, one study found that daily consumption of 5 to 10 g of
shiitake mushrooms for four weeks significantly improved immunity and
lowered inflammation. Shiitake mushrooms also exert antitumor activity
and, when used in conjunction with chemotherapy, have been shown to
prolong survival time, restore immunological parameters, and improve
quality of life. The American College of Nutrition has found that shiitake
mushrooms can improve the efficiency of the immune system, improve
--- END PAGE 784 ---

--- PAGE 785 ---
gut immunity, and decrease inflammation, and lab tests on human cell
lines show that shiitake mushrooms can prevent malignant tumor growth
by signaling tumor cells to burst in a process called apoptosis. Lastly,
shiitake mushrooms have potent antimicrobial properties, making them
effective natural antibiotics. Amazingly, one study showed that shiitake
only killed disease-causing microbes, leaving beneficial bacteria unharmed
(in contrast, prescription antibiotics kill off both beneficial and bad
bacteria in your body).
Maitake mushrooms are also powerful immunomodulators that
stimulate the immune system’s defense reaction through enhanced
cytokine production, phagocytosis, and NK cell activity. Cordyceps, which
is a fungus that lives on certain caterpillars in the high mountain regions
of China, also exhibits potent antitumor effects and immunomodulating
effects. Studies have shown that cordyceps can help improve the body’s
innate immune function, and it’s so effective in modulating immunity
(which involves both improving an immune reaction to an invader or
tumor and reducing an immune overreaction like asthma) that it has even
shown benefits in studies on people with severe asthma. Evidence also
suggests that cordyceps can help autoimmune issues and decrease the
number of harmful bacteria in the gut.
The turkey tail mushroom contains bioactive compounds called beta-
glucans, which can stimulate the immune system by enhancing
macrophage and natural killer cell function. Studies also suggest that beta-
glucans can help the immune system slow the growth of tumors and
protect the body from the effects of cancer-causing compounds. Turkey
tail also contains a high number of prebiotics, which feed the good
bacteria in your gut and support immunity.
Another little known but highly effective mushroom is the tremella,
which is rich in vitamin D and fiber, and contains specific compounds that
protect the liver. Research suggests that tremella mushrooms can help the
--- END PAGE 785 ---

--- PAGE 786 ---
body fight infections, and in ancestral medicine, it has long been used as
an immune tonic.
Finally, there’s one of the most powerful mushrooms for immune
systems, the “king of medicinal mushrooms”: chaga. Chaga has an
abundance of beta-glucans, and research has also shown that it activates
immune cells responsible for combating cancer growth. Chaga increases
the production of immune cells IL-6 and lymphocyte, which can help
increase the ability to fight pathogens. Other compounds in chaga help the
immune system to differentiate between the body’s cells and foreign cells.
Chaga reduces immune hypersensitivity and even reduces the risk of
cardiac shock from severe allergic reactions. Chaga also has antiviral
properties and can help fight off viral infections—it may even reduce the
ability of HIV to replicate and prevent herpes and Epstein-Barr viruses
from infecting new cells and replicating.
Most of these mushrooms help regulate cell-mediated and adaptive
immunity via the process of modulation—both potentiating and
suppressing the immune system similar to the way that an adaptogen can
modulate endocrine and hormonal balance.
One of my favorite ways to get a daily dose of immune-boosting
mushrooms is to use Four Sigmatic’s Protect Mushroom Blend, which
includes a hefty dose of vitamin C (from rosehips), along with chaga,
reishi, cordyceps, lion’s mane, shiitake, maitake, and a few other choice
immune-boosting mushrooms. You can put a teaspoon of this blend in
your morning cup of coffee or tea. Other good brands include Real
Mushrooms, Cymbiotika, and Host Defense.
13. Bee Products
When it comes to creating compounds that support the immune system,
bees can be a valuable resource. You’re no doubt familiar with honey, but
--- END PAGE 786 ---

--- PAGE 787 ---
there are also three other immune-supporting bee products: bee pollen,
royal jelly, and propolis.
Real raw honey stands in stark contrast to the fake, pesticide- and
herbicide-laden, nutrient-poor honey you find in the average plastic honey
bear at the grocery store. Raw honey has so many enzymes that it’s the
only food in the world that never goes bad, and it’s full of minerals and
antioxidants. In addition, honey contains minor amounts of the same type
of bioactive components found in antioxidant-rich fruits and vegetables,
including phenolic acid, flavonoids, α-tocopherol, ascorbic acid, proteins,
and carotenoids.
Honey also has potent antiviral properties and can speed recovery
from viral infections. Manuka honey, a type of honey produced by bees
that feed on the nectar of the tea tree, inhibits flu virus replication and has
been shown to be more effective than the active ingredients in popular
cough medicines at improving both cough and sleep quality in individuals
with upper respiratory infections. Methylglyoxal (MGO) is the primary
anti-flu component of manuka honey. When selecting manuka honey, look
for the MGO label on the jar and choose a brand with an MGO content of
83 or above (the higher the MGO rating, the higher the level of antiviral
activity of the honey).
Bee pollen is one of the most nutrient-dense foods found in nature.
It’s packed full of vitamins and minerals, and it has nearly a full spectrum
of essential nutrients. Pollen is the colostrum of the insect world—it
contains more protein per gram than any other animal-based food, as well
as free-forming amino acids. Research suggests that bee pollen has potent
antifungal, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, anticancer, liver-
protecting, and local analgesic properties.
Royal jelly, secreted by glands in the heads of nurse bees, is the
exclusive food of queen bees, who live about forty times longer than
worker bees. Cleopatra used royal jelly on her skin regularly because of its
--- END PAGE 787 ---

--- PAGE 788 ---
regenerative and healing effects. Research suggests that nutrient-dense
royal jelly may also support nerve health, mental acuity, and memory and
protect against nerve damage because of its high acetylcholine content.
It’s certainly a superfood. It contains proteins, fatty acids, polyphenols,
adenosine monophosphate, and hormones like testosterone, estradiol,
progesterone, and prolactin.
Finally, there’s propolis, which is the most potent of the immune-
supporting compounds we can borrow from the bees. Propolis, taken from
the Greek words for defense (pro) and city or community (polis), is
known commonly as “bee glue” and is literally the immune protection for
the beehive. Bees use propolis to seal holes and cracks in the beehive; it
hardens the walls and even makes the inside of the hive aseptic. Studies on
humans have shown that it has several applications in treating a host of
diseases because of its antiseptic, antibacterial, antioxidant, anti-
inflammatory, antifungal, antiulcer, antimycotic, anticancer, and
immunomodulatory properties. It contains over three hundred natural
compounds that have been shown to help immunity, and there’s evidence
that humans have been using propolis to support health since 300 BC.
In my pantry, you’ll find royal jelly, propolis, bee pollen, and raw honey
from Beekeeper’s Naturals; a selection of other local, raw organic honeys;
and even a drinkable blend of royal jelly, propolis, bee pollen, and wasp
extract from Vespa (which is also a keto-friendly fuel for athletes).
14. Peptides
Peptides, introduced in chapter 5, can be incredibly effective for targeting
the multifaceted immune system. My favorite immune-boosting peptide
stack includes the peptides TB-500, Thymalin, and LL-37.
The humble thymus gland is critical in developing your immune
system but is constantly assailed by stress and inflammation, resulting in
--- END PAGE 788 ---

--- PAGE 789 ---
an ever-shrinking thymus and gradually lower T cells with age. Thymosin
beta-4 is a peptide produced by the thymus that plays a key role in
regulating immunity and producing white blood cells, lymphocytes, T
cells, B cells, and antibodies. Some people actually eat thymus gland in the
form of “sweetbreads” or powdered thymus extract with the notion that it
may support immunity, but TB-500, a synthetic version of the naturally
occurring peptide present in virtually all human and animal cells, can be
far more potent and effective for fighting inflammation, healing tissue,
thymus gland regeneration, and maintaining a “young” immune system.
There are very few guidelines around dosing TB-500, so it’s best to follow
your medical practitioner’s or the manufacturer’s suggestions. However,
here is what I’ve used successfully in my own peptide protocol: 3 mg every
other day as a subcutaneous injection, cycling for three months on and
three months off.
Thymalin is yet another immune-boosting peptide produced by the
thymus gland. With practically no side effects, it has powerful
immunomodulatory properties and plays a role in cytokine production
and T cell production and function, both of which are vital for fighting
inflammation and antiviral defense. Dosing guidelines are 5 to 10 mg once
per day for three to ten days, repeated every six to twelve months, via
subcutaneous or intramuscular injection.
Finally, research on LL-37, an antimicrobial peptide, indicates that it
also has antibiotic, antifungal, and antiviral properties. It can be highly
effective for autoimmune issues and gut conditions, including fungal and
bacterial overgrowth. Warning: If you have SIBO (see chapter 13), the die-
off and Herxheimer reaction from LL-37 can be uncomfortable and may
involve flu-like symptoms and diarrhea for up to two weeks. After that,
however, many people experience the complete resolution of SIBO
symptoms and significant elimination of bloating and gas, particularly in
--- END PAGE 789 ---

--- PAGE 790 ---
response to FODMAP and carbohydrate intake. Dosing guidelines are 100
mcg twice per day for four to six weeks via subcutaneous injection.
15. Methylene Blue
Methylene blue, an intriguing compound that you may have noticed
already has appeared in multiple chapters of this book as a cognitive
enhancer, neuroprotective agent, mood elevator, pain reducer, anti-
inflammatory, and senescent cell remover, also has impressive effects on
the immune system. A synthetic dye with a long history of medical use,
methylene blue has garnered plenty of attention for its
immunomodulatory effects. Studies suggest that methylene blue possesses
antioxidant properties and is capable of scavenging free radicals and
reducing oxidative stress, both of which can compromise immune
function. By neutralizing reactive oxygen species (ROS) and bolstering
antioxidant defenses, methylene blue can help protect immune cells from
damage and enhance their ability to mount an effective immune response
against pathogens.
Furthermore, methylene blue has been shown to exhibit anti-
inflammatory properties, being capable of modulating immune-signaling
pathways and dampening excessive inflammatory responses. Chronic
inflammation is implicated in the pathogenesis of numerous diseases and
can impair immune function, making it crucial to regulate inflammatory
processes effectively. Methylene blue may help alleviate inflammation by
inhibiting pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-
alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), while promoting the
production of anti-inflammatory mediators. By modulating the immune
system’s inflammatory balance, methylene blue may contribute to
maintaining immune homeostasis and reducing the risk of inflammatory-
related disorders.
--- END PAGE 790 ---

--- PAGE 791 ---
In addition, emerging research suggests that methylene blue may exert
direct antimicrobial effects against various pathogens, including bacteria,
viruses, and parasites. By disrupting microbial membrane integrity,
inhibiting essential metabolic pathways, or interfering with nucleic acid
synthesis, methylene blue can impede pathogen growth and proliferation.
This antimicrobial activity may complement the immune system’s defense
mechanisms, helping to combat infections and support overall immune
function. Dr. John Lieurance, who introduced me to methylene blue,
suggests in his book Methylene Blue Magic Bullet to take a dose of 0.5 to 1
mg per kilogram of body weight per day, two to four days per week.
Methylene blue can be dosed orally in sublingual, dissolvable troche, or
liquid form, as a suppository, or even as an IV. I’ll include some of my
favorite brands and resources for learning more about methylene blue on
the resources page for this chapter.
16. Germs
Don’t be afraid to get dirty.
Did you eat your own boogers when you were a kid? If so, you’re not
alone—it turns out that we may actually be hardwired to eat our own
boogers. Studies have shown that a kid’s snot harbors bacteria that, when
eaten, help strengthen the body’s immune system. Don’t worry, that
doesn’t mean you need to harvest your or your kid’s boogers and consume
them as dietary staples, but it does highlight the fact that we need to allow
our bodies to be exposed to germs and to get dirty.
I must admit, when my shiny new twin baby boys were brought onto
the planet nearly seventeen years ago, I had my doubts about the value of
letting their soft and innocent bodies roll, crawl, and toddle among the
dirt and doggy doo. But since then—and especially after learning what I’m
about to share with you—I have become extremely lax about germs, and
--- END PAGE 791 ---

--- PAGE 792 ---
my boys now clamber up and down farm animals near our house and
elephants in third-world countries, wallow like hogs in every mud puddle
they find, and eat fistfuls of olives with faces and hands still stained from
exploring every corner of the garage and backyard. Turns out, it’s good for
them.
THE HYGIENE HYPOTHESIS
Although the idea that exposure to certain infections may decrease the
risk of allergies is not new, Dr. David Strachan was one of the first to
formally propose it as the “hygiene hypothesis” in scientific literature, in a
1989 article in the British Medical Journal. In the paper, Strachan points out
that hay fever and eczema were less common in children from larger
families, and that children from larger families were probably exposed to
more germs through their siblings. Since then, epidemiological studies
have confirmed the protective effects of large family size, as well as of
growing up on a farm.
In a 2003 article in a journal of immunology, Dr. Graham Rook
proposes the “old friends” hypothesis, arguing that we have become so
dependent on microbes that coevolved with mammalian immune systems
that our immune systems can neither develop nor function properly
without them. These microbes include species that inhabit our skin, gut,
and respiratory tract; species that inhabit the domesticated animals and
pets we live with; and even organisms such as symbiotic bacteria, viruses,
and parasites or worms that establish chronic infections that we can
actually tolerate and that help us develop specific immunoregulatory
responses.
Finally, in the past several years, the “microbial diversity” hypothesis
has emerged. This idea holds that the health and diversity of the bacterial
species in our gut mucosae is a key factor for strengthening the immune
systems: more-diverse microbiomes are better for our health than those
--- END PAGE 792 ---

--- PAGE 793 ---
with a limited number of bacterial species. This may relate to the hygiene
hypothesis. Dr. Rook compared the embryonic immune system to a
computer that contains many programs but little data. During gestation
and childhood, the immune system builds a “database” of organisms that
allows it to identify and respond to harmful agents in the internal or
external environment. This microbial diversity hypothesis is why I
recommend vaginal delivery of babies, which exposes newborns to the
variety of bacterial species in the vaginal canal.
Each of these hypotheses is based on the general concept of
upregulation of the body’s T cells in response to infectious agents and
appears to be well supported by epidemiological data. Many studies have
proven that autoimmune diseases are much less common in developing
countries than in industrialized countries and that people who emigrate
from developing countries to industrialized countries develop
immunological disorders such as asthma and disorders only upon
spending a certain amount of time there.
Sure, not all germs are created equal, and there are definitely some
situations in which you should protect your kids. For example, if MRSA (a
staph infection), rabies, measles, rotavirus, anthrax, or Ebola is sweeping
through your city, it’s a good idea to keep the kids indoors and not send
them out to sweat and blow snot with the other kids. But these situations
are few and far between. By and large, exposure to a wide range of germs
will help your kids develop strong immune systems and help them avoid
allergies and autoimmune problems.
BOOSTING YOUR CHILD’S IMMUNE SYSTEM
One of the best ways to jump-start the immune system with beneficial
flora is to be born via vaginal delivery—even Mom’s fecal matter can be a
boon. But there are also plenty of other ways to get dirty and boost your
immune system. Here are ten that children can highly benefit from—and
--- END PAGE 793 ---

--- PAGE 794 ---
although these are aimed at kids, you’ll find that implementing them helps
your immune system, too.
1. Let your children touch and taste things.
Although your natural reaction may be to slap that handful of leaves, patch
of dirty grass, clump of mud, or slightly discolored snowball out of your
child’s exploring hands, resist the urge! The same goes for their propensity
to gnaw on shopping cart handles, lick random windows, and chew on the
seat belts in the car. Allow your children to experiment touching, handling,
and even tasting the natural world around them. My kids kiss our dog on
the lips. When they were infants, I often saw them lick the floor of the
public bathroom at coffee shops, crawl through airports with their noses
to the ground, and even rip their diapers off and eat their own poop. This
may disgust you and make your parenting, caretaking heart want to leap
forward with an antibacterial wipe, but frankly, the pros outweigh the cons
when it comes to your kids’ noses and mouths getting down and dirty with
nature.
--- END PAGE 794 ---

--- PAGE 795 ---
2. Don’t be a bottle boiler.
Sure, just like other dishes, bottles (and pacifiers) should be cleaned of
fluid and food residue every now and again via boiling or washing, but you
don’t need to nuke the pacifier every time it touches the carpet or boil the
bottle nipple after the dog sniffs it. Your children can (and should) eat and
drink from slightly germ-tainted surfaces every now and again.
3. Avoid antibacterial soaps.
When I used to pick my kids up from childcare at the YMCA, I would
sometimes get strange looks from the other parents because I went out of
my way to remind my kids not to use the antibacterial hand soap. That
stuff can actually hurt your kids. By constantly using antibacterial soaps
and hand sanitizers, we may be not only inhibiting immune development
--- END PAGE 795 ---

--- PAGE 796 ---
in our children but also creating “superbugs,” bacteria that are resistant to
pharmaceutical and natural antibiotics. So stick to good old soap and
water, and even with these compounds, avoid excessive hand washing.
4. Avoid antibiotics.
Don’t rush out and grab a Z-Pak or an antiviral medication when they get
the flu or are knocked down by a nasty bug. This can create the same kind
of drug-resistant bacteria that antibacterial soaps do. However, if your
child is seriously down for the count with the flu, you may need to be
worried about secondary infections such as pneumonia, bronchitis, or
sinusitis. In this case, I recommend you look into natural ways to boost
white blood cell count or introduce natural antiviral or antibacterial
substances, many of which I describe in this chapter, such as thieves oil,
oregano oil, echinacea, mushrooms, and elderberry tinctures.
5. Visit farms and have pets.
--- END PAGE 796 ---

--- PAGE 797 ---
You don’t need to fly to Asia and play with monkeys and elephants to
expose your children to beneficial worms and germs. Instead, go on the
occasional field trip to your local farm to pet the sheep or feed the horses.
And pets count! Cats, dogs, gerbils, guinea pigs, and even fish can expose
children to a variety of bacteria and other living organisms they might not
otherwise encounter. In a modern era of virtual pets and GigaPets,
consider being the parent who instead builds a backyard chicken coop or
visits the pet store for the occasional birthday gift.
6. Increase your kids’ time with other kids.
For the first several years of school, we homeschooled our twin boys, but
we also made sure to put them in gymnastics and jujitsu, where they were
able to tumble around on slightly dirty floors or mats surrounded by other
children. We also went out of our way to ensure they frequently visited the
gym’s childcare facilities; participated in basketball, tennis, and soccer;
went to music camps and ski school; and engaged in a variety of other
extracurricular activities—all of which exposed our young children to
other kids’ sniffles, skin, and sweat.
--- END PAGE 797 ---

--- PAGE 798 ---
7. Eat a variety of cultured foods.
For years I have told my wife that she needs to write a cookbook called
Dirty Kitchen, alluding to the amount of lactofermentation and bacterial
cultures she uses during food prep (good idea, eh?). I love this title
because it refers to the wide variety of bacteria in foods such as natto,
kimchi, kefir, pickles, yogurts, sauerkraut, rakfisk, poi, kombucha, and even
chocolate. Earlier in this chapter, I explained the importance of
fermentation for the immune system, and there’s no reason that children
shouldn’t be exposed to these same foods early in life. Remember that
variety is important; simply feeding your child the same probiotic pill day
after day is probably not going to be an adequate stimulus for their
immune system.
--- END PAGE 798 ---

--- PAGE 799 ---
8. Encourage your kids to play outside.
I wish this tip could go without saying, but the sad truth is that a great
percentage of children spend more time indoors on Wii, PlayStation, and
Xbox than they do outdoors getting dirty. On any nice afternoon, we kick
our kids out into the backyard to explore, and since they were tiny
toddlers, they’ve always returned with dirt under their fingernails (or
possibly animal dung), mud around their noses and mouths, and weeds
and wild grasses lodged in their clothes. These are all immune system
boosters that far outweigh the inconvenience of having to wash dirty
children. Of course, our kids learned firsthand the ravages of itchy poison
ivy, the sharp stings of hornets, and the pain of road rash from tricycle
tricks and bike crashes, but the pros outweigh the cons, and it’s okay to
take pride in a dirty, cut-up kid sitting down to dinner at the dining room
table.
9. Don’t make your kids bathe or shower every day.
In our post-Victorian, cleanliness-obsessed culture, it can be tempting to
give our children a daily warm bath, followed of course by a perfect hairdo
and a color-coordinated outfit from the Gap. But sometimes it’s okay to let
the dirt ferment on your child. On many a summer day, our boys go two or
three days getting dirty and playing outside without a bar of soap in sight
—and while they get a bit stinky and stained, this is a fabulous stimulus
--- END PAGE 799 ---

--- PAGE 800 ---
for their immune system. Let those soil-based organisms thrive on your
child’s skin! If “no-soap showers” are just not your thing, then you may be
interested in AOBiome, a biotech start-up that has created a spray that
contains billions of cultivated bacteria commonly found in dirt and
untreated water—so now you can basically pay for an expensive skin
cosmetic to get the same thing you would get from rolling around on your
lawn.
10. Don’t do excessive loads of laundry.
Germs, dirt, and bacteria thrive on clothing. Prior to reading the other
parts of this chapter, you might have been tempted to take this as a sign to
do a daily load of laundry. While you shouldn’t necessarily send your child
to sports, school, or social events smelling or looking like a pigpen, it’s
okay to give clothes a few good wears before laundering—in the same way
that you don’t need to boil bottles and pacifiers constantly. Most of the
time, it’s okay for kids to smell a little bit like . . . kids.
While this list of ways to get you or your kids dirty is by no means
comprehensive, hopefully it gets your wheels turning about exposing your
children to (gasp!) pathogenic organisms—including bacteria, worms,
parasites, germs, fungus, viruses, and even other sick kids and dirty
animals. This may be one of the best favors you can do for your family, and
if you have kids, you will probably be giving them an advantage later in life,
--- END PAGE 800 ---

--- PAGE 801 ---
especially compared to children who grew up in a bubble. Your own
immune system will benefit quite a bit too—and you’ll have one less
reason to be grossed out when your little one sneezes in your face, coughs
at the table, or tracks a trail of dirt into the house!
What About COVID?
In 2020, when the COVID pandemic began, I approached a naturopathic and
functional medicine network I’m a part of on Facebook and curated some of
the top tips from the expert physicians in that group. Here are some of the
best of the golden nuggets they provided, which you can rely on as extra
“pro tips” for immunity from some of the best medical experts I know—tips
that are particularly useful if a virus seems to be spreading.
• Combine colloidal silver, BHT (butylated hydroxytoluene), and vitamin D
as a daily regimen. In your bedroom and office, and even during travel,
use a small cool-mist humidifier, because the respiratory system’s natural
defenses don’t work as well when they get dried out. A few drops of
thieves oil or frankincense in the diffuser is highly recommended.
• Take sani-wipes with you and clean areas where you sit in a plane or hotel
room. They must be the kind with antiseptic agents that kill viruses (not
baby wipes).
• For managing the immune system via the mouth and nose, use Halo oral
antiseptic and Biocidin liquid (a potent broad-spectrum botanical
combination), along with N99 face masks.
• Use chlorine dioxide. Place a few drops in a glass of water you drink
during the day, and also put it in a spray bottle and mist your face often
while traveling. Alternatively, you can use Briotech HOCl as a spray and
mouthwash.
• Travel with the following health kit: SilverSol, elderberry, vitamin D/K
blend, Biocidin, iodine, vitamin C, and umcka (a homeopathic remedy
that may shorten the duration and severity of common cold symptoms).
• Use a device like the Vielight for intranasal red-light therapy, daily for
twenty-five minutes.
--- END PAGE 801 ---

--- PAGE 802 ---
• Nebulize low-concentrate, 3 percent food-grade hydrogen peroxide in a
10:1 ratio of saline water to hydrogen peroxide, for twenty minutes per
day. You can also nebulize liquid glutathione (Glutastat is a good brand)
and colloidal silver.
• Use ozone oil capsules orally or as a suppository, or implement ozone IVs
or rectal ozone regularly.
The details and further instructions for all these tips and many others related
to diet, medication, lifestyle, biohacking, and supplementation can be found
in a helpful document I created and maintained during the entire four-year
COVID pandemic. You can find it at BenGreenfieldLife.com/virusQA.
THE POWER OF THE MIND
So far this chapter has focused on the body—all the ways that you can
boost your physiological immune system. But the mind plays a powerful
role in physical well-being, too.
There are over 150,000 different proteins that make up your body. The
shape of each protein can change as a result of electromagnetic fields, and
when it changes shape from one configuration to another, the protein
molecule moves, as do all the other protein molecules surrounding it,
which cooperate in functional assemblies called pathways. Respiratory
pathways, digestive pathways, and muscle contraction pathways are all
examples of assemblies of proteins whose coordinated movements
produce specific biological functions.
Studies have shown that this change in the shape of proteins can
change the expression of genes. Electromagnetic fields are generated by
thoughts and emotions, and since proteins are altered by electromagnetic
fields, this means that genes can be turned on and off by those same fields.
That’s right: you can control gene activity by focusing on your beliefs.
--- END PAGE 802 ---

--- PAGE 803 ---
Beliefs, true or false, positive or negative, creative or destructive,
influence the very cells of your body. This means that DNA does not
control your biology by itself, and that information can be transmitted
throughout your body, to other people’s bodies, and even to your
descendants in ways other than through the base sequence of DNA. It
means that harnessing the power of your mind can be just as effective or
even more effective than pharmaceuticals, supplements, and biohacks, and
that your perception of your environment significantly affects your health.
So is it true that a sunny outlook means fewer colds and less heart
disease, that hope can somehow protect against hypertension, diabetes,
and respiratory tract infections, and that happier people live longer? It
turns out that the biology of emotion—and what it may teach us about
helping people to live longer—has been studied at prestigious institutions
such as Harvard. Laura Kubzansky of the Harvard School of Public Health
is at the forefront of such research. In a 2007 study that followed more
than six thousand men and women aged twenty-five to seventy-four for
twenty years, she found that emotional vitality—a sense of enthusiasm,
hopefulness, engagement in life, and ability to face life’s stresses with
emotional balance—significantly reduces the risk of coronary heart
disease, even when accounting for healthy behaviors such as not smoking
and regular exercise.
A Story of Emotions and Cancer
I first realized the power of emotions and stress to affect disease when I
traveled to Israel for a tour of the country’s collection of health spas,
fitness centers, healing retreats, and wellness facilities. In northern
Galilee, I visited the home of a former professional basketball player,
Doron Sheffer.
--- END PAGE 803 ---

--- PAGE 804 ---
Doron had been an amazing athlete. He was an achiever. A hard-
charger. As a guard for the dominant college basketball team at the
University of Connecticut, he averaged five assists and thirteen points per
game, hit 40 percent of his three-point attempts, and led the team to a
brilliant 89-13 record. He then became the first Israeli ever drafted by the
NBA in 1996, but he instead signed a lucrative contract with an Israeli
professional basketball team, which he then led to four consecutive
national championships.
But then Doron got testicular cancer. When I sat down with him in his
backyard garden looking over the beautiful hills of Amirim, eating a meal
of organic figs, goji berries, and sweet local almonds, he described how the
tremendous pressure, pent-up emotions, and stress in the life of a hard-
charging professional athlete eventually built up inside him and
culminated in disease.
As a matter of fact, scientists at Yale University have discovered that
the conditions for developing cancer can be significantly affected by your
emotional environment, including everyday work and family stress. In this
case, Western medicine is catching up to the traditional Chinese medical
view of cancer, which has long held that emotions are a major contributing
factor. For example, researcher Sun Binyan wrote in his book Cancer
Treatment and Prevention, “According to our understanding of the tumor
patient, most have suppression of the emotions. They tend to hold in their
anger. Although some patients have good results after treatment,
emotional stimulation may cause them to decline again and then the
previous treatment would have been in vain. Some people have a severe
phobia about cancer. Before they know the real disease, they have a lot of
suspicion. Once they know they have cancer, their whole spirit breaks
down. This kind of spiritual state is very bad for the treatment.” And in the
book Prevention and Treatment of Carcinoma in Traditional Chinese Medicine,
author and researcher Jia Kun gives ten recommendations for cancer
--- END PAGE 804 ---

--- PAGE 805 ---
prevention. In addition to having a good environment and personal
hygiene, getting proper amounts of physical activity and rest, having good
eating habits, and avoiding smoking, he states that “emotional changes,
such as worry, fear, hesitation, anger, irritation, and nervousness, should
be prevented. Mental exhaustion is harmful and life should be enriched
with entertainment.”
Western research supports the idea that depression can impair
immune system function, which can contribute to the development of
cancer, since the immune system normally attacks and destroys cancerous
cells. For example, it has been shown that tumor-relevant lymphocyte
subpopulations, also known as natural killer cells (NK cells), which can
attack cancer cells, have receptors for various neuropeptide proteins,
including those released during stress. This means that NK cell activity
can be influenced by emotions. The level of NK cell activity has been
shown in research to be a good predictor of breast cancer outcome, and a
loss of NK activity in cancer patients has been shown to be correlated with
an increase in the patient’s stress levels, lack of social support, and fatigue
or depression.
Another recent report analyzed the findings of close to a hundred
studies that demonstrate how the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), the
fight-or-flight portion of the nervous system, can encourage cancer
metastasis. During acute stress, the SNS is activated, but soon as the
stressful event has passed, the body returns to homeostasis within about
an hour. But under chronic stress, the SNS is turned on virtually all the
time, and in this chronically stressed state, adrenaline and noradrenaline
can alter genetic expression. This genetic alteration can lead to a number
of pro-cancer processes, including activation of inflammatory responses,
inhibition of immune responses and programmed cancer cell death,
reduction in the cytotoxic function of NK cells, inhibition of DNA repair,
stimulation of cancer cell angiogenesis, and activation of epithelial-
--- END PAGE 805 ---

--- PAGE 806 ---
mesenchymal transition, which is one of the ways new cancer stem cells
are created.
One researcher, Dr. Harold Burr, measured the energy fields of mice
and noted which mice later developed cancer. After taking more than ten
thousand measurements, he found that the electromagnetic signature of
cancer appeared in the mouse’s energy field before there was any
detectable cellular malignancy! Dr. Burr also looked at a group of healthy
women who did not have a diagnosis of uterine cancer. The women who
had an electromagnetic signature for uterine cancer—even though they
were apparently healthy—went on to develop cancer later. Cancer was
showing up in the field of energy before it showed up in the physical cells.
Dr. Burr’s body of work demonstrates the wisdom of an ancient saying
in traditional Chinese medicine: The mind controls the qi, and the blood
follows the qi. The ancient sages were referring to life energy, and by
“blood” they meant the body. Energy influences matter! Perhaps this is
why research has shown tumors shrinking to less than half their original
size within just a few hours of an emotional therapy session that elicited
positive emotions, why studies have shown the DNA in lab-grown cancer
cells to disintegrate when positive emotions were directed toward those
cells by Chinese traditional medical practitioners, and why practicing
mindfulness meditation for just three months has been shown to have an
antiaging effect on telomeres.
Now here’s the deal: I’m a hard-charging guy focused on personal and
professional excellence in everything I do. But I truly believe that unless
you are able to relax, breathe, de-stress, and simply stop and smell the
roses, you’re going to eventually develop a chronic-stress-related disease
that forces your fast-forward life into slow motion. So you have to put on
the brakes before your body does, perhaps with the flu, perhaps with back
pain, or perhaps with cancer. Make sense?
--- END PAGE 806 ---

--- PAGE 807 ---
This is exactly what Doron figured out, and his new aura of peace and
calm spoke strongly to me. He defied conventional medicine and naturally
healed his body of cancer, and his approach to life is now refreshing,
relaxed, and incredibly peaceful. When I visited Doron at his home and
private health resort in the mountains of northern Israel, I was
surrounded by a laid-back community of aromatherapists and massage
therapists that featured herb gardens, spas, a health food shop, an organic
olive oil shop, art galleries, restaurants, and wellness bed-and-breakfasts.
These mountains were where Doron slipped away from chronic stress,
reinvigorated his body, and underwent his own spiritual cleanse to win his
battle against testicular cancer.
Alternative Immune-Supporting
Strategies
The ultimate question is this: How can you slow down before your body
forces you to slow down? How can you stop the constant barrage of
emails, text messages, and phone calls, the stress of overexercising, eating
to train and training to eat, going to bed late, 24-7 self-quantified
biohacking, trying to have everything, getting up early, and still somehow
managing to squeeze in some semblance of quality in your friend and
family relationships?
Now that you understand how your thoughts, stressors, emotions, and
beliefs affect your biology, it’s time to identify the techniques and tools
that can help you to use your body as your own pharmacy and heal
yourself from the inside out.
QIGONG
Translated as “life energy cultivation,” qigong is a system of coordinated
body postures and movements, breathing, and meditation used in
--- END PAGE 807 ---

--- PAGE 808 ---
traditional Chinese culture to promote health and spirituality. According
to Taoist, Buddhist, and Confucian philosophy, qigong allows access to
higher realms of awareness and awakens your true nature. Qigong
typically coordinates slow, flowing movements with deep, rhythmic
breathing and a calm, meditative state of mind. My favorite qigong master
is Robert Peng, who is good at distilling this ancient Chinese practice so
that even my eight-year-old twin boys were able to learn qigong along with
me over the course of an eight-week program.
ACUPUNCTURE
While many folks think acupuncture is something you seek out when you
have tendinitis, knee pain, or some other musculoskeletal injury, it is
actually effective not only for treating pain but also for increasing the
amount of qi—life force energy—flowing through specific meridians in the
body. The spiritual elements of acupuncture that often conflict with
Western beliefs and modern medicine have been abandoned by many
acupuncture therapists in favor of simply tapping needles into
acupuncture points. But in traditional Chinese medicine, illness and
imbalanced emotions are perceived as a disharmony or imbalance in qi,
and acupuncture therapy is designed around the pattern of disharmony.
My own acupuncturist in Spokane, Washington, works out of the office
of a physical therapist in a modern medical clinic but still practices
traditional acupuncture and examines things like the color and shape of
my tongue, the strength of my pulse, the quality of my breathing, the
sound of the voice, and (sorry, dude) even the smell of my breath. So you
don’t have to hop on a plane to Hong Kong to get acupuncture done right,
even if you are seeking it out—as I am—for emotional balance and to
achieve a higher level of consciousness, rather than to simply fix an injury
(though it works for that too).
--- END PAGE 808 ---

--- PAGE 809 ---
Some studies suggest that acupuncture causes a series of events within
the central nervous system that results in the release of adenosine, and
that this may deactivate the fight-or-flight sympathetic nervous system.
This may make acupuncture a way to use neurochemicals to cause an
electromagnetic change in your body.
ELECTRIC ACUPUNCTURE
An NES scanner is a frequency-based device that can be used to identify
specific aches, pains, health disorders, and emotions—you can think of it
as an electrical form of acupuncture. When I first began to use an NES
scanner, I placed my right hand on a computer mouse–shaped object that
mapped my body’s energy field. I then plugged the scanner into my
computer. Once the scan was completed, in a few seconds, the software
returned a graphical representation of any distortions in the body’s
information, as well as recommendations for therapy to stimulate the
body’s healing response and correct the noted distortions.
The skin indicates what’s going on underneath it and has a magnetic
quality, so wherever there is a blockage in energy flow or some other
problem, the skin in that area becomes more magnetic or sticky, which the
scanner detects. You then stimulate that area using a handheld
biofeedback device called the miHealth, which comes with the NES
scanner. As you treat the area, the body’s magnetic quality begins to
change as it heals, and the scanner detects that change.
Here’s another way of looking at this: Cells have an electrical potential.
Sick, tired, and malfunctioning cells have a low electrical potential, and
this is what surfaces as magnetic or sticky quality on the skin. By putting
energy back into the problem area, this system can apparently raise the
electrical potential of those cells, restoring them over time to their
normal, optimal functioning. This also stimulates the nervous system,
--- END PAGE 809 ---

--- PAGE 810 ---
sending a signal to the brain to direct resources to that part of the body as
part of the natural healing response.
While this may seem like a modern bastardization of traditional
acupuncture, I consider it to be one of the more potent biohacks I own for
identifying issues with my vibrational frequency and electromagnetic field
and then fixing those issues with a targeted medical device. A similar
option is the AO Scan, a noninvasive device that uses radionics to detect
abnormalities in the various energy frequencies of cells, tissues, and
organs throughout your body.
TAPPING (EFT)
Tapping, also known as emotional freedom technique or EFT, is also
somewhat similar to acupuncture. Acupuncture heals by stimulating the
body’s meridians and energy flow, but surprisingly, you can also stimulate
these meridian points by tapping on them with your fingertips—no
needles or trip to the acupuncturist required. Tapping has been shown to
provide relief from chronic pain, emotional problems, disorders,
addictions, phobias, posttraumatic stress disorder, and chronic diseases.
For example, research done at Harvard Medical School during the last
decade found that the brain’s stress and fear responses, which are
controlled by an almond-shaped part of your brain called the amygdala,
can be downregulated by stimulating the meridian points.
Although these studies focused on acupuncture and used needles,
follow-up double-blind research revealed that stimulating the points
through pressure, as in tapping, gives rise to a similar response. Other
studies have shown tapping to reduce cortisol by up to 50 percent!
Here’s how tapping works: First, identify a problem on which you want
to focus. It can be general anxiety, or it can be a specific situation or issue
that causes you to feel anxious. Then compose a setup statement
acknowledging the problem you want to deal with, such as “I feel very
--- END PAGE 810 ---

--- PAGE 811 ---
anxious right now.” You then follow this statement with an affirmation of
deeply and completely accepting yourself. For example:
• “Even though I feel this anxiety, I deeply and completely accept
myself.”
• “Even though I’m anxious about my interview, I deeply and completely
accept myself.”
• “Even though I’m feeling this anxiety about this relationship, I deeply
and completely accept myself.”
• “Even though I’m having trouble sleeping, I deeply and completely
accept myself.”
Then you begin tapping five to seven times in each of these locations,
in order: on the outer edge of the hand, the eyebrows, the side of the eyes,
under the eyes, under the nose, under the chin, under the collarbone,
under the arm, and on top of the head. You then finish with a deep breath
to release physical and emotional tension.
This may sound a bit woo-woo, but if you include EFT, acupuncture,
and other so-called energy healing methods, there are over one thousand
studies showing that energy healing is effective for an astounding number
of health conditions. (You can find a list of these studies on the National
Institute for Integrative Healthcare website, niih.org.)
MINDFULNESS MEDITATION
If I offered you a pill that could increase your levels of stem cells, lengthen
your telomeres, dissolve beta-amyloid plaques in your brain, improve your
memory and attention, boost serotonin, repair DNA, regulate
inflammation, increase the strength of the immune system, repair skin,
bone, cartilage, and muscle cells, increase growth hormone levels, and
enhance the neural connections in your brain, would you take it? Fact is,
--- END PAGE 811 ---

--- PAGE 812 ---
such a priceless pill is free and backed by research. It’s called mindfulness
meditation.
From holotropic breathwork to transcendental meditation to two-
hour-long chanting sessions, I’ve toyed around with just about every form
of meditation that exists, and I can tell you without a doubt that
mindfulness meditation couldn’t be simpler: you take a seat in a
comfortable place, pay attention to your breath, and when your attention
wanders, you return it to your breath. Heck, even my twin sons perform a
style of this meditation for fifteen to twenty minutes once or twice per
week as part of their program with Twin Eagles Wilderness School in
north Idaho. Most often, they do it outdoors in a traditional Native
American–style sit spot, during which they mindfully observe with their
eyes, ears, nose, and mouth the world around them, or inside our sauna,
during which they focus their attention on a candle or an hourglass, both
of which are fantastic tools to keep the mind from wandering too much
during meditation. The steps for mindfulness meditation are simple:
1. Take a seat on the floor, the ground, a chair, a meditation cushion,
a park bench, or anything else on which you can sit comfortably for
five to forty-five minutes.
2. Straighten your upper body so that your head and shoulders
comfortably rest on top of your vertebrae.
3. Let your hands drop onto the tops of your legs and lightly rest on
your thighs.
4. Drop your chin a little and let your gaze fall gently downward. It
helps to gently rest the tongue against the roof of the mouth. Your
eyes can be open or closed.
5. If possible, breathe through your nose. Bring your attention to your
breath and feel your breath (some say to follow your breath) as it
goes in and out.
--- END PAGE 812 ---

--- PAGE 813 ---
6. Most likely, your attention will leave your breath and wander. Don’t
worry. There’s no need to try hard to stop this from happening.
When you notice your mind wandering, don’t judge yourself or
think you’re failing. Instead, just gently return your attention to
the breath.
7. Before making any physical adjustments, such as scratching an
itch, pause for just a moment. Then, with intention, shift at a
moment you choose. This creates space between what you
experience and what you choose to do.
8. When you’re ready, gently lift your gaze (if your eyes are closed,
you can now open them). Take a relaxed, focused moment and
notice any sounds in the environment, how your body feels, any
thoughts and emotions you have. After you’ve paused, simply move
on and continue with your day.
That’s it. It’s that easy. I’ve found that the box breathing described in
chapter 3 (four-count in, four-count hold, four-count out, four-count hold)
is a good form of breathwork during this style of meditation. Two other
forms of guided mindfulness meditation that I have found to be beneficial
are Dawson Church’s EcoMeditation (available for free online) and Emily
Fletcher’s Ziva Technique.
VISUALIZATION
In the book Getting Well Again: A Step-by-Step Self-Help Guide to Overcoming
Cancer for Patients and Their Families, radiation oncologist Dr. O. Carl
Simonton and his wife, Stephanie Matthews-Simonton, a trained
psychologist, document how people can influence the disease process of
cancer through healing their emotions. They provide example after
example of how visualization prolongs life and improves quality of life in
cancer patients, and in some cases aids in healing cancer altogether.
--- END PAGE 813 ---

--- PAGE 814 ---
Research backs this up: a host of studies connect visualization (often
referred to as guided imagery) with improved mood and quality of life in
cancer patients. But visualization doesn’t just work for chronic diseases. It
can also serve as a quick way to transform yourself out of stress and to a
higher level of energy vibration, which is the frequency at which cells
oscillate within the human body.
Visualization involves creating a detailed mental image of an attractive
or peaceful environment and is often paired with physical relaxation
techniques such as progressive muscle relaxation, which involves
tightening and then relaxing every muscle in your body, one by one. When
visualization is paired with physical relaxation techniques, the aim is to
associate the sensations of relaxation with the peaceful visual image so
that future practice sessions with visualization will quickly bring back the
physical sensations of relaxation. My collegiate tennis coach often used
this strategy with us young, nervous players: as we lay on the court, we
would progressively relax our bodies while visualizing fluid serves and
flawless ground strokes. Later, during match play, we could achieve the
same level of relaxation without stopping to lie down on the court and do
the actual physical relaxation technique (which might have annoyed our
opponents, I would imagine).
The beauty of visualization is that it requires nothing more than your
imagination and concentration. Here’s a simple step-by-step guide:
1. Find a quiet and calm space and make yourself comfortable.
2. Take a few slow and deep breaths to center and calm yourself.
3. Close your eyes.
4. Imagine yourself in a beautiful place where everything is as you
would ideally like it, such as a beach, a mountaintop, a peaceful
meadow, or a forest.
--- END PAGE 814 ---

--- PAGE 815 ---
5. Imagine yourself becoming calm and relaxed—smiling and feeling
full of joy.
6. Focus on the sensory details of your scene to make it more vivid.
For example, if you imagine the beach, spend time imagining the
warmth of the sun on your skin, the smell of the ocean, seaweed,
and salt spray, and the sound of the waves, wind, and seagulls.
7. Remain within your scene for five to ten minutes as you become
more and more relaxed.
8. While relaxed, tell yourself that you can return to this place
whenever you want or need to relax.
9. Then open your eyes and rejoin the real world.
You can find guided visualization audios for free on iTunes and
YouTube. One of my favorites is yoga nidra, also known as NSDR (non-
sleep deep rest), which can place you in a state of rest that is similar to
deep sleep but without actual sleep. I often use a yoga nidra session if I
wake in the wee hours and want to get a bit of extra rest. A few of my
favorite sessions are in the Othership app and on Ally Boothroyd’s
YouTube channel.
YOGA
Research shows that yoga can boost your immune system and decrease
inflammation in the body. As you’ve learned, psychological stress can
impact many systems in the body, including weakening the immune
system and increasing chronic inflammation, but yoga can significantly
combat these issues.
In one study, researchers reviewed fifteen randomized controlled trials
that examined whether the regular practice of yoga postures could
strengthen the immune system and reduce chronic inflammation. The
--- END PAGE 815 ---

--- PAGE 816 ---
majority of the studies used hatha yoga, which combines traditional
postures you’ve probably seen before with breathing techniques.
Scientists in these trials investigated the immune system response to
yoga by measuring blood or saliva levels of circulating pro-inflammatory
markers such as cytokines, C-reactive protein (CRP), immune cell counts,
antibodies, and markers of gene expression in immune cells. They found
that yoga reduced pro-inflammatory markers, with the strongest evidence
for the reduction of a cytokine called IL-1 beta. Another trial found that
yoga could mediate inflammation at the genomic level, changing levels of
proteins that control the DNA transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokine
genes.
So how frequently and how long would you need to practice yoga to
get this effect? Most of these research studies implemented yoga programs
that lasted from eight to twelve weeks, with a frequency of once weekly to
daily and a duration of thirty to ninety minutes, meaning that you can
support your immune system with something as simple as one yoga class
per week. Due to the production of immune-supporting heat-shock
proteins and other benefits of heat and deep sweating, hot yoga is one of
my favorite forms of yoga, often practiced by myself in my basement
sauna, where I’ve removed all the benches to allow room for ample
stretching and yoga postures.
FAITH
A large and growing volume of research documents the benefits of
religious faith on immune functioning and vulnerability to infection. Many
scientific studies have reported a positive association between religious
involvement and indicators of healthy immune function. Many of these
studies have been conducted in individuals with compromised immune
systems, such as older adults and those with HIV/AIDS, other infections,
or immune system disorders. This research shows that religious
--- END PAGE 816 ---

--- PAGE 817 ---
involvement is associated with a reduction in pro-inflammatory cytokine
levels, resistance to infection, and an increase in immune function.
In addition, research shows that those with compromised immune
systems due to viral infections or cancer experience better immune
function if they engage in religious activity. More directly, research in both
healthy and vulnerable populations (for example, people with HIV/AIDS,
hepatitis, and sexually transmitted diseases) has found that religious
activity is associated with decreased rates of infection, decreased viral load
(concentration of virus in blood) among those already infected, and better
outcomes from viral infection over time. One randomized controlled trial
showed improved immune function among those with viral infection in
response to spiritual interventions, including prayer.
When it comes to enhancing immunity through faith, I like to think
about it in the same way that the book The Healing Code explains in great
detail: Sickness and disease ultimately arise from stress. To control stress,
you must steer your energy toward a state of positivity and hope, and to
do so, you must engage in the crucial spiritual disciplines that maintain
your focus on caring for the most important element of your being: your
soul, which if healthy can help can repair your body from the inside out,
but is so often shriveled, shrunken, and neglected if you myopically focus
on purely material remedies.
The spiritual disciplines critical to building a faith practice are
outlined in the book Spiritual Disciplines by Donald Whitney and include
prayer, worship, fasting, serving, silence, solitude, journaling, expressing
gratitude, and knowing your life’s purpose. Because of the vast importance
of these spiritual disciplines for my own fulfillment and happiness and the
key role that they play in overall health and even immunity, I’ve written
four books to help you on your journey: Endure, Fit Soul, Precepts, and The
Spiritual Disciplines Journal. If you were to read these four simple books,
you would have everything you need to know to understand my approach
--- END PAGE 817 ---

--- PAGE 818 ---
to spiritual strength, endurance, and discipline. They are discounted in a
bundle on the resources page for this chapter. Of course, as you dive into
the disciplines, it’s important not to lose sight of the fact that the
epicenter of faith is not to simply “work out” the soul, but to build a deep
and intimate relationship with God—the most fulfilling relationship you’ll
ever have.
What Would I Do if I Had Cancer?
I’m often asked what I would do if I (or a family member) got cancer. While I
am of course not a physician, I have, over the years and since publishing the
first version of Boundless, amassed what I consider to be the “best-of-the-
best” allopathic and alternative cancer resources and remedies.
Ben’s Recommended Cancer Resources:•

Read Dr. Nasha Winters’s book The Metabolic Approach to Cancer. It
outlines exactly what I would do if I were a cancer patient. Dr. Winters is
one of the most respected minds in the industry for a forward-thinking
approach to holistic cancer management and is also opening a holistic
healing center in Arizona based on her approach to treating cancer as a
metabolic disease.
• Another fantastic book is The Cancer Revolution: A Groundbreaking
Program to Reverse and Prevent Cancer by Dr. Leigh Erin Connealy. I
would focus on the chapters on emerging alternative chemotherapy
drugs and diet, including a very helpful meal plan.
• Visit the Moss Report website for a comprehensive, downloadable report
on alternative remedies for a wide variety of cancers.
• Visit CareOncology and Hope4Cancer for lists of practitioners who offer
alternative forms of immunotherapy based on Dr. Thomas Seyfried’s
work.
• For precisely targeted low-dose chemotherapy combined with other
cutting-edge cancer treatments, check out Envita Medical Centers in
Scottsdale and Cancun.
• Review the Mederi Breast Cancer Protocol paper.
--- END PAGE 818 ---

--- PAGE 819 ---
• Review CMN’s Alternative Cancer Treatment website.
• Listen to my podcast episodes about cancer at BenGreenfieldLife.com
with Jonathan Otto, Dr. Ahvie Herskowitz, Dr. David Minkoff, Eric
Remensperger, Ian Clark, Roger Drummer, Dr. Leigh Erin Connealy, and
Doron Sheffer.
Specific Recommendations:•

High-dose vitamin D (4,000 to 10,000 IU/day)—especially recommended
for GI cancers.
• Daily frequent consumption of hydrogen-rich water, deuterium-depleted
water (DDW), and Quinton hypertonic water solution.
• Two to six cups of organic bone broth each day, along with specific
medicinal plants and mushrooms, most notably chaga, ashitaba, turmeric,
burdock, mistletoe, and melatonin, and the glycoside extracts of the
digitalis and strophanthus plants. Most of this stuff you can get from Dr.
Thomas Cowan’s website.
• Daily use of oral NR, NAD, or NMN supplements and/or NAD
patches/NAD IVs (unless cancer is already present, particularly breast
cancer).
• Methylene blue 100 mg orally or suppository combined with red-light
therapy. I discussed this strategy in my podcast with Dr. Joseph Mercola
and Dr. Nasha Winters.
• Frequent high-dose vitamin C and ozone blood replacement IV therapies.
For details, see the article “The Powerful Duo: How Glutathione and
Vitamin C IV Drips Impact Cancer.”
• Ozone can be helpful for oxygenating cancer cells by making them more
responsive to chemotherapy. Related to colon cancer and ozone,
specifically consider Colozone therapy. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
(HBOT) can also be used for this purpose but is probably not as effective.
• For fats and proteins, seed oils such as Andreas seed oil blends and Kion
Aminos can allow for adequate fats and proteins without digestive
distress or excess activation of cancer growth.
• Consider frequent use of Rife therapy, PEMF therapy, and hyperthermia
using technologies such as the Ammortal Catalyst, the Royal Rife
machine, Pulse PEMF, and the BioMat.
• Consider frequent use of hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT).
--- END PAGE 819 ---

--- PAGE 820 ---
• Daily infrared sauna for 20 to 45 minutes.
• Organic coffee enema daily or multiple times per week.
• Control and/or elimination of non-native EMF (NNEMF) such as Wi-Fi,
Bluetooth, smart appliances, and significant smartphone usage.
• Consider high-dose T-cell therapy overseas or in Mexico. Dr. Matthew
Cook has a good clinic.
• Complete emotional detoxification focused on gratitude, prayer,
meditation, relationships, and destressing.
• Mixed tocopherol and tocotrienol appears to be an effective strategy for
multiple types of cancer, as discussed in my podcast with Dr. Barrie Tan.
• Ivermectin protocol: Take 12 mg daily three days a week, skip a week,
then repeat. You can literally get it as “ivermectin horse paste” on
Amazon. Pair it with organic apricot kernels (ApricotPower.com), starting
with 5 per day and working up to 25 per day, and with 200 mg
artemisinin, preferably taken at bedtime.
• Protocel Formula 50 protocol: Take ¼ teaspoon every 6 hours (including
waking up at night to take).
• Itraconazole (antifungal drug; brand name Sporanox): Take 200 mg twice
a day for 4 weeks; do not take if taking ivermectin.
This list is by no means exhaustive, and other specific protocols may be
appropriate for different forms of cancer. Nonetheless, this is the direction I
would take if I got cancer based on dozens of interviews and countless
hours researching this topic for clients, family members, and friends.
THE LAST WORD
The modern-day immunity marketplace is flooded with supplements and
herbal formulas claiming to cure the common cold or to guard the human
body against illness, but it can be difficult to sift through the bold
marketing and fake supplements to find what’s truly useful. But you’re
now equipped with everything you need to know to defy the odds of
getting sick and create an unstoppable immune system via research-
--- END PAGE 820 ---

--- PAGE 821 ---
proven but little-known supplement, food, and lifestyle strategies, along
with the spiritual disciplines that can make your immune system stronger
and more robust.
If your head is spinning with the wide variety of ways you can support
your immune system, here’s a simple example of how to weave many of
the strategies in this chapter into a cold and flu season protocol:
• Eat a wide variety of fermented foods.
• Place several drops of thieves oil in an essential oil diffuser in your
office, bedroom, or home and run the diffuser throughout the day.
• Each morning, take a handful of colostrum capsules, a teaspoon of
mushrooms, a dropperful of oregano oil in a glass of water, or all three.
• Have a piping-hot cup of organic bone broth with lunch or dinner. Add
even more immune support by stirring in a teaspoon of medicinal
mushrooms.
• If you’re exposed to sickness, continue using these strategies, but also
sip on elderberry juice or use elderberry tincture three times a day and
take zinc lozenges, vitamin C, and echinacea.
• Whether you’re sick or not, don’t stop moving. Try to engage in low-
level physical activity, even if it’s just an easy walk in the sunshine or a
bit of bouncing on a trampoline. If you’re too sick to move, consider
resting with infrared blankets, an infrared sauna, or a warm bath to
keep lymph fluid circulating.
• Prioritize regular use of vitamin D, preferably combined with vitamin
K.
• Regularly practice the spiritual disciplines, including meditation,
silence, solitude, study, journaling, prayer, and worship. Never
underestimate the power of the mind and belief patterns to heal the
body!
--- END PAGE 821 ---

--- PAGE 822 ---
Obviously, these are just a few of the immune-supporting strategies
you’ve discovered in this chapter, but they are some of the easier ones that
you can implement immediately without spending too much money.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Your lymph system is stimulated by the g-forces generated during exercise
and, more notably, when bouncing on a trampoline or standing on a
vibration platform. But another technique for enhancing the movement of
lymph fluid is even easier: plant both feet on the ground and bounce up
and down while wiggling your hands and fingers. As you bounce, take a
deep breath in through your nose and then hum or ahh as you exhale,
which will help produce extra nitric oxide. Do this for five minutes within
the first hour of waking tomorrow, and notice how your entire body feels
less stressed and more energized. This whole-body shaking technique is
actually an ancient qigong practice and involves no fancy, expensive
supplements or medications!
For bonus points, begin gratitude journaling in the mornings,
specifically by writing down one person, experience, or thing for which
you’re grateful that day and then closing your eyes and visualizing that
person, experience, or thing while dwelling upon the gratitude you feel for
them/it and breathing that gratitude into your heart’s center.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/15.
--- END PAGE 822 ---

--- PAGE 823 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 823 ---

--- PAGE 824 ---
16
QUANTIFIED SELF
HOW TO TEST, TRACK, AND INTERPRET BLOOD, SALIVA,
URINE, AND POOP
I shifted awkwardly on the toilet seat, using one porcelain-planted hand to steady myself while I held a small paper
collection device shaped like a hot dog tray (complete with red-and-white checkered squares) in the other. It had been
ten minutes, and not a single particle of fecal matter had materialized from my backside. I squirmed, grimaced, and then
finally managed to squeeze out a marble-sized speck of poo onto the tray.
A handful of brochures and poop-collecting instructions were splayed out on the bathroom floor in front of me,
along with a small plastic storage container for my tiny turd. Based on the photograph on the tube, my deposit
was large enough. I could now finish my duty in an actual, civilized manner, thank-you-very-much. With a sigh of
relief, I dropped my sample into the tube and settled back on the toilet seat, slightly apprehensive about
repeating this procedure on days two and three, and wondering what my wife would think of the prepaid FedEx
shipping bag full of my poop tubes laid neatly next to her homemade kimchi in the refrigerator.
From dripping oodles of saliva into a tube for DNA analysis, to spraying urine into a giant orange bucket I
carried around for twenty-four hours for a University of Connecticut high-fat-diet lab experiment on athletes, to
getting holes punched in my quads for muscle biopsies, to shipping liquid cancer biopsies off to Greece, to
--- END PAGE 824 ---

--- PAGE 825 ---
snipping hair off my crotch for a mineral analysis, I’ve tried just about every method there is to test and track
myself.
Not a single day goes by that I’m not asked about the most important tests to get if you want to fully analyze
and optimize the performance of your body and brain. In our modern era of “the internet of things,” Web 2.0,
and a dizzying number of self-quantification devices, it can be confusing and frustrating to figure out what to
measure when it comes to blood, biomarkers, metrics, and beyond—and even more confusing and frustrating to
figure out what to do with all the data.
After testing, tracking, and interpreting biometrics from self-quantification devices, along with blood, saliva,
urine, hair, and poop, I’ve found the tests and tracking tools that give you the most bang for your buck without
producing oodles of unnecessary data. This chapter will explain the 20 percent of self-quantification efforts that
give you 80 percent of the valuable data and results, and the best way to figure out exactly what is going on
inside your body on a daily basis.
While there are literally hundreds of blood, urine, and saliva measurements you could use to track your
health, and scientific advances are constantly making more and more test markers available, I’m going to share
with you the best, most reliable indicators of health and the best tests for determining whether you are
venturing into the land of nutrient depletion, gut issues, the wrong diet for you, and overtraining, or whether
there are hidden missing components that you can optimize through diet, lifestyle, or supplements.
15 BIOMARKERS TO TRACK
When it comes to testing your blood, I’m a fan of paying the closest attention to the biomarkers that are
associated with aging. After all, if you can control for these blood values, you can be relatively confident that
you’re going to maintain not just a reduced rate of biological aging but also superior overall health.
If you care at all about how well you’re doing in the longevity game, you’re curious how fast you’re aging, or
you want to quantify the efficacy of your healthy-eating and healthy-living efforts, it’s worth paying attention to
the following parameters. This list is by no means comprehensive, but it includes the biomarkers that I consider
the most important to track. Please keep in mind that lab reference ranges are flawed and do not take into
account your physical activity levels and exercise goals, your current diet, your health history, and many other
factors—so be sure to pay attention to the next section, “When Normal Ain’t Normal,” because “normal” lab
values are often not what they seem, and you don’t want to take unnecessary steps to correct an issue that really
isn’t an issue.
When Normal Ain’t Normal
When a doctor orders a test like a blood or saliva panel to look for health-related biomarkers, he or she compares
your results to the results of the average population, which are known as a reference range or reference interval.
This allows a physician to determine how your test results compare to what’s considered normal. About 80
percent of doctors’ recommendations, diagnoses, and prescriptions are based on lab tests and their reference
ranges. But reference ranges may not be as normal as they are supposed to be. In this context, “normal” doesn’t
necessarily mean “ordinary” or even “optimal.” “Normal” refers to how the values from an average population
create a range or distribution of numbers on a graph.
--- END PAGE 825 ---

--- PAGE 826 ---
When values are placed on a graph, the average value lies in the middle, and half lie on the left side of the
average (the lower half of the range) while the other half lie on the right side (the higher half of the range).
These values account for 95 percent of the population. Once 95 percent of the population is accounted for in a
reference range, any remaining values are considered to be the tails of the curve on a graph, resulting in about 2.5
percent of the measured population falling outside of the reference range on either side.
Here’s the first reason why reference ranges can be problematic: there’s no universally applicable range for
most lab test results. Different labs can use different ranges, so if you go to one lab for, say, a blood test, you
might get results that suggest you’re perfectly healthy, but if you get the same test at a different lab, your result
might be “abnormal.” Most labs don’t even carry out their own research to establish reference ranges but instead
use those provided by test manufacturers. Labs are supposed to perform twenty sample tests to verify that the
manufacturers’ ranges are accurate, but most labs don’t even perform this step!
Granted, reference ranges can be useful because they give fixed values for biomarkers from relatively healthy
populations, which gives healthcare providers a basis for analyzing your personal results, diagnosing conditions,
and prescribing treatments. Ranges also give you, the patient, a chance to see how your biomarkers measure
against those of tested populations. But ranges don’t account for large population research, which often suggests
completely different ranges for diagnosing disease and mortality risks. Reference ranges also don’t account for
genetic individuality and differences in environment but instead act as a blanket, one-size-fits-all approach to
diagnosing. The ranges are based on “healthy” populations, but these can be hard to define or find because the
tested population may include people with undiagnosed diseases or conditions that affect their results. And,
again, just because a certain range of values is considered normal doesn’t mean that those values are optimal—it
just means those are the average values of the population that was tested.
The second reason why laboratory reference ranges need to be viewed with a wary eye is that they don’t
necessarily reflect levels that would help you go from good to great; they simply reflect the absence of disease.
For example, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is often not flagged as high until it reaches levels above 4.0,
but many people—although they may not have full-blown hypothyroidism—can feel sluggish or show signs of
low metabolism or low thyroid activity with levels as low as 2.0. The same can be said for testosterone. The
reference ranges on a lab test often don’t flag a result as low unless it’s so low that it’s a sign of hypogonadism;
the reference ranges don’t necessarily allow for high libido, fast exercise recovery, or increased physical
performance, which all require higher levels of testosterone, so an “average” testosterone result would be too
low. In these two scenarios, you may look at your test and think your thyroid and testosterone are just fine when,
in fact, they should actually be addressed if your goal is peak performance.
Another reason why reference ranges frequently don’t represent optimal ranges is that they are often applied
to both men and women when, ideally, men and women should have separate ranges. For example, aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) are liver enzymes that are used to measure liver
function, liver damage, and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. One reference range allows for AST to vary from 10
to 40 U/L (units per liter) and ALT to vary from 7 to 56 U/L. But research indicates that while this may be a
--- END PAGE 826 ---

--- PAGE 827 ---
“normal” range, it’s far from ideal. Several research reports on liver enzymes suggest that for men, ALT
shouldn’t exceed 30 U/L, and for women, it shouldn’t exceed 19 U/L. One study performed to determine upper
cut-off values for AST and ALT states that in men, ALT shouldn’t exceed 22.15 U/L and AST shouldn’t exceed
25.35 U/L, while in women, ALT shouldn’t exceed 22.40 and AST shouldn’t exceed 24.25. Dr. Bryan Walsh, a
board-certified naturopathic physician and the man behind the Walsh Detox protocol described in chapter 13,
claims that ALT and AST shouldn’t be much higher than 20 and that their reference ranges in men and women
should be different.
While the reason why ideal ranges for AST and ALT are different for men and women is a matter of
speculation, one study suggests that hemoglobin may be responsible. High hemoglobin levels are strongly
associated with elevated ALT levels in men, and hemoglobin is typically lost through bleeding. Since men don’t
have a monthly menstrual cycle by which they lose regular amounts of blood, they typically have higher
hemoglobin levels than women, possibly resulting in higher levels of liver enzymes.
So, if you order a blood test and your results fall outside of the “normal” range, that doesn’t necessarily mean
you’re sick or have a higher risk of getting sick. After all, reference ranges come with built-in bumpers on either
side to allow for 5 percent of the population to have out-of-range biomarker values, and 5 percent can be an
enormous number of people, and may include you.
Finally, everything on your labs needs to be taken in the proper context, and this often goes far beyond
looking to see if a single reference is high or low. For example, on a lipid panel, there is no upper limit for HDL.
If you were to believe what the reference range indicates is healthy, the more HDL you have, the better. But
research has shown increased risk of all-cause death and cardiovascular death once HDL exceeds 75 mg/dL in
men or 90 mg/dL in women! Similarly, the lab reference range for triglycerides shows no lower limit. But low
triglycerides can be a sign of a poorly functioning gallbladder, because low bile production means that fats
cannot be emulsified and thus blood triglycerides will be low. But in this case, low triglycerides are not a good
thing. So, if you have low triglycerides and also have symptoms like gas, bloating, or fatty stool, you would ideally
get a stool test to see if fecal fat is high, and that would give you one good indication that bile production is low,
which would tell you the reason your triglycerides are low.
To make matters even more complicated, consider the case of albumin, a protein made by the liver that if out
of range can indicate a problem with your liver or kidneys. Elevated albumin often indicates chronic
dehydration, but simultaneously, inflammation can cause albumin levels to decrease. So even if you have perfect
albumin levels, you could be both dehydrated and inflamed! To know if this is the case, you could look at other
lab markers for dehydration, such as glomerular filtration rate or creatinine levels, and look for markers of
inflammation, such as hs-CRP. If those levels all look good, your normal albumin levels are, well, just normal.
With all that in mind and a healthy skepticism in place, along with a willingness to take a deeper dive rather
than simply swallowing reference ranges hook, line, and sinker, let’s look at what I consider to be some of the
most important biomarkers and what exactly they mean. Most of these tests can be ordered by your physician, at
a medical clinic like NextHealth or Fountain Life, or through an at-home testing company like InsideTracker,
Thorne, SiPhox, or DirectLabs. On the online resources page for this chapter, I’ve included links to my favorite
options on the recommended lab testing page at BenGreenfieldLife.com and in a helpful podcast at
BenGreenfieldLife.com/testingpodcast.
1. RBC Magnesium
Accurately measuring magnesium levels can be difficult. Magnesium is found primarily within your cells
(intracellular), but most blood tests for magnesium measure what is outside the cells (extracellular), so they
may not detect a significant deficiency. Despite this fact, most physicians measure magnesium with a simple
--- END PAGE 827 ---

--- PAGE 828 ---
blood test, and many people are then informed that their levels are normal. But to get an accurate reading, you
need to measure intracellular magnesium levels, which can be done by testing red blood cells.
A red blood cell (RBC) magnesium test can provide an earlier indication of magnesium deficiency than a
standard magnesium blood test. This is because when levels are low, the body pulls magnesium from red blood
cells. So a standard magnesium blood test may show normal levels while an RBC magnesium test gives a far
more accurate picture of low magnesium. The ideal range for RBC magnesium levels is 6.0 to 6.5 mg/dL; the
normal reference range is 4.2 to 6.8 mg/dL. RBC magnesium measurements can help predict important longevity
markers such as insulin sensitivity and likelihood of hospitalization. High levels of RBC magnesium can predict
physical performance and potential for sarcopenia (muscle deterioration) as you age.
As an alternative to RBC magnesium testing, some physicians will test magnesium by scraping some cells
from the tongue and smearing them onto a slide, which is sent to a lab to be tested for magnesium. A lab called
Intracellular Diagnostics offers this test, and it is just as accurate as an RBC magnesium test.
2. Estradiol
Some of the most important hormones to test for in both men and women are estrogens, particularly estradiol.
(I’ll address full hormone panels later in this chapter.) Estrogens aid in regulating bone mass and strength by
stimulating bone-forming osteoblasts and inhibiting bone-absorbing osteoclasts. This type of bone support is
crucial for reducing age-related fractures and maintaining healthy production of new blood cells as you age.
Interestingly, when women are treated with exogenous estrogens, reductions in bone mass and increases in bone
turnover can be reversed, suggesting that estrogens have a potent bone-protective effect.
Estrogens also protect against oxidative stress and participate in the antioxidant system by decreasing the
expression of NADPH oxidase, an important source of cell-damaging superoxide radicals, and increasing the
availability of nitric oxide, an antioxidant naturally produced in the body. In addition, estradiol stimulates the
activity of antioxidant enzymes, such as glutathione peroxidase, in mitochondria. Since mitochondrial
respiration produces reactive oxygen species, which cause oxidative damage, this activity of estradiol results in
less oxidative stress from normal metabolic processes; this may be part of the reason that women’s life
expectancy is generally longer than men’s. Estrogens can also stimulate muscle repair and regenerative
processes, likely by acting as antioxidants and mitigating oxidative damage, leading to greater muscle strength
and preventing fall-related fractures.
Ideal estradiol levels in men range from about 10 to 82 pg/mL (one picogram, pg, is one one-trillionth of a
gram). Levels in women vary depending on the point of their menstrual cycle they are in when tested:
• Less than 50 pg/mL during menstruation
• Up to 200 pg/mL during follicular development
• Up to 400 pg/mL just before ovulation
Estradiol levels dip just before the release of the ovum and peak again during the luteal phase and then reach
their lowest point at the end of the luteal phase.
There are a few options for testing levels of estradiol, but they’re not all created equal. Blood testing is the
least effective method because it provides only a snapshot of your hormone levels at the exact moment you had
your blood drawn. Since your hormone levels change throughout the day based on your normal circadian
rhythm, this doesn’t give you a full picture. A salivary panel, known as an adrenal stress index, comprises four or
five salivary measurements performed throughout the day and gives you a more accurate idea of how your
hormones are fluctuating during a twenty-four-hour period. However, the gold standard for hormone testing is a
urine test known as the DUTCH test, which tells you not only what your hormones are doing over a twenty-four-
--- END PAGE 828 ---

--- PAGE 829 ---
hour cycle but also the upstream and downstream metabolites of those hormones. This tells you if you are
deficient in certain hormones, if your hormones aren’t being metabolized properly, or if they’re being
metabolized too rapidly.
3. High-Sensitivity C-Reactive Protein
Over two dozen research studies have proven that baseline levels of the inflammatory marker high-sensitivity C-
reactive protein (hs-CRP) in healthy people are highly predictive of future risk of cardiovascular ailments,
including heart attack, diabetes, stroke, sudden cardiac death, and peripheral arterial disease. Research also
suggests that hs-CRP levels predict repeat coronary events in people with heart disease and that the outcome in
patients following a heart attack is closely correlated with hs-CRP levels. Ultimately, individuals with high levels
of hs-CRP have a risk of cardiovascular problems about two to three times higher than the risk of those with low,
optimal levels.
If you test your hs-CRP, try to do it after a couple days of recovery from hard exercise, particularly weight
training, running, or anything that causes impact or muscle damage, as this will elevate hs-CRP and may make
you or your medical practitioner think you have chronic inflammation when you really just have exercise-
induced inflammation. Although I do hard exercise sessions frequently, by eating a diet high in anti-
inflammatory herbs, spices, and nutrients like turmeric and fish oil and avoiding overtraining, excessive stress,
poor sleep, and toxin exposure, I keep my hs-CRP consistently below 0.5 mg/L, and I prefer to have it below 0.2
mg/L.
4. Triglyceride-to-HDL Ratio
Otherwise known as the atherogenic index of plasma (yep, that’s a mouthful), a high triglyceride-to-HDL ratio
(meaning a high number of triglycerides relative to your HDL cholesterol) is one of the best indicators of your
risk for heart disease. This test has the added benefit of predicting lipoprotein particle size and insulin
resistance, two other important markers for longevity. In one study in elderly women, the triglyceride-to-HDL
ratio predicted all-cause mortality, meaning it predicted the risk of not only cardiovascular mortality but also the
overall risk of dying from anything.
There are, of course, a host of additional studies on this ratio, including a study that shows that triglyceride-
to-HDL ratio is one of the best predictors of the risk of death from coronary heart disease or cardiovascular
disease. A ratio of 2 or under is good, but like most of my healthiest clients, I aim for 1 or under. Anything above
4 is typically a very unfavorable scenario.
In my clients and myself, I consider the following three variables to be the big issues to pay attention to for
an overall picture of your lipid and cholesterol health:•

Trends: Triglycerides should ideally go down over time, while HDL should trend upward.•

Total cholesterol-to-HDL-C ratio: Lower is better and usually indicates fewer atherosclerotic LDL
cholesterol particles. HDL-C specifically refers to the cholesterol carried within HDL particles.•

Triglyceride-to-HDL-C ratio: Lower is better and usually indicates fewer and larger LDL particles (which
are less damaging). Ideally, this ratio should be 1 or lower. HDL and triglyceride levels can be measured by
your doctor, but you can also order panels yourself through LabCorp or DirectLabs and then compare the
results of the HDL panel to the triglycerides panel to determine your ratio. HDL and triglycerides are also
typically measured on a lipid panel, which I’ll talk about below.
--- END PAGE 829 ---

--- PAGE 830 ---
How to Change Your Triglycerides
If your triglycerides are elevated, generally about 150 mg/dL, implement the following strategies:
• Consume high amounts of monounsaturated and omega-3 fats and little sugar and starch (e.g., a low-carb
Mediterranean-style diet).
• Supplement with vitamin C.
• Supplement with fish or krill oil.
• Eat more olive oil.
• Add fenugreek seeds to your meals.
• Supplement with ashwagandha.
• Get more prebiotics and probiotics from fermented foods and supplements (see chapter 13).
• Eat fruit in moderation, preferably small, dark-colored berries.
• Avoid high amounts of added sugars and seed oils.
• Exercise before meals (brisk walking is particularly effective).
If your HDL is low, generally below 60 mg/dL, implement the following strategies:
• Eat more olive oil.
• Eat more eggs.
• Follow a low-carb or ketogenic diet.
• Eat more anthocyanin-rich foods, such as blueberries, blackberries, pomegranates, eggplants, red cabbages, and
other dark-colored fruits and vegetables.
• Stick to a low-to-moderate alcohol consumption.
• Cook with coconut oil and/or add it to meals.
• Eat more fatty fish.
• Get more aerobic exercise.
5. Blood Lipids (Cholesterol and Triglycerides)
An advanced cardiovascular and lipid panel goes beyond the typical cholesterol test to help uncover early risk
factors for heart disease. Many people don’t realize it, but a cholesterol test is important long before you feel old
or sick. A basic lipid panel measures fats and fatty substances in the blood, such as LDL, HDL, total cholesterol,
and triglycerides, while a full lipid panel goes far beyond the basics and includes LDL particle sizes.
LDL particle size is crucial because research has shown that small, lower-density LDL cholesterol is more
inflammatory and toxic to blood vessels than larger, fluffier LDL, and that a high level of lipoprotein(a)—a type
of small LDL particle that inflames your blood and makes it “sticky” and more prone to clotting—indicates the
presence of the most dangerous blood lipids.
A comprehensive lipid panel can reveal the amounts of the different types of cholesterol particles in your
blood and give you a far more accurate profile of your cardiovascular risk than standard cholesterol tests.
In most cases, a doctor or medical textbook will give you the usual one-size-fits-all “normal” cholesterol and
lipid ranges, such as the following:
Total cholesterol Less than 170 mg/dL for those under twenty years old, and less than 200 mg/dL
for those aged twenty or older
HDL cholesterol Greater than 45 mg/dL for those under twenty, and greater than 40 mg/dL for
those twenty or older. In women aged twenty or older, normal values are greater
than 50 mg/dL.
--- END PAGE 830 ---

--- PAGE 831 ---
LDL cholesterol Less than 110 mg/dL for those under twenty, and less than 100 mg/dL for
those twenty or older
Total-cholesterol-to-HDL ratio Less than 5.0 mg/dL
Non-HDL cholesterol Less than 120 mg/dL for those under twenty, and less than 130 mg/dL for
those twenty or older
Triglycerides Less than 75 mg/dL for those aged nine or younger, less than 90 mg/dL for those
aged ten to nineteen, and less than 150 mg/dL for those twenty or
older
While these numbers are approximations that can give very general guidance for improving health or
avoiding cardiovascular disease, the fact is that cholesterol values tend to fluctuate depending on diet, exercise,
genetics, and lifestyle. Dave Feldman of CholesterolCode.com has developed a new paradigm for understanding
cholesterol that looks at the effects of fatty foods. Dave initiated very large changes to his lipid markers through
a series of self-experiments in which he changed only his dietary fat intake and kept every other lifestyle- and
exercise-related factor constant. His Feldman Protocol has now been used by over two hundred people who
follow his work. The protocol involves eating a high-fat, low-carb diet with large quantities of fatty food for a few
days, and the results from most people show, paradoxically, a corresponding drop in total and LDL cholesterol
numbers.
Dave refers to this as an inversion pattern, and his lipid energy model suggests that high intake of dietary fat,
especially when that fat is being used for energy by a very active person, can cause the liver’s production of LDL
(low-density lipoprotein) to go down because fewer lipoproteins are needed to transport fatty acids through the
body and because triglycerides and fatty acids are being used so rapidly as a fuel. In other words, lean, active
people eating a high-fat diet may see their LDL drop.
But this may not matter anyway because LDL can actually be a poor measurement of cardiovascular risk
when compared to two other important lipid markers: HDL cholesterol and triglycerides. In studies that stratify
all three, HDL and triglycerides appear as the clear risk indicators, while LDL becomes nearly irrelevant. When
HDL is high and triglycerides are low, risk for cardiovascular disease is very low, regardless of LDL levels.
Ultimately, cholesterol can be confusing. If you want to become a cholesterol expert and understand
everything you need to know about lipids, I recommend Dr. Peter Attia’s “The Straight Dope on Cholesterol”
series of articles and his five-part interview series with Dr. Thomas Dayspring, both available at
PeterAttiaMD.com. As explained in detail in that series, LDL particle count and size are particularly important
compared to simply LDL cholesterol, and your lipid panel should ideally be an NMR panel—a blood test that
directly measures the amount of LDL circulating in the body and counts the number of LDL particles using
nuclear magnetic resonance technology. Ideally, total LDL particles should be less than 1,000 nmol/L, total small
LDL particles less than 600 nmol/L, LDL size greater than 21 nm, HDL size greater than 9 nm, and VLDL
(another kind of lipoprotein) less than 0.1 nmol/L.
6. Omega-3 Fatty Acids
The fatty acids present in your blood are worth examining because a higher proportion of omega-6 linoleic acid
can predict earlier death and physical and cognitive decline. This is because linoleic acid can make red blood
cells more susceptible to oxidative damage, which ages the cells and impairs their ability to deliver oxygen. At
the same time, older individuals with low levels of omega-3 fatty acids decline physically more quickly than older
adults with higher levels. A low omega-3 fatty acid count also predicts smaller brain volume and cognitive
decline, even in older adults who don’t possess any other symptoms of dementia. And finally, the more omega-3
--- END PAGE 831 ---

--- PAGE 832 ---
fatty acid in the red blood cells, the lower your risk for colon cancer—and the higher the omega-6, the higher the
risk for colon cancer.
The ideal dietary ratio of omega-6 to omega-3 is 4:1, although many antiaging and functional medicine
practitioners suggest a 1:1 ratio or higher in favor of omega-3. (The average American eats a ratio ranging from
12:1 to 25:1!)
There is an important caveat. The omega-6 fatty acid in plants and vegetable oils is linoleic acid, but the
omega-6 fatty acid that you ultimately use in your body and that you get from animal foods is arachidonic acid.
The omega-3 fatty acid that is found in plants and vegetable oils is alpha-linolenic acid, but the omega-3 fatty
acids that you ultimately use in your body and that you get from animal foods are EPA and DHA. Now here’s one
thing that a lot of folks don’t realize: despite all the talk about the ideal omega-6-to-omega-3 ratio, most of the
data on this ratio is based on animal experiments in which the animals were fed only fats found in plants and
vegetable oils, specifically linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid.
The enzymes that convert linoleic acid into arachidonic acid are the same enzymes that convert alpha-
linolenic acid into EPA and DHA, so too much intake of one fat may use up more of the enzymes and hurt the
conversion of the other, resulting in an even greater omega-6-to-omega-3 imbalance. But it’s important to
understand that unless you’re a vegan who is only getting fats from plants, this doesn’t matter, because the
arachidonic acid, EPA, and DHA found in animal foods, particularly foods such as eggs, liver, and fish (and, even
if you are a vegan, algae) don’t need to compete for the enzymes—they’re already usable and don’t need to be
converted. So, ultimately, you need to pay more careful attention to omega-6-to-omega-3 ratios only if you are
eating a vegan diet. Excessively limiting omega-6s could actually be harmful to the mitochondrial membrane—
meaning, don’t completely swear off seeds, nuts, and other important sources of omega-6s!
An omega index test is offered by labs such as OmegaQuant, Great Plains, Quest, and WellnessFX. This test
examines the EPA and DHA in red blood cell membranes, then calculates an index. For example, if you have
sixty-four fatty acids in a cell membrane and three are EPA or DHA, then you would have an omega-3 index of 4.6
percent. An index of 8 percent or higher is ideal. Most people have an index around 6 percent or below, and in
the US, most people are at 4 percent or below—the highest risk zone. This translates to a 90 percent higher risk
of sudden cardiac death!
Finally, your ratio of stearic acid to oleic acid, also known as your saturation index, is another important
marker to check. Stearic acid is a saturated fat, and oleic acid is a monounsaturated fat. A lower saturation index
(less stearic acid and more oleic acid) is linked to reduced risk of several aging-related diseases, including
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, prostate cancer, colon cancer, and gallbladder cancer. The normal index for both
adults and children is 0.97 to 1.02.
7. Testosterone and Free Testosterone
Several studies have proven that low testosterone (low T) is associated with increased mortality. One study
showed that low T levels are associated with increased mortality in male veterans. Another study showed that
low T is associated with increased mortality over a twenty-year time span, independent of metabolic syndrome,
diabetes, and prevalent cardiovascular disease (but this can be attenuated by adjustment for inflammatory
markers IL-6 and C-reactive protein, making yet another case for keeping your inflammation low, especially if
you have lower T).
One report concluded that low T may be even more dangerous than previously thought and lead to a greater
risk of death. That study tracked nearly eight hundred men, fifty to ninety-one years old, living in California.
Their T levels were measured at the beginning of the study, and their health was then tracked over the next
twenty years. The men with low T had a 33 percent greater death risk over the period of the study than the men
with higher T.
--- END PAGE 832 ---

--- PAGE 833 ---
In addition, low T can drastically affect the quality of your life as you age. Symptoms reported by the low-T
men in the twenty-year study included decreased libido, erectile dysfunction, fatigue, loss of strength, decrease
in bone density, and decreased muscle mass. These men tended to be overweight or obese and had higher risk of
cardiovascular disease and diabetes. Indeed, men with the lowest T, below 241 total serum level, were 40 percent
more likely to die!
Once T is produced by the testes (in men) or the ovaries or adrenal gland (in women), it enters the
bloodstream as free T, which is the bioavailable form of T that your body can use. Normally, about 98 percent of
this free T is bound to either albumin or sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG). While about 55 percent of
albumin-bound T can be used, SHBG-bound T is not readily bioavailable.
When it comes to T deficiencies, it is important to understand that having high total T levels does not mean
that you will also have high levels of bioavailable free T. Some men have total T levels ranging from 300 to 800
ng/dL, but their free T levels are often as low as 2, 3, or 4 ng/dL (often less than 1 percent of total T!). This can
occur because some of the 2 percent of total T that remains in a free form can be converted into hormones like
estradiol and DHT.
While you do need some amounts of estradiol and DHT (DHT is especially important in the brain because it
promotes neurogenesis), when too much of your free T is converted into these hormones, you can suffer from
low levels of bioavailable T, which are associated with the health issues outlined above and an increased risk of
death. This excess conversion is often linked to deficiencies in minerals like lithium, magnesium, and
manganese, so you should ensure that you’re eating plenty of dietary sources of these minerals, such as nuts,
dairy, red meat, and leafy greens for lithium; legumes, avocados, and dairy for magnesium; and whole grains,
nuts, and leafy greens for manganese. Environmental chemicals can also be a major contributor to excess T
conversion; I’ll explore that more in chapter 20.
So what ratio of free T to total T should you aim for? Ideally, you want at least 2 percent of your T to be free,
and this usually means that as a ratio, your T levels should be at least 1:49 free T to bound T. In other words, if
your total T is, say, 500 ng/dL, then your free T levels should be about 10.2 ng/dL. The upper accepted levels for
free T peak at 27 ng/dL, but it is important to note that this upper limit is simply the result of available
measurements and does not reflect the maximum amount of testosterone that a healthy human can maintain.
This is why it is important to also pay attention to qualitative variables like libido, recovery, and erectile
function.
For men, ideal levels of free T typically range from 4.6 to 22.4 ng/dL, and ideal levels of bioavailable T (which
includes albumin-bound T and free T) range from 110 to 575 ng/dL. For women, ideal levels of free T range from
0.02 to 0.5 ng/dL, and ideal levels of bioavailable T range from 0.5 to 8.5 ng/dL. (You can delve into even more
resources on the link between T and overall health and longevity in a very fascinating article by Dr. Jeffrey Dach
that’s linked to on BoundlessBook.com/16.)
If you are testing your testosterone levels, testing DHEA as well can add insights. The largest amount of
hormone produced by the adrenal glands is actually in the form of DHEA, which is a precursor to estrogen,
progesterone, and testosterone. Symptoms of DHEA deficiency usually include fatigue, cognitive impairment,
depression, decreased libido, and recurrent infections. Fortunately, DHEA is relatively easy to measure. But
when DHEA is measured, the results should be correlated to age to be meaningful. For example, men around the
age of twenty should have high levels of DHEA (around 1,200 mcg/dL). But by age ninety, the level is usually
closer to 180 mcg/dL. A thirty-year-old man with a DHEA level of 250 mcg/dL would technically fall “within the
normal range” of 180 to 1,200, but as you can imagine, this is a problem, since it’s nowhere near optimal and can
actually indicate adrenal insufficiency and significant hormone imbalances. Women’s ranges vary considerably
with age as well. For example, in twentysomething women, ideal DHEA levels are from 145 to 395 mcg/dL, before
declining to 45 to 270 mcg/dL in the thirties, with levels further dropping to 32 to 240 mcg/dL in the forties.
--- END PAGE 833 ---

--- PAGE 834 ---
Finally, even though I’ve emphasized that free T is important, new research indicates that total T may not be
as bound and inactive. While traditional medical orthodoxy has promoted the idea that sex steroids bound to
SHBG are biologically inactive, it turns out that testosterone, even when bound to SHBG, can still have effects
on tissue. A protein called megalin can actually allow SHBG-bound testosterone to interact with cells for repair,
recovery, and other anabolic effects of testosterone, but this occurs only in the presence of adequate amounts of
vitamin D3 and cholesterol, which is likely why sunlight and a high intake of healthy fats can be so beneficial for
libido and energy!
Similarly to estradiol and estrogen testing, the best way to test hormone levels such as testosterone and
DHEA is not via a blood test or salivary test (although salivary tests are more accurate than blood tests if
performed four or five times throughout the day) but via a DUTCH test—see here for more.
8. IGF-1
I first discussed the “sweet spot” for insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) in chapter 9. As I explained there, IGF-1
promotes the growth and repair of skeletal muscle, the growth of new neurons, and better cognitive function.
However, lower levels of IGF-1 result in increased longevity. In animal studies, genetically engineering the
animals to be IGF-1 deficient results in 50 percent longer lifespans. So the key is to find the sweet spot for IGF-1.
Recommended levels of IGF can vary widely, but in an eye-opening hormone replacement therapy podcast
interview I conducted with antiaging physician Richard Gaines, he reported that the sweet spot for IGF-1 is
between approximately 80 and 150 ng/mL.
9. Insulin
Low fasting insulin can be a crucial marker for longevity and indicates an important variable called glycemic
variability, which is how often and how much your blood sugar levels fluctuate throughout the day. In chapter 8,
I talked about the extreme importance of glucose regulation and glycemic variability when it comes to longevity,
and insulin is intimately tied to these variables.
For example, cancer patients who eat the highest amount of insulin-producing foods experience worsened
cancer and increased overall mortality. Furthermore, high insulin levels can predict cancer mortality, even when
controlling for variables such as diabetes, obesity, and metabolic syndrome. In older adults with type 2 diabetes,
the level of insulin use also predicts mortality.
The trick is not to eliminate insulin altogether but to keep insulin levels within certain limits. Dr. Joseph
Mercola recommends “a normal fasting blood insulin level . . . below 5 [uIU/mL], but ideally . . . below 3.”
10. Complete Blood Count with Differential
A complete blood count with differential, also known as a CBC, is often used as a broad screening test to
determine an individual’s general health status. It can be used to screen for a wide range of conditions and
diseases and to help diagnose various conditions, such as anemia, infection, inflammation, a bleeding disorder,
or leukemia. The CBC evaluates the three major factors that circulate in the blood:
• White blood cells (WBC), which defend against infections and cancer and also play a role in allergies and
inflammation. WBC count is a count of the total number of white blood cells in a person’s blood sample, as
well as the number of the various types of white blood cells: neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes,
eosinophils, and basophils.
--- END PAGE 834 ---

--- PAGE 835 ---
• Red blood cells (RBC), which transport oxygen throughout the body. RBC count tells the number of red
blood cells in a person’s blood sample. Other factors in this part of the panel include hemoglobin,
hematocrit, MCV, MCH, MCHC, RDW, MPV, and PDW.
• Platelets, which form blood clots at a site of damage to stop bleeding. Platelets are measured as part of the
RBC test. The mean platelet volume (MPV) is a calculation of the average size of platelets. Platelet
distribution width (PDW) reflects how uniform platelets are in size.
Hemoglobin measures the total amount of the oxygen-carrying protein in the blood, which generally reflects
the number of red blood cells in the blood. Hematocrit measures the percentage of a person’s total blood volume
that consists of red blood cells. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) is a measurement of the average size of a
single red blood cell. Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) is a calculation of the average amount of
hemoglobin inside a single red blood cell. Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) is a calculation
of the average concentration of hemoglobin inside a single red blood cell. Red cell distribution width (RDW) is a
calculation of the variation in the size of RBCs.
In an article in the Journal of Hospital Medicine, it was reported that the most impressive predictors of
mortality to be derived from a CBC are burr cells (a type of red blood cell with spike-like surface projections),
nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs, red blood cells with nuclei), and absolute lymphocytosis (an increase in the
number of lymphocytes in the blood). In the analysis, burr cells and NRBCs were associated with mortality rates
eight to ten times higher than that of the average hospital patient. There are anecdotal reports in the literature of
burr cells being associated with “ominous prognosis” and more robust statistical analyses showing NRBCs to be
associated with increased mortality. Lymphocytosis has also been reported as a mortality risk in patients,
especially those with trauma and emergency medical conditions. The analysis shows that all three of these
findings are strong, independent predictors of mortality.
In addition, one study reports that individuals with above-normal WBC counts could face an increased risk
of death at an earlier age, particularly from cardiovascular disease. Even people with normal WBC counts may
not be out of danger; counts at the high end of the normal range are also associated with increased risk of illness
and death. Basically, the risk of cardiovascular mortality increases as WBC counts increase, and the increased
risk of mortality associated with high WBC counts is maintained over forty years of follow-up!
For total WBC counts, a healthy range is between 5 and 8 cells per liter. Higher counts often indicate
infection, and lower often indicate a depressed or suppressed immune system. And again, consistently high WBC
counts translate to an increased risk of death at an earlier age, particularly from cardiovascular disease.
Here’s a more detailed breakdown of what to look for in a WBC panel:
EXPECTED HIGHER VALUES INDICATE LOWER VALUES INDICATE
Neutrophils 40–80%
Drug reaction, autoimmunity,
aplastic anemia, bone marrow
Viruses, autoimmunity, or
cancers
detoxification challenges
Lymphocytes Autoimmunity, hepatitis, flu, or
20-40% other viral or bacterial infection
Monocytes 0–7% Hairy cell leukemia or bone
Liver dysfunction, prostate
marrow damage (but only if
problems, or recovery from an
there’s a low value on multiple
infection (or Epstein-Barr virus)
tests)
Eosinophils 0–3% Food sensitivities, environmental
Stress, steroid useallergies, or parasites
--- END PAGE 835 ---

--- PAGE 836 ---
EXPECTED HIGHER VALUES INDICATE LOWER VALUES INDICATE
Basophils 0–1% Stress, allergic reaction, steroid
Histamine intolerance use, hyperthyroidism
11. Iron
Iron is an important nutrient for almost all life. It forms hemoglobin, making it necessary for the transportation
of oxygen in blood. It comprises proteins throughout the body and regulates cell growth and differentiation. It
even helps maintain brain function, metabolism, endocrine function, and immune function and plays a role in
the production of ATP, your body’s primary energy source. But while iron seems to be the darling of many in the
health and medical industries and iron deficiencies are frequently tested for, iron toxicity is rarely addressed.
Because many people are convinced that iron is a panacea, it can be found in everything from multivitamins
to fortified, whole-grain breakfast cereals. Problem is, if you consume too much iron, you can develop iron
overload. Hemochromatosis is a disease characterized by an accumulation of dangerously harmful levels of iron.
This can be an especially concerning issue for men (in women, menstruation helps rid the body of excess iron)
and for sedentary individuals, who don’t turn over as many red blood cells and as much iron as active
individuals, particularly endurance athletes.
As your cells produce energy through normal metabolism, they create low, manageable levels of a toxic by-
product of oxygen called superoxide. Enzymes convert superoxide into hydrogen peroxide, which is then
converted into water and oxygen. But when iron interacts with superoxide or hydrogen peroxide, it leads to a
chemical reaction that produces a free radical known as a hydroxyl radical. Hydroxyl radicals can be extremely
harmful to your cells, and if you are consuming excess iron or have excess iron in your bloodstream, you can
produce high levels of these radicals, leading to age-related chronic conditions such as cancer, heart disease, and
diabetes, and neurodegenerative conditions like Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s. Think of this as “rusting” your
body.
Two biomarkers will reveal if you have excess iron. The first is a protein called ferritin. When your iron levels
are sufficient, the protein hepcidin is secreted by the liver and signals the cells in your gastrointestinal tract to
block the absorption of iron. It also signals your body’s other cells to bind their iron to ferritin, which acts as an
iron storage mechanism. If your ferritin levels are high, then you may have too much iron in your body. People
with hereditary hemochromatosis have a genetic inability (based on the HFE gene) to effectively use hepcidin to
regulate iron levels, so they are highly susceptible to iron overload. The typical reference range that most
laboratories use for ferritin is 20 to 300 ng/mL, but the ideal levels for nonmenstruating adults are between 30
and 60 ng/mL, and you don’t want to be below 20 ng/mL or above 80 ng/mL.
If you menstruate, you are more likely to suffer from iron deficiency than iron overload, so if you experience
fatigue, paleness, shortness of breath, headaches, dizziness, heart palpitations, dry or damaged hair and skin,
restless legs, or mouth swelling during your period, you likely need to consume more iron. If you have no
symptoms and your biomarker levels are within the ideal range, then your iron levels are probably being
sufficiently regulated by your menstrual cycle. If you’re a man, you’ll likely only experience issues with low
ferritin or low iron if you’re a heavily training athlete or you’re not eating any red meat.
Another biomarker to track for iron is gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT). GGT is a liver enzyme involved in
the metabolism of the antioxidant glutathione as well as the transport of amino acids and peptides. Originally
tracked to determine the extent of alcoholism and liver damage, GGT is highly interactive with iron and can be
used to track levels of excess free iron (unbound iron in your blood). In fact, GGT has been shown to be the
single most predictive measure of early death by any cause. If you have both high ferritin and high GGT, you
have a significantly increased risk of chronic disease because you have both excess free iron (indicated by GGT)
--- END PAGE 836 ---

--- PAGE 837 ---
and excess stored iron (indicated by ferritin) that keeps those free levels elevated. As with ferritin, the reference
ranges for GGT that are considered “normal” are not the ideal levels. In men, “normal” GGT levels are allowed
to range all the way up to 70 U/L (units per liter), but ideal levels are less than 16 U/L. For women, normal levels
range up to 45 U/L, while ideal levels are less than 9 U/L.
Conveniently, to reduce excess iron levels, all you need to do is give blood two or three times per year,
reduce your intake of red meat, or take up some form of frequent cardiovascular exercise, or all three. Men and
postmenopausal women are particularly at risk for developing iron overload because they don’t lose a significant
amount of blood once a month, so if you fall into one of those categories, then consider giving blood a few times
per year. If you can’t give the liter of blood that’s normally drawn, you can have 2 to 6 ounces of blood drawn
once every few weeks.
12. Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP)
A comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) provides a snapshot of your overall health by measuring various
substances in your blood. It typically includes multiple components that evaluate different organ systems and
metabolic processes. The test is commonly ordered as part of a routine checkup to assess overall health,
diagnose certain medical conditions, monitor ongoing health conditions, or evaluate the effects of medications.
Here are some of the important components typically included in a comprehensive metabolic panel:•

Glucose: Measures the level of sugar (glucose) in the blood. High levels may indicate diabetes or other
metabolic disorders, while low levels may indicate hypoglycemia. As you learned from the discussion of
glycemic variability in chapter 8, I’m a bigger fan of using a continuous glucose monitor (CGM) to track
glucose in real time, but many CMPs include a hemoglobin A1C or HbA1c test, which measures your average
blood sugar levels over the past three months. This can obviously be more insightful than a single snapshot
of blood glucose, although like many reference ranges it must be taken with a grain of salt because HbA1c is
often elevated in those who are anemic and in endurance athletes, because of a shorter-lived time of the red
blood cells. This is a perfect example of knowing when to view lab values in the proper context!
• Incidentally, a Lipoprotein-Insulin Resistance Score (LP-IR) can tell you whether you have signs of insulin
resistance years before hemoglobin A1C or blood glucose shows signs of this problem. Often, LP-IR can be
elevated while HbA1c is normal. An LP-IR is probably the most predictive score of future diabetes risk you
can get, and it only costs around $20 to $50 to include on a lab panel. The LP-IR Score is calculated based on
the levels of specific lipoprotein subclasses, including very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), low-density
lipoprotein (LDL), and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) particles, along with their respective sizes. This score
is presented on a scale (such as 0 to 100), with a higher score indicating a greater degree of insulin
resistance.•

Electrolytes (sodium, potassium, chloride): These minerals help maintain the balance of fluids in the body
and are crucial for nerve and muscle function. Abnormal levels can indicate dehydration, kidney problems, or
hormonal imbalances. Chloride is an example of lab value that can advise you on specific dietary or lifestyle
factors, because high chloride can indicate that you have metabolic acidosis (having too much acid in your
blood, or a lower-than-normal blood pH, often due to high intake of acidic foods or low intake of minerals)
or respiratory alkalosis, which is a low level of carbon dioxide in your blood due to shallow breathing,
excessive breathing, or hyperventilating.•

Calcium: Important for bone health, muscle function, and nerve transmission. High or low levels can
indicate issues with the parathyroid gland, kidneys, or bones.
--- END PAGE 837 ---

--- PAGE 838 ---
•

Kidney function tests (blood urea nitrogen [BUN], creatinine): These tests evaluate how well the kidneys
are functioning by measuring waste products in the blood. Abnormal levels can indicate kidney disease or
other kidney-related issues, although elevated creatinine and BUN can also simply mean you’re
supplementing with creatine or you did a hard workout in the one to two days prior to the test.•

Liver function tests (albumin, total protein, alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase [ALT],
aspartate aminotransferase [AST], bilirubin): These tests assess the health of the liver and its ability to
metabolize substances. Abnormal levels can indicate liver disease, hepatitis, or other liver disorders and can
often give you insight about whether you might be drinking too much alcohol or using too many herbs,
supplements, or pharmaceuticals that stress the liver—a common problem among biohackers and health
enthusiasts.•

Total protein and albumin: Measures the total amounts of protein and albumin in the blood, which can
indicate liver or kidney disease, malnutrition, or other conditions, including excessive protein intake or poor
protein breakdown.• 
Bilirubin: Measures the levels of a waste product produced by the breakdown of red blood cells. Abnormal
levels can indicate liver or bile duct problems, excess red blood cell turnover from high amounts of
endurance exercise, or, once again, that you simply worked out too hard in the days leading up to your test.
Overall, a CMP is a valuable tool for assessing overall health, diagnosing medical conditions, monitoring
ongoing health conditions, and guiding decisions about lifestyle, exercise, and diet modifications. However, it’s
important to interpret the results in conjunction with other clinical information and consult with a healthcare
professional for proper diagnosis and management.
13. Vitamin D
Vitamin D is quite possibly the most important vitamin to pay attention to on a lab test since it is a crucial
nutrient that plays a fundamental role in a host of physiological processes. While it’s commonly associated with
bone health and calcium absorption, emerging research has highlighted vitamin D’s diverse functions in
supporting immune function, cardiovascular health, mood regulation, resistance to infection, and overall well-
being. Low levels of vitamin D have been linked to a myriad of health concerns, including increased
susceptibility to infections, autoimmune diseases, cardiovascular disease, cognitive decline, and mood disorders.
But, like many lab results, more vitamin D is not better, and excess vitamin D levels often indicate risk for
vascular calcification (VC). Calcification occurs when calcium deposits accumulate in soft tissues, such as
arteries, heart valves, and kidneys, leading to arterial stiffness, cardiovascular disease, and kidney stones.
Excessive vitamin D intake, either through supplementation or sun exposure, can lead to hypercalcemia, a
condition characterized by elevated levels of calcium in the blood. Hypercalcemia can result in symptoms such
as nausea, vomiting, weakness, confusion, and even organ damage if left untreated. Prolonged hypercalcemia can
contribute to the formation of calcifications in various tissues, increasing the risk of cardiovascular events and
kidney dysfunction, particularly if vitamin D is elevated in the absence of adequate vitamin K and magnesium
intake.
The optimal range for vitamin D levels is between 40 and 80 ng/mL. Levels below 20 ng/mL are indicative of
vitamin D deficiency, while levels above 80 ng/mL may increase the risk of adverse effects, including
calcification.
There are other subtle nuances to pay attention to when testing vitamin D. For example, in the presence of
excess lead exposure from paint, pipes, contaminated soil, children’s toys and jewelry, drinking water, or other
environmental sources, your body forcefully lowers vitamin D as a protective mechanism. Obviously, if you don’t
--- END PAGE 838 ---

--- PAGE 839 ---
test your lead levels via a hair or blood analysis, you wouldn’t know that your vitamin D is low not because you
aren’t taking enough, but rather due to lead exposure. Vitamin D is also a negative acute phase reactant, meaning
that concentrations decrease during inflammation. So inflammation, not a lack of vitamin D supplementation or
inadequate sun exposure, could also be a reason vitamin D is too low, and a blood test could be an unreliable
biomarker of vitamin D levels if you have had an acute inflammatory insult such as an injury or you suffer
chronic inflammation from stress, lack of sleep, or other environmental factors. Finally, glutathione plays a key
role in vitamin D metabolism, and often a glutathione deficiency can contribute to low vitamin D levels.
Glutathione intake alone can increase vitamin D in the absence of additional vitamin D supplementation! As you
can see, similar to other lab results, when it comes to vitamin D, everything needs to be taken in the proper
context.
14. Apolipoprotein B (ApoB)
When it comes to lipids, the terms “good” cholesterol and “bad” cholesterol are a bit antiquated, because both
LDL and HDL serve important functions. Similarly, the idea that diet is the main factor that impacts blood
cholesterol levels is also antiquated. Fact is, about 80 percent of the circulating cholesterol in your body is
produced by your cells, not consumed through your diet. This means dietary cholesterol is very unlikely to be
the major driver of cholesterol levels in your bloodstream since most of your blood cholesterol comes from your
body creating its own cholesterol, not from all those eggs you’re eating or not eating.
This is why it’s important to pay attention to specific components of lipoproteins, which are the shuttles that
carry cholesterol around and across tissues and organs. ApoB is a protein that wraps around these lipoproteins,
including low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL). It serves as a structural
component of these lipoproteins, facilitating the transport of cholesterol and other fats throughout the body.
Higher levels of ApoB suggest you have more particles in your blood that may trigger a cascade of heart attack or
stroke, and elevated ApoB levels have been shown to be associated with an increased risk of atherosclerosis and
cardiovascular events. Calcium buildup in the arteries is now understood to be related to the number of ApoB
lipoprotein B carriers. This makes it pretty surprising that ApoB testing is not a part of the standard lipid profile
your physician may order.
Ideal levels of ApoB are 90 nmol/L or less. When I discovered that I had significant plaque accumulation and
ApoB levels above 170, I experimented with a variety of strategies to lower ApoB, and eventually—after trying
natural solutions such as niacin, red yeast rice extract, nattokinase, and vitamin K—found near-immediate
success with a three-month stint of a twice-monthly injection of a PCSK9 inhibitor, which increases LDL
receptors in the liver, decreases LDL cholesterol levels in the blood, and has been shown to be a good way to
lower ApoB. With this strategy, I was able to plummet my ApoB down to below 70.
15. Lipoprotein A [Lp(a)]
Lp(a) is a type of lipoprotein particle similar to low-density lipoprotein (LDL), but it contains an additional
protein called apolipoprotein(a) attached to the LDL particle. Lp(a) is a known risk factor for cardiovascular
disease and is implicated in the development of atherosclerosis. Elevated levels of Lp(a) in the blood are
associated with an increased risk of heart attack, stroke, and other cardiovascular events, even independent of
traditional risk factors such as high LDL cholesterol levels, and are five to ten times more predictive of
cardiovascular events than other lipid measurements!
An optimal range for Lp(a) is less than 14 mg/dL. It’s important to know that, similar to how you can have a
normal lipid panel but an elevated plaque score in the heart, you can have a normal ApoB on a lab test and
--- END PAGE 839 ---

--- PAGE 840 ---
normal cholesterol on a standard lipid panel but still have high Lp(a). This is important because high Lp(a) is
about twenty-five times more likely to cause a heart attack than high LDL! Once again, considering that the
Lp(a) and ApoB tests cost about $10 each, I find it a bit shocking that these tests are not standard measurements
a doctor orders on a regularly scheduled lipid panel to check up on heart health.
The Bottom Line
So there you have it. Sure, you should certainly pay attention to variables such as love, stress, relationships, diet,
fasting, grip strength, and more. But you should also track the important biomarkers listed here, which can give
you early warnings about accelerated aging and increased risk of mortality. Because so many of these biomarkers
are not included on a standard blood panel, you’ll need to either order these tests for yourself from one of the
services included on the resources page for this chapter or ask your doctor for them.
HOW TO TEST YOUR HORMONES
Because hormone levels fluctuate throughout the day, the gold-standard method for testing your hormones is
the DUTCH urine steroid hormone profile, which is performed via multiple collections throughout the day—all
in the comfort of your home. It is a good way to see what’s truly going on with your hormones because it doesn’t
measure just hormones but also hormone metabolites. Since steroid hormones do not dissolve well in water,
they cannot pass directly into the urine and instead must be broken down in the liver and kidneys to form
smaller water-soluble particles known as metabolites. These metabolites can be extremely important indicators
for certain conditions and give an in-depth picture of why hormones are elevated, lacking, or point toward
specific symptoms.
Measuring both hormones and their metabolites can give you or your healthcare practitioner a much better
overall picture of hormone production. For example, someone whose salivary test shows low cortisol could
discover through a DUTCH urine steroid hormone profile that they have normal cortisol production but high
levels of metabolites—in other words, they produce enough cortisol, but it’s getting broken down very quickly,
or vice versa, which can indicate hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, long-term stress, inflammation, insulin
resistance, infection, poor liver function, anorexia, critical illness, and more.
With serum (blood) and saliva hormone spot-testing, it’s possible to track variations in hormone release
throughout the day—and this is a great way to measure how your hormones change during a twenty-four-hour
period. In contrast, a standard twenty-four-hour urine collection many physicians use reflects your total
hormone output in a twenty-four-hour period. But by using the DUTCH urine steroid test, you get the best of all
worlds: blood, saliva, and urinary results with just a urine collection. The DUTCH test measures the following:
• Free cortisone (a corticosteroid related to cortisol)
• Creatinine (a by-product of creatine breakdown)
• Free cortisol. Most circulating cortisol is bound to albumin and corticosteroid-binding globulin; less than 5
percent is unbound. Only free cortisol can reach the enzyme transporters in the kidneys, liver, and other
organs involved in excretory and metabolic clearance.
• Tetrahydrocortisone, a-tetrahydrocortisol, and b-tetrahydrocortisol (all metabolites of cortisol breakdown)
• DHEA (a precursor for estrogens and testosterone; see here)
• The progesterone metabolites a-pregnanediol and b-pregnanediol
--- END PAGE 840 ---

--- PAGE 841 ---
• The androgen metabolites etiocholanolone, androsterone, testosterone, 5a-DHT, 5a-androstanediol, 5b-
androstanediol, and epi-testosterone
• The estrogen metabolites estrone, estradiol, estriol, 2-OH-estrone, 4-OH-estrone, 16-OH-estrone, 2-
methoxyestrone, and 2-OH-estradiol
• 6-OH-melatonin-sulfate (the major active metabolite of melatonin)
Testing with DUTCH is easy. When you order a test, a collection kit is sent straight to your door, and the kit
includes five easy-to-use filter paper devices on which you urinate. You then use the enclosed prepaid label to
send them back to the lab. Your DUTCH results include helpful, actionable tips for adjusting hormones using
diet, lifestyle, and supplementation strategies.
HOW TO TEST FOR FOOD SENSITIVITIES
I prefer to use Cyrex Labs for food-sensitivity testing because their tests are highly accurate, consistent, and
based on the latest research and development in food-sensitivity analysis. Unlike outdated tests that test only
one form of a given food, Cyrex tests multiple forms (raw, cooked, and processed) and food cross-reactions and
identifies only foods that challenge your immune system so you can reduce the load on your immune system by
minimizing exposure to those foods.
I particularly like Cyrex because it produces fewer false positives than other food-sensitivity tests. It’s quite
popular these days for health enthusiasts to order tests advertised as ALCAT tests (you can even buy them on
Amazon!). Many of these tests use an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), which tests allergies and
sensitivities to a variety of common allergens, or an antibody assessment panel that tests for IgG and IgA. I had
this panel done on myself and discovered that I can’t tolerate dairy from cows (but not from goats) and chicken
eggs (but not eggs from other fowl, such as ducks).
Considering the amount of omelets, raw-dairy yogurt and cheese, Greek yogurt, and protein bars containing
whey from grass-fed cows that I was consuming at the time, it was impossible to ascertain which came first, the
food sensitivities or the high levels of antibodies circulating in my bloodstream because I was eating those foods.
And herein lies the problem with blood-based food-intolerance testing: the presence of antibodies to certain
foods does not necessarily mean that those foods are causing a harmful immune reaction. It more likely means
that those are the foods you eat the most often or have eaten the most recently.
In fact, people who were allergic to milk or eggs as kids but eventually outgrew those allergies (which is fairly
common) tend to have more antibodies to those foods. In other words, the presence of antibodies is linked to an
increased tolerance for those foods, not a decreased tolerance. Yet when you test yourself, you may receive a long
and foreboding list of foods to avoid (often hundreds of them!) when they may not be your problem.
This is why, for the best accuracy, I recommend the Array 3, Array 4, and Array 10 tests from Cyrex Labs,
which will give you plenty of information without producing false positives or giving you a frustrating, extremely
long list of foods that you can’t eat. This is due to many reasons, including these:
• Food that’s been heated above 118 degrees Fahrenheit experiences changes in its protein structure and thus
its antigenicity. Cyrex screens for raw and cooked forms of common foods on their Array 10.
• Some antigens are cross-reactive, meaning that antibodies developed for one food also respond to another
food. Cyrex tests for reactivity to these cross-reactive antigens, as well as for reactivity to pan-antigens like
parvalbumin and latex hevein.
• Instead of testing only for reactivity to individual proteins, Cyrex also tests for reactivity to food
combinations.
--- END PAGE 841 ---

--- PAGE 842 ---
• Many food products, especially gluten-free foods, substitute gums for gluten to hold the food together. Cyrex
tests for sensitivity to these gums.
• Binding isolates like lectins and agglutinins tend to affect specific tissues. Cyrex tests for sensitivity to these
isolates.
• Cyrex measures your reactivity to artificial food colorings.
• Oils that were once thought to be uncontaminated by proteins actually contain hidden proteins called
oleosins. Cyrex tests for reactivity to oleosins.
• Meat glue is used to hold meat together (it’s crazy what food manufacturers do these days, huh?). So, in
addition to testing for reactivity to meat, Cyrex also tests for reactivity to meat glue.
• Some people produce more IgA or more IgG. Cyrex combines the two into one panel to reduce the chance of
missing reactivity.
On your results, Cyrex gives three ranges of results: “normal,” “equivocal,” and “out of range.” “Normal”
indicates an immune response within the accepted range, “equivocal” is one standard deviation away from a
normal result, and “out of range” is two points of deviation from normal.
You should consider any “out of range” result to mean that the food is provoking a serious immune response.
An “equivocal” result is also significant and may mean you are just beginning to exhibit an immune reaction to a
food, and temporary elimination of that food—as well as addressing issues such as a leaky gut or implementing
other strategies from chapter 13—is a very good idea. If you test positive for immune sensitivity to many foods,
remove only the ones you react to the most (the “out of range” scores) and begin a protocol to restore tolerance.
After several weeks, you can test again, and if fewer foods come back positive, it’s a sign you are on the right
track.
The Cyrex Array 10, also called the Multiple Food Immune Reactivity Screen, measures reactivity to 180 food
antigens, including reactions to foods in cooked, raw, and/or modified forms. This can help you customize which
foods to eat and avoid. Of all the Cyrex panels, I consider the Array 10 to give you the best bang for your buck
when it comes to food-sensitivity testing. Other useful Cyrex panels include the Array 4 (gluten-associated
cross-reactivity), Array 11 (chemical immune reactivity), and Array 10C, which combines all their best food-
allergy tests into one highly informative panel that evaluates over 180 different food antigens and cross-
reactivities. A newer test that is similar to the Cyrex tests but can be even more sensitive for wheat- or gluten-
related issues is the Gut Zoomer, a blood sample test that can also give precise results about foods causing
sensitivities and intolerances.
Another way to test for food allergies is via a microbiome panel, which can give clues about food allergy or
intolerance risks based on gut flora. More details on this type of testing are in chapter 13. Research has shown
that people with food allergies experience differences in their gut flora, which, in turn, suggests that changes in
your gut microbiome impact the development of allergies and intolerances. A normal human microbiome
includes a wide range of bacteria, including enterobacteriaceae, bacteroides, lactobacilli, and bifidobacteria, and
reduced numbers of these microbes has been shown to impair the immune system, leading to allergies or
intolerances.
For example, reduced levels of lactobacilli and increased levels of Staphylococcus aureus are correlated with
milk and egg allergies. Reduced numbers of L. casei, L. paracasei, L. rhamnosus, and Bifidobacterium adolescentis
have been associated with egg white allergies and allergies to cow’s milk. Lower levels of actinobacteria,
proteobacteria, and bacteroides have also been correlated with general allergies and intolerances. Research has
also suggested that if you have poor gut flora diversity, you may be predisposed to intolerance of gluten,
FODMAPs, and histamines. When it comes to gluten in particular, certain bacterial strains can aid your digestive
system in breaking down gluten proteins, which means that if you lack these strains, you’re more likely to have a
--- END PAGE 842 ---

--- PAGE 843 ---
gluten intolerance. SIBO (small intestine bacterial overgrowth) is known to result in FODMAP intolerances and
is caused by a lack of beneficial gut bacteria. Similarly, an overgrowth of histamine- or enzyme-producing
bacteria that interferes with histamine metabolism can result in histamine intolerances.
Finally, many symptoms of food allergies or intolerances are actually brought on by mold and mycotoxin
exposure. Using the types of toxin tests you’ll find on the online resources page for this chapter, you can
measure levels of c4a, TGF-beta-1, MSH, VIP, VEGF, MMP-9, and leptins, which give a snapshot of how the
immune system may have been impacted by mold toxicity. Markedly elevated levels of c4a, TGF-beta-1, MMP-9,
and leptins and low levels of MSH, VIP, and VEGF all point in that direction. You can find a physician well versed
in this type of testing on the website SurvivingMold.com, and chapters 4 and 20 address in detail how to manage
mold and mycotoxin exposure.
HOW TO TEST FOR MICRONUTRIENT DEFICIENCIES
Sometimes you need to take a deep dive into smaller variables that a basic blood test doesn’t look into, such as
amino acids, fatty acids, antioxidants, minerals, metabolites, enzymes, inflammatory markers, and more. For this
purpose, you can use an at-home test like the Metabolomix+ from Genova Diagnostics, which is a unique
combination of nutritional tests that provides an analysis of key nutritional biomarkers. A first morning void
(FMV) urine collection, with an optional add-on bloodspot finger stick and buccal swab, the Metabolomix+ test
is a noninvasive way to assess the functional need for antioxidants, B-vitamins, minerals, digestive support, fatty
acids, and amino acids. It also tests for a variety of nutrient, detoxification, and cell regulation markers, as well
as bacterial and yeast/fungal compounds.
Over time, deficiencies in these compounds can cause a variety of chronic health conditions, and if you
struggle with things like poor sleep, less-than-stellar workouts, brain fog, appetite cravings, sore joints, or other
“mysterious” issues, this profile can help elucidate deficiencies in micronutrients and other small components
that other basic blood tests simply can’t discover. The results from a Metabolomix+ test include a suggested
supplement schedule that offers personalized recommendations and a helpful at-a-glance interpretation page
that provides facts on nutrient function, causes and complications of their deficiencies, and dietary sources.
A more affordable and convenient way to test for micronutrients and minerals is a hair tissue mineral
analysis (HTMA). This diagnostic tool assesses mineral levels and heavy metal toxicity in the body by analyzing a
small sample of hair (I don’t like to mess up my precisely engineered haircut, so I just take a small snip of hair
from my crotch, which is perfectly acceptable for accurate results). This noninvasive test provides valuable
insight into the body’s mineral status and potential imbalances, offering a comprehensive overview of overall
health and potential nutritional deficiencies or toxic exposures. The lab analysis examines the concentrations of
various minerals and heavy metals present in your hair, reflecting your body’s mineral metabolism and potential
exposure to environmental toxins over time.
When I took my first HTMA interpretation course from Dr. Leland Stillman, I realized that for only a
hundred bucks, an HTMA offers an impressive array of insights into health and well-being. First, it provides
information about mineral deficiencies or excesses that may impact various physiological processes. For
example, imbalances in or improper ratios of essential minerals like calcium, magnesium, zinc, and potassium
can affect energy production, hormone regulation, immune function, and nerve transmission. Identifying these
imbalances via HTMA allows for targeted nutritional interventions to restore or balance mineral levels.
Additionally, HTMA can detect toxic exposure to heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, cadmium, and arsenic,
which can accumulate in the body over time and contribute to chronic health issues.
--- END PAGE 843 ---

--- PAGE 844 ---
These types of imbalances, deficiencies, or excesses can serve as clues to do further, more advanced blood,
stool, saliva, or urinary analysis. For example, let’s say you’ve been experiencing blood sugar issues, and your
HTMA shows a chromium deficiency. Chromium is involved in glucose metabolism and blood sugar regulation,
and abnormal chromium levels can impact insulin function and contribute to blood sugar imbalances,
potentially leading to diabetes or other metabolic disorders. Or let’s say your vitamin D is chronically low, no
matter how much you supplement or how much sunshine you get. Your HTMA may show a high load of metals
such as lead or abnormal levels of antioxidants such as manganese and copper, both issues that can lower
vitamin D levels. An experienced practitioner can quickly identify issues like these on an HTMA, and you can
learn quite a bit from taking an HTMA interpretation course such as the one I took from Dr. Stillman. I’ll include
a link to that course on the online resources page for this chapter.
HOW TO TEST YOUR GUT
There are approximately 40 trillion microorganisms living in your gut, where they make up your gut microbiome.
They help digest your food, produce beneficial and harmful chemicals, control infections from pathogens,
regulate your immune system, and even control your emotions (ever have a “gut feeling”?). Some of these
microorganisms have been implicated in maintaining optimal health, while others can contribute to many
chronic conditions, including diabetes, obesity, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, coronary artery disease, psoriasis,
lupus, and autism. By taking care of your 40 trillion microbe friends, you can maximize your wellness and
potentially prevent disease.
In chapter 13, I told you most of what you need to know about testing your microbiome. As you learned in
that chapter, if you suspect that you have insufficient gut bacteria levels or want to adjust your diet and
supplementation routine for your unique gut profile, I recommend a one-two combo: the three-day Genova gut-
testing kit to test for the presence of bacteria, which uses short sequences called primers to look for specific
microbes using a PCR analysis, along with a microbiome analysis, which is offered by companies such as Viome,
Wellnicity, BIOHM, Psomagen, Ombre, and Thorne and uses metagenomics to assess bacterial abundance and
overall microbial function and screen for stealth gut infections. These types of microbiome tests can even
identify the metabolites produced by the microbes in your gut and provide personalized diet and lifestyle
recommendations to fine-tune the function of your gut microbiome to minimize the production of harmful
metabolites and maximize the production of beneficial ones.
HOW TO TEST YOUR GENES
I’ve been testing and tracking my genetics for over ten years—not because it’s necessary to constantly retest
your genetics (unless you’re engaged in some kind of regularly scheduled, aggressive gene-editing experiments)
but because I find it informative and interesting to see what kind of data one can get from a few simple drops of
saliva or blood. After all, if you know where your ancestors came from, what they ate, and what diseases or
predispositions you might have floating around in your body, you’ll be far better equipped to make targeted diet,
supplementation, exercise, and lifestyle modifications.
For the most part, all DNA tests are quite similar: First, you provide some personal background information,
and then you order a test kit. After that, you provide your DNA sample via a finger-prick blood sample, saliva
deposit, or cheek swab. You then mail it to the lab and wait for your results. However, there are some variations
depending on the type of test you use and your reason for taking a DNA test. Different labs employ different
--- END PAGE 844 ---

--- PAGE 845 ---
methods to analyze DNA samples based on the focus of the results, and some tests only assess specific sections
of the DNA, while others analyze the entire genome.
DNA tests use various techniques, including DNA methylation, to make predictions about your health state.
Tests that also check for ancestry often use a technique called genotyping to gather results. This process involves
studying an individual’s DNA sequence to determine variants in their genetic makeup that are unique to them.
Another method called autosomal DNA testing measures autosomal chromosomes and matches them across a
database to connect individuals to unknown relatives.
This type of self-quantification is important because genes can reveal information about your predisposition
to certain diseases, your overall nutritional health, and any vitamin or mineral deficiencies you may be at risk of
developing. While your genetic code cannot be altered to reduce your susceptibility to a given disease (at least,
not yet with great precision or safety), DNA tests can provide meaningful insight into how your body functions,
which allows you to take proactive measures to reduce your likelihood of developing a certain disease. For
instance, if a test identifies a gene linked to heart disease, you can prioritize early preventative actions you may
not have otherwise taken, such as a robust sauna practice, mineral intake, exercise that is adequate but not too
hard, and meditation or other stress-control tactics.
The accuracy and precision of DNA health test kits largely depend on various factors, including the sample
type, the method of analysis, the database size, the algorithm used to produce results, the amount of DNA
studied (specific sections versus the entire sequence), and the reproducibility (result consistency under
different conditions). With advancements in science and technology, at-home genetic testing kits have become
increasingly accurate in providing key health insights.
Perhaps the most popular DNA test is 23andMe, which offers an ancestry service that helps you understand
who you are, where your DNA comes from, and your family story. 23andMe analyzes, compiles, and distills your
DNA information into helpful reports about your ancestry and provides a tool to enable you to connect with
relatives who share similar DNA, along with providing insights on your health predispositions and risks, such as
how fast you metabolize caffeine or your likelihood for having migraines. AncestryDNA’s service is similar but a
bit more focused on deep historical research to build out a family tree. Their database contains more than 18
million profiles, making it the largest of all the DNA test kit services. They also maintain a powerful tool for
searching through hundreds of historical document databases.
If you’re a workout junkie, DNAfit is a good service to upload your genetic data to, especially if you’re active
and want to know more about how to exercise and eat. DNAfit can determine your response to a selection of key
genetic markers associated with health, fitness, nutrition, and athletic performance, and it provides an in-depth
analysis of up to forty-five key genetic variants, allowing you to tailor your training and nutrition choices to play
to your genetic advantage. The DNAfit Nutrigenetic report uses DNA data to provide information about your
response to carbohydrate and fats; detoxification (phase 1 and phase 2) ability; antioxidant capacity; omega-3
and vitamins B and D needs; salt, alcohol, and caffeine sensitivity; lactose intolerance; and celiac disease
predisposition. The DNAfit Fitness report uses DNA information to provide information regarding your
response to power training versus endurance genetics, aerobic (VO max) response, recovery profile, and injury
2 risk.
Companies like 10X, The DNA Company, StrateGene, 3X4 Genetics, and SelfDecode operate at the forefront
of personalized health by leveraging advanced genomic science to provide a comprehensive understanding of
your genetic makeup. Unlike traditional DNA testing services that often focus on ancestry or limited health
markers, these services go several steps further by offering a 360-degree view of your genetic blueprint,
interpreting how genetic variants interact and influence overall health. StrateGene, designed by my friend and
former podcast guest Dr. Ben Lynch, dives into specific “dirty” genes that you should pay the most attention to,
such as folate, methionine, sulfur, glutathione, and histamine pathways, providing advice about compounds and
lifestyle activities that speed up or slow down each gene. For education on your genetics, SelfDecode offers one
--- END PAGE 845 ---

--- PAGE 846 ---
of the most comprehensive genetic models on the market. For example, their report on blood pressure looks at
nearly a million genetic variants (SNPs)! For comparison, 23andMe’s blood pressure report looks at only 3,000
SNPs. SelfDecode then designs reports built on AI and machine learning technology. By using a technique called
genetic imputation, their system turns the roughly 500,000 SNPs that most genotyping chips cover into data for
over 83 million additional variants, all with an accuracy rate of 99.7 percent. This enables SelfDecode to analyze
up to seventy times more of your genome than other companies can, which massively improves the accuracy of
your genetic results and personalized health recommendations.
Should you want to take the deepest dive into your DNA, you can get whole genome sequencing (WGS),
which gives you a complete blueprint of your entire DNA. When you receive your results, you will have
information on more than three billion genetic variants, or changes in your genome. Even genes whose purpose
are not yet known are included. This means that years in the future, your sequencing results will still be relevant
and applicable to the latest genetic findings. This testing is not as expensive as you’d think: the cost of a whole
genome sequence decreased from an estimated $1 million in 2007 to $1,000 in 2014, and today it costs about
$600. Companies that offer WGS include Gencove, Dante Labs, 23andMe, Illumina, and Nebula.
Finally, many biological age measurements use the science of epigenetics to determine the age of your body,
organs, and cells and your potential to function for years ahead. This biological age is often different from
chronological age, and many are surprised to find they’re aging faster than they think. For each year that you’re
biologically older than your chronological age, your statistical probability for disease and death increases, but
fortunately, the opposite is also true: for each year you’re biologically younger, your risk decreases.
There are a variety of biological age measurements available, including the epigenetic clock, which is a
biochemical assessment that analyzes DNA; extrinsic immune age, which measures epigenetic changes in
immune cells and how they relate to immunosenescence; telomere tests, which measure the rate at which
telomeres become shorter as DNA is damaged; a PhenoAge or GlycanAge test, which measures common age-
related biomarkers that change during aging; and a DunedinPACE test (described in chapter 9), which measures
the pace of biological aging by analyzing methylation patterns. You don’t have to go to a fancy clinic to get a test
like this; companies like Novos, TruAge, Elysium, GlycanAge, and myDNAge now ship kits directly to your home.
--- END PAGE 846 ---

--- PAGE 847 ---
Should You Train Based on Your Genetics?
You’ve seen it before: there’s that person at the gym who has been training only half as long and half as hard as you
and seems to be making twice the gains and getting twice the results. They must be on steroids, right? Not
necessarily. It’s possible that they’re simply performing the exact number of sets and reps and using the precise
weights that are appropriate for their genetics, while you’re possibly training with a strategy that flies completely in
the face of your own genetics.
While sports scientists have long suspected that elite athletes are born and not necessarily formed in the gym, a
growing body of research studies are now revealing literally dozens of genetic variants that are linked to highly
individualized training responses and sport-related traits. Elite sports coaches from countries such as Russia and China
are now taking this to the next level by selecting the right candidates for the right sports and then personalizing each
athlete’s training based on their unique genetic profiles.
One recent study from Europe impressively demonstrated that matching your genotype with the appropriate training
modality can lead to a far more effective resistance training protocol. The researchers set out to develop an algorithm
that would allow athletes to achieve greater results in response to high- or low-intensity resistance training programs
by predicting each athlete’s potential based on the power and endurance qualities of their genetics using fifteen
performance-associated gene polymorphisms.
In the study, athletes completed an eight-week high- or low-intensity resistance training program that was either
matched or mismatched with their individual genotype (based on information such as whether they appeared to be
genetically equipped with slow-twitch or fast-twitch muscle, levels of mitochondrial density, repair and recovery
mechanisms, and antioxidant production). They were given pre- and post-training performance tests for both
explosive power and endurance capacity. The study was double-blind, and both researchers and athletes were
unaware of the “genetic potential status” of each individual athlete, which was determined by an algorithm developed
by DNAfit.
--- END PAGE 847 ---

--- PAGE 848 ---
The results were astounding. Training according to your genes produced impressive results. Those with the power
genotype who trained with high-intensity, low-rep training and those with the endurance genotype who trained with
low-intensity, high-rep training had performance gains up to 610 percent greater than the participants who trained
with the opposite training protocol from what their genetics dictated! Nearly 82 percent of the low or non-responders
in the study were from the genetically mismatched groups who were training using the wrong training program for
their genetics.
The researchers summarized that “matching the individual’s genotype with the appropriate training modality leads to
more effective resistance training” and that “the developed algorithm may be used to guide individualized resistance-
training interventions.” The big takeaway is this: if you do indeed get a DNAfit test that tells you how you should be
training based on your endurance or power responder profile, you’d most likely benefit big-time from paying attention
to those recommendations! For example, I am nearly 90 percent on the power responder scale, and my body fares far
better for both performance and recovery when I train with heavy weights in an explosive manner as opposed to light
weight with high reps, whereas my friend and endurance responder Kelly Starrett noticed huge performance
breakthroughs when he adopted the opposite approach.
HOW TO TEST BLOOD GLUCOSE AND KETONES
Knowing how your body is responding to its fuel can be key to understanding why you’re having trouble losing
weight, why you’re crashing during a workout, or whether your diet is correctly keyed in to your individual
needs. That’s where blood glucose monitors and ketone meters come in.
Testing Your Blood Glucose
While a single blood test using an inexpensive blood glucose monitor from any drugstore or health website can
give you a static snapshot of your blood glucose levels, nothing beats a continuous blood glucose monitor for
truly determining how your diet is affecting one of the most important parameters of your health and fitness:
glycemic variability.
--- END PAGE 848 ---

--- PAGE 849 ---
A continuous glucose monitoring system (CGM) is just what it sounds like: a system that monitors your
blood sugar continuously, twenty-four hours a day. A sensor is inserted right beneath your skin and attaches to a
transmitter that sends the data to the receiver. You are then able to see your blood sugar level at any point with
the receiver or a phone app.
The sensor is usually inserted with a simple at-home device under the skin of your abdomen or on the back
or your arm and is typically worn for seven to fourteen days. (In my opinion, if you are eating your normal diet
and you eat the same things regularly, you’ll know everything you need to know about your blood glucose after
two weeks and can stop testing at that point, unless you’re wearing the CGM for medical reasons.) If your diet
widely varies or you’re simply a supremely curious self-quantifier, you can of course wear a CGM continuously.
This sensor reads glucose levels in the interstitial fluid below your skin’s surface, and the transmitter it’s linked
to sends this information wirelessly to a receiver or smartphone app (or an insulin pump, if you’re diabetic and
using one). This means that at any given time during the day or night, you can look at your phone or receiver and
see how your blood glucose level is trending, and you can even receive instant notifications if it gets too high or
too low.
In CGM studies of healthy people, a normal fasting blood sugar is approximately 83 mg/dL or less, and in
very metabolically healthy, active individuals, it’s in the mid to high 70s. Unfortunately, most doctors accept
anything under 100 mg/dL as normal, but studies have shown that people with fasting blood sugar levels above
95 have more than three times the risk of developing diabetes than people with levels below 90.
Even more important than fasting blood glucose is the amount of time your blood sugar is elevated over the
level known to increase disease risk, which is about 140 mg/dL. Ideally, after a meal—even a high-carb one—
blood sugar should rise to around 120–130 mg/dL for about forty-five minutes and then drop, reaching less than
100 mg/dL by the two-hour mark.
One caveat is that if you are eating a very-low-carb or ketogenic diet, you may see elevated fasting blood
glucose levels. This is because low-carb diets cause a natural drop in insulin levels and some amount of insulin
resistance. When carbohydrates are restricted, fatty acids are freed up for use as a fuel, which means that in the
long term, muscles have less need for sugar and thus become less sensitive to insulin. So, if you eat a low-carb or
ketogenic diet and have a somewhat high fasting blood sugar (e.g., above 90–100), this is not important, and you
should instead pay closer attention to your postprandial blood sugar levels.
The two most popular CGMs—both of which I’ve experimented with and found to work well, especially
when covered in kinesiotape or some kind of elastic bandage for high-intensity workouts, races, swimming, or
sauna exposure—are the Dexcom and the FreeStyle Libre. Admittedly, I was nervous about using a continuous
blood glucose monitor because I worried that with my active lifestyle, it would constantly become detached
from my body, it would become water-damaged, or the tiny sensor needle would become bent. But as long as I
am careful to tape the CGM prior to intense physical activity, it seems to stay attached well and continues to
take good readings (this is especially true for the more expensive but far more accurate Dexcom G6 model). The
Simpatch adhesive patch for Dexcom works particularly well, as does a strip of properly cut kinesiotape.
Newer, noninvasive CGM technology being developed includes the optical rotation method, which uses a
visible light source to measure glucose levels in the cornea and aqueous humor of the eye; microwave sensors,
which measure blood sugar levels by using the reflection and absorption of microwave signals when they pass
through human tissues; and electromagnetic sensor systems that function much like a small, wearable MRI.
Wearables are increasingly implementing CGM data also, with rings and straps like Ultrahuman, Noise, and
Biosensor pulling your glucose data into the same platform as your stress, sleep, and activity data.
Testing Your Ketones
--- END PAGE 849 ---

--- PAGE 850 ---
In addition to blood glucose, ketone levels can offer good insight into your body. Ketones, you’ll recall from
chapter 4, are produced during fatty acid breakdown, and your ketone levels reflect how efficiently you are
burning fat or producing energy, even in the absence of high blood glucose levels. Assuming you do not possess
genes that would make you respond deleteriously to a high-fat, low-carb diet (as explained in chapter 13), ketosis
can be a powerful nutritional approach to switching your metabolism to prioritizing fat as a fuel while also
increasing cognitive and physical performance. (Incidentally, even if you’re not achieving ketosis via a high-fat,
low-carb diet, you can still amp up ketone production with intermittent fasting or another form of calorie or
carbohydrate restriction.) Many people assume that if they are eating low-carb or fasting, they are in ketosis, but
actually measuring ketones can be useful, especially if you’re just getting used to a new diet or supplement and
are trying to determine whether it increases ketone production. Ideal blood levels of ketones to indicate that you
are in a state of ketosis range from at least 0.5 millimolar up to 3.0 millimolar.
There are three testing methods for ketosis because there are three forms of ketones in your body:
acetoacetate, which can be tested in your urine; acetate, which can be tested in your breath; and beta-
hydroxybutyrate, which can be tested in your blood.
Let’s begin with acetoacetate. The way ketones get into your urine is if they are “spilling over” in excessive
amounts. This means that if there is an excess of ketones, or if you are not utilizing ketones efficiently, they can
be dumped into your kidneys to be excreted in your urine as acetoacetate. The way to measure these excess
amounts of ketones is through a urine test strip, which changes color relative to the number of ketones in your
urine (usually the darker the purple color on the strip, the more ketones you have).
Unfortunately, this type of test is not always reliable. Once your body is in a keto-adapted state and you’re
efficiently using ketones for fuel, you will see progressively lower levels of ketones on the strip. This is
misleading: you may actually be in a deep state of ketosis and using almost all the ketones your body is
producing, but the strip says you have low ketones because there are fewer ketones spilling over into your urine.
So urine strips can be a cheap and effective testing method if you are just starting to get into ketosis, but they
aren’t viable for long-term testing once you’ve been consistently in ketosis.
Acetone (also called acetate) is the second ketone body and is produced by gas exchange in your lungs.
Acetone has been found in research to correlate very closely to levels of beta-hydroxybutyrate in the blood and
can be measured directly with a breath ketone meter. One of the key advantages of a breath meter for testing
ketones is that it is reusable and usually involves a one-time purchase of a device such as a Ketonix, Keyto, or
LEVL.
Finally, the primary ketone body that you use for energy (or can take as an exogenous ketone supplement) is
beta-hydroxybutyrate, or BHB. Here’s how BHB is used for energy: upon entering a cell, it is converted to
acetoacetone, which is ultimately converted to acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA is then used in the Krebs cycle for the
production of ATP.
A blood test for BHB can be done easily at home the same way people with diabetes check their blood
glucose. You simply prick your finger and squeeze a drop of blood onto a strip, and a small handheld reader tells
you the level of BHB in your blood. This is the most direct and accurate way to measure your level of ketones.
The downside to using a blood ketone meter is that some people may have a strong aversion to needles and
blood, and the testing strips are expensive, usually $5 to $10 per strip (although a newer device called Keto Mojo
has dropped the price of strips down to $0.99 each). The blood level of BHB is measured in millimoles, or mmol.
Studies have shown that the optimal ranges of BHB levels for ketosis are between 0.5 and 3.0 mmol, although
this varies based on activity levels, time in ketosis, fat-burning efficiency, and other factors. Other blood ketone
monitors include the Abbott Precision Xceed Pro, Precision Xtra (a meter that tests for both blood glucose and
ketones), and KetoSens.
So how do I test my ketones? Although I wear a CGM to monitor my blood glucose, I’m not a fan of the
hassle or expense of constantly measuring blood ketones. Instead, I use a device called a LEVL to monitor my
--- END PAGE 850 ---

--- PAGE 851 ---
breath ketones.
Clinical research has demonstrated a correlation between the amount of acetone detected in the breath,
blood ketone values, and body fat burned, making breath ketone testing a reliable indicator of ketosis fat loss. A
breath ketone–measuring device such as the LEVL detects trace amounts of acetone in your breath when your
body is burning fat. You simply breathe into it, and your breath is then analyzed by LEVL’s nanosensor, providing
you with an instant measurement of your body’s acetone concentration.
When you first shift into a lower carbohydrate intake, your body increases the amount of fat it burns relative
to the amount of carbohydrates, and your breath acetone concentration ramps up. This happens over the course
of three to seven days, until you reach an elevated level of breath acetone. If your diet becomes higher in calories
or carbohydrates, your body will become less dependent on fat for energy, resulting in a drop in acetone
concentration over one to two days.
I prefer this method of measuring ketones because it’s quick and easy. It does not measure blood mmol
concentrations but can be faster and more convenient than blood testing for ketones. A similar device is the
Lumen, which doesn’t measure ketones directly but approximates fat and carb burning based on carbon dioxide
it detects in the breath.
HOW TO TRACK YOUR STRESS
No one can perform at their best 24/7/365, because both mental and physical readiness varies from day to day.
This means some days are perfect for challenging your body and mind, and other days should be focused on easy,
restorative, relaxing activities. Ideally, this should be quantified and tracked. In chapter 12, I explained the idea of
a “readiness score,” which indicates how recovered you are and how well your body is responding to the
demands of daily life, and can give surprisingly accurate information about the potential onset of illness or injury
days before an actual problem occurs. It’s a sleek and efficient way to test the body’s recovery status and overall
wellness without the need for imprecise subjective evaluation, time-consuming questionnaires, or extensive
testing, and it requires just one simple piece of hardware: a wearable like a heart rate strap, ring, or wristband.
For example, I use the Oura ring readiness score as one of the few key daily metrics I glance at (the other is
sleep, and when I’m trying a new diet, food, or supplement, I keep an eye on my blood glucose and ketones). The
readiness score allows me to answer important questions such as these:
• Is my nervous system ready to take on the day?
• Should I take it easy today in my workouts or go all-out?
• How much stress can I handle today?
• Should I get extra sleep tonight, or take a nap today?
• Have recent lifestyle or environmental changes significantly affected me?
I can quickly answer all of these questions by glancing at my readiness score first thing in the morning. If my
daily stress load and recovery are in balance, then usually my readiness score is high. I use the same method with
the clients and athletes I coach to give me intelligent data that I use to structure their training for the week—
even occasionally pushing athletes in training through low periods of readiness followed by big bouts of recovery
so that they can super-compensate and bounce back even stronger (a training method called “periodization”).
It’s true that the state of your body and mind can give you subtle hints about your readiness. For example,
are you relaxed or tense? Is your mind crystal clear or covered in fog? Do you feel healthy or a bit under the
weather? But these are mainly subjective evaluations of your readiness. An objective evaluation is also
--- END PAGE 851 ---

--- PAGE 852 ---
important, which is why getting a personal readiness score is something I do each morning by glancing at the
smartphone app that connects to the Oura ring.
On the Oura ring, the readiness score ranges from 0 to 100 percent and is based on specific metrics tracked
by the ring, such as heart rate, heart rate variability (HRV), sleep, body temperature, and the previous day’s
activities. A general rule is that if your readiness score is above 85 percent, you’re ready to meet the day’s more
stressful physical and mental challenges, and if it’s below 70 percent, you might want to consider concentrating
on recovery.
Of the metrics commonly used to determine readiness or stress score, the most important is HRV, which is a
measurement of the variance between heartbeats over a period of time. This measurement reflects the resilience
of your autonomic nervous system, which governs your ability to face and handle stress. Higher HRV scores are
correlated with resilient mood, better heart health, lower risk of early death, and improved recovery from
exercise and adaptability to stress. It’s important to understand that HRV scores aren’t necessarily
interchangeable between apps and devices, which means that a score of sixty on a wristband could be high, but
that same number measured by a ring or chest strap could indicate excessive stress. For this reason, it’s best to
simply look for patterns of increasing or decreasing HRV on whichever device you choose to use. In addition to
the Oura, a few other wearables that give good stress measurements are the Whoop and Biosensor wristbands,
the Hanu chest strap, and the Noise and Ultrahuman rings.
HOW TO TRACK YOUR SLEEP
What is the right amount of sleep for me? How fast did I fall asleep? Did I go through a normal series of sleep stages
during the night? Am I sleeping well? Until this new era of self-quantification came upon us, outside of sleep clinics,
it was very difficult to answer these questions objectively.
The problem with sleep monitoring is that traditionally, most people didn’t have tools with which to track
sleep accurately. Without a measuring device, you cannot really know whether you have had enough deep or
REM sleep. In addition, it can be tough to remember how well you slept, say, a couple weeks ago, or to generate a
realistic view of how your sleep trends with your diet, supplements, and exercise. This is important because your
“sleep history” can have a significant effect on your readiness score. In addition, it’s easy to misinterpret sleep
quality: having a feeling that you slept like a log doesn’t necessarily mean that your sleep was actually restorative,
and training through a low readiness score or sleep score can cause an impending injury or illness to rear its ugly
head, even if you subjectively felt as though you were ready for stress. I’ve seen this happen over and over again
both in myself and in clients and athletes I train who decided to just listen to their body instead of listening to
their body and using better self-quantification through science.
If you don’t know what your sleep quality is, you cannot act proactively. In the worst case, this can lead to a
situation where you start to learn more about your sleep only after you’ve developed some sort of sleep disorder,
such as severe sleep apnea or insomnia, and need to consult a sleep clinic or find yourself addicted to sleep
supplements or medications. Even if you do go to a professional sleep clinic or lab, you’re usually only there for a
night or two of sleep analysis, and the sleep-tracking devices there can be quite uncomfortable to wear, thus
giving you inaccurate data (go ahead, just try to get a normal night of sleep in a lab with a bunch of electrodes
attached to your head).
I’ve used the Oura ring as a simple yet unobtrusive sleep-tracking device: it doesn’t disturb sleep, but its
highly accurate sensors quietly measure body signals such as resting heart rate, heart rate variability, respiration
rate, body temperature, and movement during sleep, along with tracking all your sleep cycles. You can grab your
sleep metrics in an easy-to-read format and visualizations from the smartphone app, along with guidance on
what the different metrics mean and how you can improve your sleep quality with time. Oura—along with many
--- END PAGE 852 ---

--- PAGE 853 ---
of the devices mentioned earlier in the stress section—uses the following parameters to calculate your sleep
score:•

Total sleep: This shows you the total amount of sleep you achieved the previous night, including light, REM,
and deep sleep. It’s important to realize that the total time you spent in bed does not necessarily equate to
the total amount of sleep you got.•

Efficiency: Put simply, efficiency means the percentage of time you spent sleeping while in bed. The longer
you slept, the more efficient your sleep was. In general, a sleep efficiency score of 85 percent or above shows
that you fell asleep quickly enough (in less than twenty minutes) and didn’t wake up too often during the
night.•

Disturbances: Disturbances are the other side of the efficiency coin and show the total time you spent awake
during the night. Disturbances such as wake-ups, get-ups, and restless time during sleep can have a big
influence on your sleep quality, resulting in less-restorative sleep. This can be one of the primary reasons
behind daytime sleepiness. Obviously, many things can cause your sleep to be interrupted, but variables such
as stress, noise, sleep companions, light, room temperature, infections, drinking too much (alcohol or even
water) so that you get up to pee during the night, and later evening activities (exercise, screen time, heavy
meals) are all on the list of suspects.•

REM sleep: As you know from chapter 7, REM is short for “rapid eye movement.” This is the stage of sleep
that is associated with dreaming, memory consolidation, learning, and creativity. It ideally makes up 20 to 25
percent of your total sleep time, but that percentage tends to decrease with age.•

Deep sleep: Deep sleep, or NREM sleep, is considered the most restorative and rejuvenating stage of sleep.
This is the stage when muscle repair and growth takes place, your body is relaxed, your blood pressure is
lower, and it’s harder to wake you up. The amount of deep sleep varies between nights and individuals, but
on average, adults should spend 15 to 20 percent of their total sleep time in deep sleep. This percentage also
tends to decrease with age. Simple practices such as daily physical activity and avoidance of heavy meals and
alcohol before bedtime, long naps, and caffeine in the afternoon can increase your amount of deep sleep, as
can following all the sleep hygiene tips in chapter 7, such as sleeping in a cool, dark room with limited sound
interruptions.•

Sleep latency: This is the amount of time it takes for you to fall to sleep. Sleep latency is highly variable, but
it shouldn’t take you more than fifteen to twenty minutes to fall asleep. There are many reasons that your
sleep latency might decrease, including exposure to too much blue light at night, a late dinner, and
consumption of alcohol too close to bedtime. Bear in mind, too, that dozing off in less than five minutes can
often indicate that you are sleep-deprived or that you didn’t sleep enough the previous night.•

Sleep timing: As you learned in chapter 7, every human has a biological clock aligned to day and night cycles.
All of our essential biological processes, such as body temperature, hormone releases, and hunger, operate on
twenty-four-hour cycles known as the circadian rhythms. As you also learned in that chapter, there are
significant differences in our rhythms. Some of us are morning oriented, some are evening people, and others
are somewhere in-between. But regardless of orientation, having consistency in your rhythm and your sleep
timing is important (for example, I go to bed at approximately 10 p.m. most nights and am up at
approximately 6 a.m. most mornings). In addition, having the midpoint of your sleep land somewhere
between midnight and 3 a.m. is preferable from a sleep quality point of view.
The Oura ring uses all these parameters to calculate your daily sleep score, which ranges from 0 to 100
percent. As a rule of thumb, the higher it is, the better and more restorative your sleep.
--- END PAGE 853 ---

--- PAGE 854 ---
Finally, although many wearables don’t yet incorporate blood oxygen sensing into the overall sleep score,
they do allow for measurement of blood oxygen during sleep. For example, the Oura ring measures peripheral
oxygen saturation (SpO ) levels in your blood while you sleep by sending light from the ring’s red and infrared
2LEDs into your finger and then measuring how much light is reflected. Richly oxygenated blood reflects more
red light than infrared light, while poorly oxygenated blood reflects more infrared light than red light. When
combined with measurements of respiration rate, or the use of a nighttime noise-monitoring app like
SleepSpace, this data can give you incredibly helpful clues about whether you may have one of the most serious
but less discussed causes of poor sleep and daytime tiredness: sleep apnea.
How I Use My Sleep Data
Let’s take a look at how to practically use the data you can glean from a sleep system like the Oura, shall we? Before
writing this chapter, I opened up all my app data. Two nights ago, I was in bed from 10:31 p.m. until 7:29 a.m. Pretty
impressive, eh? Makes me look like a good little sleeper. But upon taking a closer look at my sleep data, I can identify a
few concerning issues, including these:
• I spent a good hour of that time awake.
• I spent five hours and thirteen minutes of that time in light sleep (59 percent of the total night of sleep!).
• My lowest resting heart rate of 39 bpm occurred at about 4:30 a.m., nearly two hours later than my lowest rate
normally occurs, and was three beats higher than my normal lowest resting heart rate of 36 bpm.
So, although one would think upon first glance that I had a rock-star night of sleep, that’s far from the truth. As a
matter of fact, this morning I received a warning that my readiness score is low and that I may not be recovered fully
from the previous day’s activity. Interestingly, the previous day’s activity was a three-hour horseback ride, an activity
my body definitely was not used to and which it needed additional time to recover from.
Pretty interesting, eh?
By adjusting my activities the next night—avoiding screen time after 9 p.m., eating a light dinner, not drinking a second
glass of wine, and taking a magnesium bath to both relax me and bring my core temperature down—I achieved a sleep
score of 97 percent, with my lowest heart rate during sleep being 34 bpm (nice and low for me), achieved at my ideal
time of 2:30 a.m. I spent 27 percent of the night in deep sleep and only 5 percent awake, and the next day my Oura
--- END PAGE 854 ---

--- PAGE 855 ---
app even congratulated me for sleeping “like a bear in the winter.” I had a high readiness score and high physical
activity recommendation for the day.
HOW TO TEST YOUR FITNESS
What gets measured gets managed, and because of that, I’ve always been able to gather a great deal of motivation
to stay in shape by regularly testing specific parameters of overall fitness and activity. There’s just something
about knowing you need to step out after dinner to take an extra thousand steps to hit your 10K daily step count
goal, you need to crank out a few extra pull-ups so that you have beaten your dead hang-time test, or you need to
back off the cookies so that your visceral fat score drops.
Here are the most important daily and monthly variables to pay attention to when it comes to your body.
Step Count
Frequency: daily
Measuring your step count is easily accomplished with the use of a wearable activity tracker, smartphone
app, or pedometer. These devices typically use accelerometers to detect movement and count the number of
steps taken throughout the day. Wearable activity trackers are worn on the wrist, while pedometers can be
clipped onto clothing or carried in a pocket. Smartphone apps often utilize the built-in accelerometer and GPS
features to track steps and provide additional insights such as distance traveled and calories burned.
Research suggests that achieving a daily step count of at least 10,000 is associated with various health
benefits, including improved cardiovascular health, weight management, and overall well-being. By using an
office treadmill, walking just about anywhere I can, taking the stairs, parking in the far corners of parking lots,
and stopping regularly during the workday to move, my average daily step count in the past year was 16,778!
Once you start measuring, you may be surprised at how few steps you actually take and how tiny modifications
--- END PAGE 855 ---

--- PAGE 856 ---
to your day can add up quickly. Maintaining a high walking speed is also important, as smaller declines in
walking speed are associated with slower aging rates.
VO Max2 
Frequency: monthly
As you may recall from chapter 10, VO max is the number of milliliters of oxygen per kilogram, per minute
2 that your body uses in your mitochondria to create ATP. It is a score of how well your whole body is working to
extract oxygen and use it productively, and it gives you information about lung capacity, the capacity of oxygen
to diffuse across the lungs and alveoli into blood, the ability of the heart to pump blood into tissues, the ability of
tissues to extract blood into muscle, and the ability of the muscle to use oxygen and produce ATP. Higher VO2
max levels are also associated with better verbal short-term memory.
Although many wearables will approximate your VO max based on your workout pace and heart rate, the
2 Cooper 12-minute run test is a simple, verified way to regularly track your VO max. This test requires you to run
2 or walk as far as possible in a 12-minute period and is usually carried out on a running track with cones placed at
various distances to enable measuring of the distance. The objective is to measure the maximum distance
covered during the 12-minute period. There is also a 3-mile cycling version of the test for those who can’t or
don’t like to run.
The Cooper test is simple: after a brief warm-up, you record the total number of miles or kilometers you
travel in exactly 12 minutes. This test is designed to be conducted on a track with a clearly marked distance. You
can perform the test on a treadmill, but be sure to raise the incline to 1 degree to simulate outdoor running. To
calculate your estimated VO max results (in ml/kg/min), use either of these formulas:2 
Kilometers: VO max = (22.351 × kilometers) – 11.2882 
Miles: VO max = (35.97 × miles) – 11.291
2 The easiest way to get your test results (your VO max score) and compare yourself to others of your age and
2 gender is with an online test results calculator, which I’ll include on the resources page for this chapter. After
completing the test, you can compare your results to the norms and recommendations for your age and gender,
which I’ll also include on the resources page.
If you want a more precise measurement of VO max, you can use a portable VO analyzer like the VO2
2 2 Master, which allows for portable metabolic testing with a surprising degree of accuracy and minimal,
lightweight equipment.
Strength
Frequency: monthly
A simple way to regularly test strength is with a hand grip dynamometer. Grip strength refers to the force
exerted by the muscles of your hand when gripping an object, but it is actually an indicator of both hand and
forearm muscle health and is recognized as a surrogate marker for overall muscular strength. Many studies have
shown the association of grip strength with various health outcomes, including cardiovascular disease, mobility,
cognitive function, and overall mortality. A decline in grip strength can be a predictor of increasing frailty and
reduced life expectancy, making it a valuable tool for gauging your overall health and potential longevity.
One study of over 500,000 adults between ages forty and sixty-nine correlated grip strength to rates of
healthy outcomes for diseases ranging from heart disease to respiratory illness and even cancer. It found that a
grip strength measurement of less than 57 pounds for men or less than 35 pounds for women was associated with
“higher overall risk of death and higher risk for specific illnesses.”
--- END PAGE 856 ---

--- PAGE 857 ---
Grip strength norms can vary widely between studies and populations, but the following is a good chart of
approximate values to get an idea of where your strength lies. It’s also ideal to have no more than a 10 percent
differential between hands. 
HAND GRIP DYNAMOMETER
Typical Grip Strength for Healthy IndividualMEN WOMEN

AGE
WEAK NORMAL STRONG WEAK NORMAL STRONG
10–11 <27.8 27.8–49.4 >49.4 <26.0 26.0–47.6 >47.6
12–13 <42.8 42.8–68.8 >68.8 <32.2 32.2–53.8 >53.8
14–15 <62.8 62.8–97.7 >97.7 <34.2 34.2–60.2 >60.2
16–17 <71.9 71.9–115.5 >115.5 <37.9 37.7–63.9 >63.9
18–19 <78.7 78.7–122.4 >122.4 <42.3 42.3–68.3 >68.3
20–24 <81.1 81.1–124.8 >124.8 <47.4 47.4–77.8 >77.8
25–29 <83.1 83.1–126.8 >126.8 <56.4 56.4–91.3 >91.3
30–34 <79.4 79.4–123.0 >123.0 <47.4 47.4–77.8 >77.8
35–39 <78.9 78.9–122.6 >122.6 <44.8 44.8–75.2 >75.2
40–44 <78.3 78.3–121.9 >121.9 <41.7 41.7–72.1 >72.1
45–49 <76.5 76.5–120.2 >120.2 <41.0 41.0–71.4 >71.4
50–54 <72.5 72.5–111.8 >111.8 <39.9 39.9–70.3 >70.3
55–59 <67.7 67.7–106.9 >106.9 <39.0 39.0–69.4 >69.4
60–64 <66.6 66.6–105.8 >105.8 <37.9 37.9–68.3 >68.3
64–69 <62.2 62.2–97.0 >97.0 <34.0 34.0–60.0 >60.0
70–99 <47.0 47.0–77.4 >77.4 <32.4 32.4–54.0 >54.0
For general full-body strength, I’m a big fan of strength coach Dan John’s standards, which are as follows:
For Men: 
EXPECTED GAME-CHANGER
PUSH* Bodyweight bench press Bodyweight bench press for 15 reps
PULL 5 pull-ups 15 pull-ups200% bodyweight deadlift
150% bodyweight deadlift (e.g., if you weigh

HINGE (e.g., if you weigh 200 pounds, you can
200 pounds, you can deadlift 300 pounds)
deadlift 400 pounds)
SQUAT Bodyweight squat Bodyweight squat for 15 reps
LOADED CARRY Bodyweight farmer’s walk (half per hand) Bodyweight per hand
GET-UP One left and right, done with a half-filled cup of water, without spilling
For Women:
--- END PAGE 857 ---

--- PAGE 858 ---
GAME-CHANGER
PUSH* Bodyweight bench press
PULL 3 pull-ups
HINGE 275-pound deadlift
SQUAT 135 pounds for 5 reps in the back squat
LOADED CARRY 85 pounds per hand
GET-UP One left and right, done with a half-filled cup of water, without spilling
*Note from Ben: I’m a bigger fan of a push-up test for push strength, which is basically doing as many push-
ups as you can without breaking form. Fifty reps is a good score for men, and forty for women.
Finally, to these strength standards I recommend adding a dead hang, which is the maximum amount of time
you can hang from a bar. A good score is longer than 45 seconds, and a great score is longer than 60 seconds.
Power
Frequency: monthly
A simple broad jump is effective for measuring how much force you can produce over time. For a broad
jump, start in a standing position, then jump as far forward as you can. Measure the distance covered from the
front of your toes at the start to the back of your heels at landing. You should be able to jump your height
(reduce by 15 percent if you are female).
If you want to implement technology to measure power, then check out the wearable tracker devices that
now use noninvasive tendon-force measurement tools to track muscle speed and power during movement,
including the M-Power and the Moxy.
Don’t do this test right after doing all your strength tests. I spread any harder tests like a VO max, strength,
2 or power over the course of an entire week. For example, I’ll test strength on Monday and Tuesday, mobility on
Wednesday, power on Thursday, anaerobic capacity on Friday, and VO max on Saturday.2 
Anaerobic Capacity
Frequency: monthly
A measurement of anaerobic capacity can provide good insight into your body’s ability to buffer lactic acid
effectively. The test is conceptually simple but physically difficult. Pick any activity where you can go close to
100 percent effort for 30 seconds (e.g., sprinting on a treadmill, rowing machine, or bike).
After you finish, watch your recovery heart rate. It should drop by about 0.5 beat per second, or 30 beats per
minute (30 BPM). So, if you reach a max heart rate of 200 during your sprint, then one minute later, your heart
rate should be 170.
For this test, you can also use an at-home fingertip blood lactate meter. These devices work like glucose
monitors. To test, just warm up on a bike or treadmill for four minutes at an easy pace, prick your finger, squeeze
the blood onto a testing strip, and stick it in the machine for a reading. Then increase the intensity to about 5 to
10 percent, go for another four minutes, and test again. Once your blood readings are at 4 mmol/L, that’s the
heart rate at which your anaerobic threshold has occurred (i.e., you’re building up blood lactate faster than you
can buffer it). This should feel like 80 to 85 percent intensity.
--- END PAGE 858 ---

--- PAGE 859 ---
Mobility
Frequency: monthly
Any good mobility test will assess the joints or regions that most people tend to have mobility issues with,
namely the shoulders, hips, thoracic spine (upper back), and ankles. For my clients, I use a helpful app called
Mobility Vault to regularly assess movement patterns. It tests for the following important ranges of motion:
• Hip flexion
• Hamstring flexion
• Hip internal rotation
• Hip external rotation
• Shoulder extension
• Shoulder flexion
• Shoulder internal rotation
• Shoulder external rotation
• Upper back rotation
• Ankle plantarflexion
• Ankle dorsiflexion
• Big toe flexion
If you don’t want to use an app to test for mobility, then I recommend the overhead squat test as a highly
practical and time-efficient way to measure your movement potential. The overhead squat test is done in a
standing position, feet pointed forward in line with the shoulders, and arms overhead with both shoulders flexed
to around 180 degrees and elbows extended. You then go into a squat position as if sitting down on a chair and
stand back up to resume the initial upright position, and repeat for three to five reps. The table on the next page
is an example of how much insight a simple test like this can give you.
Finally, here’s a bonus mobility tip for you. A study entitled “Ability to Sit and Rise from the Floor as a
Predictor of All-Cause Mortality” investigated 2,002 men and women aged fifty-one to eighty who performed a
sitting-standing test to and from the floor, which was scored from 0 to 5: one point was subtracted from 5 for
each support used (for example, using both hands and one knee to get up would result in a score of 2, while
being able to simply pop up using just one leg would result in a score of 4). The ability to sit down and stand up
efficiently and with minimal assistance was directly correlated with a decrease in mortality.
After reading this study, I began making it a goal most days to do a quick two-minute burst of sitting on the
floor, extending my legs in front of me, then standing up as many times as I can, using my arms and any other
support as little as possible. Try it. It’s harder than you may think.
--- END PAGE 859 ---

--- PAGE 860 ---
OVERHEAD SQUAT SOLUTIONS TABLE
EXAMPLE
PROBABLE
PROBABLE
FLEXIBILITY
VIEW CHECKPOINT COMPENSATION
OVERACTIVE
UNDERACTIVE
STREXERCISE (SMR &
MUSCLES
MUSCLES
STATIC)
Med.
Soleus
gastrocnemius
Calf Stretch
Lat. gastrocnemius
Med. hamstring
Hamstring Stretch
Foot Turns out
Biceps femoris
Gracilis
Standing TFL
Ba
(short head)
Sartorius
Stretch
Popliteus

ANTERIOR
L
Adductor complex
Gluteus
Biceps femoris
Adductor Stretch
medius/maximus
Knee Moves inward
(short head)
Hamstring Stretch
Vastus medialis
w
Tensor fascia latae
TFL Stretch
Oblique (VMO)
Vastus lateralis
w
Soleus
Gastrocnemius
Calf Stretch
Anterior tibialis
Excessive
Hip flexor complex
Hip Flexor Stretch
Gluteus maximus
forward lean
Abdominal complex
Ball Abdominal
Erector spinae
(rectus abdominus,
Stretch
external oblique)
Gluteus maximus
Hamstrings
L-P-H-C
Intrinsic core
stabilizers
Hip Flexor Stretch
Hip flexor complex
(transverse
Latissimus Dorsi
Low back arches
Erector spinae
abdominis,
Stretch
F
Latissimus dorsi
multifidus,
Erector Spinae
internal oblique,
Stretch
transversospinalis,
pelvic floor
LATERAL
muscles)
Latissimus dorsi
Mid/lower
Latissimus Dorsi
F
Arms fall
Pectoralis
trapezius
Stretch
forward
major/minor
Rhomboids
Pec Stretch
S
Teres major
Rotator cuff
SMR Thoracic Spine
Upper Body
Levator Scapula
Forward head
Levator scapula
Stretch
kee
Deep cervical
(pushing/pulling
Sternocleidomastoid
Sternocleidomastoid
nefloors
assessment)
Upper trapezius
Stretch
Scalene Stretch
Upper Trapezius

Shoulder
Stretch
Upper trapezius
elevation
Mid/lower
Sternocleidomastoid
FSternocleidomastoid
(pushing/pulling
trapezius
Stretch
Levator scapulae
assessment)
Levator Scapulae
Stretch
--- END PAGE 860 ---

--- PAGE 861 ---
Visceral Fat
Frequency: yearly for visceral fat, monthly for body fat percentage or FFMI
Visceral fat is the fat that wraps around organs, and it is more dangerous than other types of fat because it
can kick off a cascade of inflammation in the body and causes narrowing of your blood vessels, which can cause
chronically high blood pressure and increased pulse wave velocity (described later in this chapter). While you
could use an at-home scale to measure your overall body fat percentage and lean mass, knowing how much of
your mass is visceral fat can be more valuable. This is usually measured at a medical facility via a DEXA scan or
an MRI. Ideal visceral fat amount should be less than one pound total.
A similar measurement is a body fat percentage test (based on the latest mortality research, this should be
about 11 to 22 percent in men and 22 to 35 percent in women) or Fat-Free Mass Index (FFMI), which measures
your muscle mass relative to your height and can be easily calculated at ffmicalculator.org.
HOW TO FIND A GOOD PHYSICIAN
Should you be concerned after testing and want to visit a medical practitioner who is able to intelligently
interpret and help you fix your lab values, I cannot recommend highly enough that you work with a functional or
integrative medicine practitioner. These doctors act a bit like detectives by employing lab work, comprehensive
medical histories, and a broad knowledge of the human body to gather information and reach a diagnosis. This is
the foundation of functional and integrative medicine: having a well-trained physician identify the root cause of
your symptoms and then address it, whether it’s infection, nutrition, metabolism, a toxic burden, genetic factors,
lifestyle, emotions, or relationships.
A number of kinds of medical practitioners work in functional and integrative medicine, including these:•

Medical Doctor (MD): Not all MDs specialize in functional or integrative medicine, but those who do go
through a traditional medical program and follow that with additional training.•

Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine (DO): Like an MD, a DO, who is trained at an osteopathic medical school,
offers a host of services, including prescribing medications. They can even become surgeons. Osteopathy is a
type of alternative medicine that emphasizes manual readjustments, myofascial release, and other physical
manipulations of muscle tissue and bones, so DOs tend to focus on the body as a whole.•

Doctor of Chiropractic (DC): Usually, we think of chiropractors as those who treat orthopedic dysfunction,
but they can also practice functional and integrative medicine. But they can’t prescribe medications, so
they’ll typically work with an MD or recommend one if you need traditional treatment.•

Doctor of Naturopathic Medicine (ND): Most of these doctors avoid drug prescriptions and surgery.
Instead, they focus on natural health-supporting agents. Often, a functional or integrative medical
practitioner with an MD is also trained as an ND, and this can be a very good combination.
Here are my recommended resources for finding the perfect physician for you:•

American Academy of Anti-Aging Medicine (www.a4m.com)•

American Association of Naturopathic Physicians (www.naturopathic.org)•

American College for Advancement in Medicine (www.acam.org)•

Institute for Functional Medicine (www.ifm.org)•

Paleo Physicians Network (www.paleophysiciansnetwork.com)• 
Re-Find Health (www.re-findhealth.com)
--- END PAGE 861 ---

--- PAGE 862 ---
•

Wild Health (www.wildhealthmd.com)
Many of the physicians in these networks, if they’re not in your region, will be willing to offer telemedicine
and work with you from a distance via online lab review dashboards, phone, and Skype.
Finally, these are the specific practitioners I recommend:•

Dr. Harry Adelson, Park City, UT (DocereClinics.com): Stem cells•

Dr. Eric Braverman, New York, NY (PathMed.com): Brain health, anti-aging•

Dr. Zach Bush, Charlottesville, VA (ZachBushMD.com): Microbiome•

Dr. Andrew Campbell, Houston, TX (AndrewCampbellMD.com): Mold, mycotoxins•

Dr. Halland Chen, New York, NY (DrHalland.com): Anti-aging, stem cells, regenerative medicine,
interventional pain management and cosmetics•

Dr. Matthew Cook, San Jose, CA (BioResetMedical.com): Regenerative medicine, Chinese traditional
medicine, anti-aging, mold/mycotoxins, Lyme, stem cells, gut, aesthetics, sexual optimization•

Dr. Ram Dandillaya, Beverly Hills, CA (DrDandillaya.com): Cardiology•

Dr. William Davis, Milwaukee, WI (WheatBellyBlog.com): Cardiology•

Dr. Matt Dawson, Versailles, KY; Bend, OR (WildHealthMD.com): Athletic performance optimization,
stroke and heart attack prevention, hormone replacement therapy, dementia, Alzheimer’s, stem cells, PRP,
regenerative medicine, healthy aging•

Dr. John Douillard, Boulder, CO (LifeSpa.com): Ayurvedic medicine, sports performance, detoxification, gut•

Dr. Ahvie Herskowitz, San Francisco, CA (AnataraMedicine.com): Cardiology, immunology, regenerative
medicine, pathology•

Dr. Daniel Kalish, Reno, NV (KalishWellness.com): Brain health, neurotransmitters
• Dr. Adeel Khan, Mississauga, ON, Canada (Eterna.health): Stem cells, age reversal, gene therapy, regenerative
medicine, PRP, EBOO•

Dr. Craig Koniver, Mt. Pleasant, SC (KoniverWellness.com): Anti-aging, IVs, NAD, hormones•

Dr. Chris Kresser, Kensington, CA (ChrisKresser.com): Functional medicine, thyroid, gut•

Dr. John Lieurance, Sarasota, FL (FunctionalCranialRelease.com): Chiropractic functional neurology,
functional cranial release (FCR), LumoMed, nutrition, Lyme disease care, and musculoskeletal ultrasound•

Dr. Eniko Loud, Phoenix, AZ (wholehealthdentistryaz.com): Full mouth rehabilitation, implant dentistry,
integrative and functional dentistry•

Dr. Ben Lynch, Seattle, WA (DrBenLynch.com): Genes and genetic interpretation•

Dr. Joseph Mercola, Schaumburg, IL (Mercola.com): Biohacking, mitochondria, stem cells•

Dr. Beth McDougall, Mill Valley, CA (https://jyzen.com): Integrative medicine•

Dr. David Minkoff, Clearwater, FL (DrMinkoff.com): Dentistry, detoxification, energy medicine, anti-aging,
hormones•

Dr. Mansoor Mohammed, Toronto, ON, Canada (TheDNACompany.com): Genes and genetic
interpretation•

Dr. Francis Murphy, Dallas, TX (OTZHealthEd.com): chiropractic care• 
Dr. Neil Nathan, Santa Rosa, CA (NeilNathanMD.com): Mold and mycotoxins, Lyme disease, chronic
fatigue, fibromyalgia
--- END PAGE 862 ---

--- PAGE 863 ---
•

Dr. Stuart M. Nunnally, Marble Falls, TX (HealthySmilesForLife.com): Integrative biologic dental medicine,
naturopathic medicine•

Dr. David Perlmutter, Naples, FL (DrPerlmutter.com): Brain, gut health•

Dr. Dan Pompa, Park City, UT (DrPompa.com): Detoxification, chiropractic care•

Dr. Michael Ruscio, Las Vegas, NV (DrRuscio.com): Gut health•

Dr. Darshan Shah, Malibu, CA (DrShah.com): Anti-aging, hormones, IVs, aesthetics•

Dr. Michael Smith, Nelson, BC, Canada (IntegrativeHealthSolutions.ca): Autoimmune disease, ancestral
diets, Chinese traditional medicine•

Dr. Leland Stillman, Naples, FL (StillmanMD.com): Environmental medicine, EMF/light/sound/energy/air,
etc. along with immunology/toxicology•

Dr. Bryan Walsh, Ellicott City, MD (DrWalsh.com): detoxification, gut, bloodwork interpretation•

Dr. Nasha Winter, Durango, CO (DrNasha.com): Cancer
ADVANCED MEDICAL SCREENINGS
Warning: This section on self-quantification is not for the budget-conscious health enthusiast. Nonetheless, for
executives, pro athletes, very serious biohackers, and extremely curious or motivated individuals, fancy clinics
like Fountain Life, Next Health, and Wild Health offer comprehensive health and medical screenings that can
give you a detailed analysis of just about everything you’d ever want to know for health span and lifespan
optimization. The following is a battery of tests that, for a cool $50 to 100K, you can have bundled together and
overseen by a physician, along with a detailed analysis and walk-through of your results and ongoing medical
guidance.•

Full-body MRI: An advanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) system can produce high-definition images
of your body and brain, enabling early detection of issues ranging from cancers to organ irregularities like
aneurysms or cysts, all without significant amounts of ionizing radiation. By accurately quantifying body fat
and muscle distribution, an MRI can also give you insights into your metabolic health, similar to a DEXA scan
(see below). AI-enhanced analysis of a brain MRI can now offer detailed insights into various brain regions,
helping to preemptively identify structural changes that could signify early stages of neurocognitive
conditions like Alzheimer’s.•

CT angiography: An AI-guided approach to Coronary Computed Tomography Angiography (CCTA), also
known as a CLEERLY scan, detects the presence of soft plaque, which is a less dense and more vulnerable
type of arterial buildup that is more likely to rupture and cause blockages. It gives far more insight and data
than a normal calcium scan score. This test does involve radiation, so I recommend supplementing with
iodine for a couple weeks afterward and not doing this test more frequently than once a year.•

AI-powered cardiovascular risk blood test: This test uses advanced AI algorithms to measure proteins and
other molecules in your blood that allow an assessment of one-year risk for a heart attack, as well as risk of
having soft vulnerable plaque. Your doctor can order a similar at-home screening for you called the Prevencia
HART test, which can be convenient if you want to check for plaque without subjecting your body to the
radiation from CT angiography too frequently.• 
Pulse wave velocity: Pulse wave velocity is a quick three-minute measurement of the speed at which blood
travels through the circulatory system, which is an indicator of arterial stiffness. As arteries become stiffer,
they are less able to contract and expand with each heartbeat. This leads to increased strain on the heart and
--- END PAGE 863 ---

--- PAGE 864 ---
a higher risk of cardiovascular and kidney diseases. Pulse wave velocity increases linearly with aging with a
high degree of correlation, so a higher velocity is worse. This may seem somewhat counterintuitive, but you
want the velocity to move slowly because that means your blood vessels are very supple and elastic.
Conveniently, Withings now has a Body Scan scale that can measure pulse wave velocity if you want to keep
track of it in the comfort of your home!•

Bone density/body composition scan (DEXA): You learned earlier that a DEXA scan can be used to assess
visceral fat, fat mass, and lean mass, but it can also provide detailed images of your bones, specifically your
spine and hips. By measuring the density of your bones, you can assess your risk of fractures and put a plan
in place to enhance your bone health to prevent fractures as you age. Electrocardiogram: This noninvasive
test records the electrical activity of your heart. Using electrodes placed on your skin, it measures the timing
and strength of electrical signals as they travel through your heart. This can provide valuable information
about your heart rate and rhythm and can help detect various cardiac abnormalities, such as arrhythmias or
damage from prior heart attacks.•

Lung CT scan: A low-dose lung CT scan aids in the identification of potential lung issues such as infection,
fibrosis, pulmonary embolism, COPD, and even early-stage lung cancer.•

Retinal scan: A retinal scan is obtained using a special camera equipped with microscopes that take a
photograph of the inner layer of your eye. The retina is the only place in the body where blood vessels can be
directly viewed without invasive procedures, and the appearance of retinal blood vessels can indicate issues
elsewhere in the body, such as diabetic retinopathy and initial signs of diabetes.•

AI-powered skin cancer screen: This dermatologic skin-mapping technology takes photos that document
and track changes in your skin over time and identify moles and other spots that may require further
attention for skin cancer prevention.•

Neurocognitive function test: A neurocognitive function test is an evaluation designed to assess cognitive
capabilities and neurological health, including tests for memory, attention, executive function, and
processing speed. This can be a valuable tool for identifying potential cognitive impairments, tracking brain
changes over time, and guiding personalized interventions to support your neural health.•

Balance tracking test: A balance tracker monitors stability, coordination, and body movement to assess
your risk of falling and detect potential neurological issues. By pinpointing early signs of brain and nervous
system anomalies, it can assist in preventing further decline.•

Olfactory test: Declining olfactory function as we age can be an early indicator of neurodegenerative
diseases like Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s. Olfactory screening is often overlooked but is critical to detect
potential underlying conditions and inform proactive interventions. For this test, an olfactory probe is
presented at your nostrils, and your response is measured.•

Oral microbiome test: This saliva test measures the levels of five specific bacteria in your saliva:
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans (Aa), Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg), Treponema denticola (Td),
Tannerella forsythia (Tf), and Fusobacterium nucleatum (Fn). These bacteria are associated with periodontitis,
a gum disease that can lead to tooth loss.•

Early cancer blood detection: Blood tests can detect cancer in its early stages by screening for over fifty
types of cancer, including those that are not traditionally screened by standard methods. These tests, such as
a Galleri (Grail) or Color gene test, can analyze blood markers and genes strongly linked to the most
common hereditary cancers, including breast, ovarian, and pancreatic cancer. Beyond cancer risk
assessment, some of these tests offer insights into personalized medication responses, helping you
understand how your genes influence your reaction to substances like caffeine and prescription medications.
--- END PAGE 864 ---

--- PAGE 865 ---
THE LAST WORD
If all this testing sounds a bit overwhelming, please remember that the goal is not to spend each day hunched
over a tube while spitting saliva, filling beakers full of blood in a laboratory, testing your bench press score, or
pooping into an analysis tray every time you use the bathroom. Here’s what the ideal, simple self-quantification
scenario would look like:•

Stress and sleep tracking: Daily•

Fitness testing: Monthly•

DNA test: Once in a lifetime•

Comprehensive blood test: Once per year•

Gut microbiome test or stool panel: Once per year or whenever the gut seems to significantly change in
function or health•

DUTCH test: Once per year or when feeling fatigued with no explanation, particularly if libido is low•

DEXA scan or MRI: Once per year•

Food allergy test: Once per year or whenever the gut seems to significantly change in function or health•

Ketones and glucose testing: Optional, but ideally performed on a daily basis when adopting a new diet or
attempting to evaluate how different food groups affect glycemic variability or ketones• 
Micronutrient test: Optional, but to be performed if concerned about energy levels or health issues, or
when you want to dial in your supplementation and diet protocol even more thoroughly
Two final resources that I think are excellent guides for educating yourself on how to interpret your own lab
tests and address common deficiencies are Dr. Chris Masterjohn’s “Testing Nutritional Status: The Ultimate
Cheat Sheet” and Dr. Bryan Walsh’s functional medicine and bloodwork interpretation courses. You’ll find links
to both at BoundlessBook.com/16.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS WEEK
It’s time to start self-quantifying. You don’t have to buy a fancy $10,000 full-spectrum blood test from a
longevity institute—considering how inexpensive and accessible DNA testing is, it can be a perfect place to start.
So invest in yourself. This week, order a simple at-home DNA test. If you’ve already gotten one, open up your
results, look at your disease risks, and see what you can do to address them proactively. For example, if you have
a higher-than-normal risk of prostate cancer, you can start getting more lycopene from a fresh tomato every day.
Or if you have a high risk of type 2 diabetes, you can begin saving any carbohydrates that you eat for after an
exercise session, when your blood sugar levels won’t be as prone to fluctuation. You get the idea. DNA testing is
one of the less expensive and more informative tests in this chapter. Just remember: knowledge about your risks
and predispositions shouldn’t stress you out or make you scramble to go cut off a body part because it’s at a high
risk for cancer. Instead, view your DNA information as empowering knowledge that allows you to make smart
and informed diet, supplementation, and lifestyle modifications that increase your health span and lifespan.
Finally, if you visit the recommended tests page at BenGreenfieldLife.com, you’ll find all the tests I most
frequently recommend conveniently listed there.
--- END PAGE 865 ---

--- PAGE 866 ---
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—
including links to podcasts, blog posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/16. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 866 ---

--- PAGE 867 ---
17
SUPERMODEL
MAXIMIZE YOUR SYMMETRY AND
BEAUTY
--- END PAGE 867 ---

--- PAGE 868 ---
I was reading the book Deep Nutrition by Cate Shanahan when I first realized
some shocking facts about beauty and symmetry—facts that we tend to ignore
in our politically correct modern Western culture infatuated with fairness for all,
but facts that are nonetheless incredibly relevant to anyone who is trying to
reinvent their body or health.
In the book, Dr. Shanahan explains that the way we look speaks volumes
about our health because of the idea that form implies function. But the
entire subject of optimizing appearance is emotionally charged; physicians
even pretend that disfiguring birth defects and other developmental
malformations are unavoidable. However, if doctors and nutritionists were
willing to explore the connection between beauty and health, every child
would have a better chance to grow up healthy. From cheetahs to babies to
doctors, all animals fundamentally equate symmetry and attractiveness
with health and fertility.
In her book, Dr. Shanahan talks about a California surgeon named
Stephen Marquardt who was interested in whether the beauty and
symmetry of a human could be quantified. In his research, Dr. Marquardt
kept running across mathematical formulas and rules of symmetry in
painting, photography, writing, architecture, and other art forms. He
eventually created a formula for evaluating the beauty-health connection
based on the principles of symmetry described by ancient Greeks.
At the core of these mathematical principles of beauty is a set of
numbers named the Fibonacci sequence. As this mathematical sequence
extends out to infinity, a golden ratio forms. The ancient Egyptians and
Greeks used this ratio to design perfectly balanced works of structural art,
such as the Great Pyramids and the Parthenon, which mystify architects
even today. If you think back to high school math, you may be more
familiar with the golden ratio as symbolized by the Greek letter phi. Phi
was even worshipped in ancient Egypt and Greece as a fountainhead of
eternal beauty called the divine ratio.
--- END PAGE 868 ---

--- PAGE 869 ---
Leonardo da Vinci was obsessed with these geometric relationships
and the structure of the human form, and his Vitruvian Man sketch of a
man superimposed on a circle and a square illustrates these same
mathematical sequences, which he used in his quest to discover the
ultimate human symmetry.
But back to our friend Dr. Marquardt. In his pursuit of the perfect
human face, he discovered that the golden ratio is uniquely capable of
generating a special kind of symmetry called dynamic symmetry, which is
based on a balanced, crystalline-like structure. In John Cleese’s BBC series
The Human Face, which features Dr. Marquardt’s research, a symmetrical
mask based on dynamic symmetry is superimposed over photos of people
society has deemed beautiful, such as Marilyn Monroe, Halle Berry, and
Elizabeth Taylor. The mask fits each face perfectly, revealing that these
celebrity icons and many others—including the movie stars, professional
athletes, and supermodels we consider to be attractive—all fall into this
same bucket of mathematical proportion. So much for beauty being in the
eye of the beholder, eh?
It turns out that beautiful people don’t just randomly happen but
instead are products of DNA strands that are naturally driven to create
dynamic, symmetric geometry during bone formation and tissue growth.
Whether it is the shape of a pine cone, the segments of insect bodies, the
spiraling of a seashell, the symmetry of a leaf, the bones of your fingers, or
the size of your teeth, everything that relies on order and symmetry
follows specific rules of math and physics encoded in living matter
everywhere. A new field called biomathematics is now confirming that
recurring patterns seen throughout nature are more than just
coincidences, that phi and the Fibonacci sequence are capable of
producing intricate patterns that can emerge spontaneously given the
correct starting conditions (such as human DNA), and that the health of a
biological organism is largely dependent on its symmetry.
--- END PAGE 869 ---

--- PAGE 870 ---
This idea of healthy form being intimately tied to healthy function can
be highlighted in the work of researchers who studied the effect of four
dominant female body types on lifespan. They categorized women based
on body shape: banana, apple, pear, and the rarest of shapes, the coveted
hourglass. The women with the most attractive of the four types, the
hourglass, not only lived longest but also were the healthiest. Statistics
consistently show that a longer, slimmer waist and wider hips correlate
with reduced rates of infertility, osteoporosis, cancer, cognitive problems,
aneurysms, diabetes, and more. Research has also shown that women with
less symmetrical faces are less healthy and more susceptible to depression
and other emotional instabilities.
Of course, the same holds true for men. Research has shown that
women are more attracted to men with more symmetrical features. In
fact, one study demonstrated that during sex, women have more orgasms
with men whose bodies and faces are more symmetrical, regardless of the
level of romantic attachment to the men or the men’s sexual experience.
Another study showed that men with asymmetrical faces are, like women,
more prone to experience greater levels of anxiety, depression, headaches,
and even GI problems. Other studies show that regardless of gender, the
less symmetrical someone’s body is, the more aggressive the person tends
to be when provoked in any way.
In her book, Dr. Shanahan also uses the example of a brain, which has
the same organizing force that helps calculate the sculpting of a beautiful
face. She describes how, within the jelly-like matrix inside our skulls,
neurons in the brain form bifurcating tendrils called dendrites, which look
like tiny branches coming off a well-proportioned, graceful tree. Just as a
mathematical ratio delineates the branch formation, symmetry, and
growth of plants and thus helps them capture more sunlight, the same
dynamic symmetry may allow our brains to pack in as many nerve
connections per cubic inch as possible, making the best use of the limited
--- END PAGE 870 ---

--- PAGE 871 ---
real estate between our ears. This is a perfect example of how every
healthy part of every living thing follows the same basic formula for
growth to promote proper function.
Our desire for beauty and symmetry is not simply a matter of vanity.
The way we look speaks volumes about our health because form implies
function, which means that less attractive faces and bodies can be less
functional. Children with suboptimal skull structure may need glasses,
braces, or oral surgery, whereas children with more symmetrical cranial
architecture won’t. For example, narrow nasal passages irritate the nasal
mucosae, increasing the chances of rhinitis and allergies. And
furthermore, when the airway in the back of the throat is improperly
formed, a child may suffer from sleep apnea, which starves the brain of
oxygen during sleep, oxygen that is needed to develop normal intelligence.
Of course, asymmetry can occasionally work to a human’s advantage.
For example, a glance at any annual “Body” issue of a fitness magazine
reveals the forms of some of the best athletes on the face of the planet,
reflecting each athlete’s success in their particular sport. The jumpers
have long, gangly legs with disproportionately large butts; the swimmers
have oddly short legs with enormous, winglike latissimi dorsi; and the
basketball players have narrow chests and waists and freakishly long arms.
The inherent pleasure we seem to derive from looking at attractive
people may offer insight into how the brain works. Just think about it: if
beautiful human faces and bodies share the same dynamic symmetry as
the connections in our brain, then they may trigger a greater dopamine
and pleasure response than observing objects with less symmetry, such as
an ugly witch from a fairy tale book or the Hunchback of Notre Dame.
If we can instinctively recognize the form-function relationship and
use the presence or absence of dynamic symmetry to gauge health, then
we are likely to make better judgments about who is more attractive, who
is healthier, who is more fertile, who would be the fittest or safest mate,
--- END PAGE 871 ---

--- PAGE 872 ---
and, in modern culture, who might be best primed to receive a better job,
command a higher salary, make the team, or get the bonus. Science has
shown that, whether we want to or not, we really do judge a biological
book by its cover, and nowhere is this truer than in our ability to perceive
slight symmetrical differences and subtle nuances in our fellow humans’
faces and bodies. Although it’s contrary to the modern notion that it’s
unfair that some people might be inherently more attractive than others,
the truth is that some people are more symmetrical and, thus, more
beautiful than others.
Even from birth, we are naturally attracted to patterns and symmetry.
Researchers studying infants have discovered that babies gaze at
symmetrical faces longer and learn to recognize them faster. Later in life,
during puberty, our brains begin to associate certain patterns with sexual
promise, enabling us to select the fittest mates.
So it turns out that, as unfair as it may seem, symmetry and beauty can
result in a more successful career, a higher income, more social success,
and a potentially easier life. This confession may sound like a callous
platform for vanity and bullying, but it’s based primarily on a physiological
genetic principle that we modern humans have inherited from our
ancestors. Press a publisher, judge, casting director, or news reporter hard
enough, and you may get them to confess that good looks matter in their
fields more than they’d like to admit. As irrelevant as these facts are to the
contemporary “we’re all beautiful in unique ways” philosophy, they are
incredibly relevant if you’re trying to reinvent your body or your health, or
if you want to give your child the highest chances of health and success.
I’d say that’s a pretty good reason to pay close attention to what you’re
about to discover in this chapter!
--- END PAGE 872 ---

--- PAGE 873 ---
HOW TO ASSESS AND QUICKLY
FIX YOUR PERSONAL BODY
SYMMETRY
Before delving into the host of tips, tricks, and hacks you can use to
increase your personal symmetry and take advantage of your newfound
understanding of the extreme importance of symmetry, let’s go over a few
self-assessment tests so that you can get a sense of how well your body is
currently aligned. These quick check-ins are even easier than the mobility
assessments described in chapter 16, although I still recommend doing
that more intensive check-in on a monthly basis.
First, stand in front of a mirror with your arms at your sides, pinkies
turned in and thumbs turned out, and look at your shoulders. Is one
shoulder higher? Does one rotate inside more than the other? Your
shoulders should be symmetrical and square—if they aren’t, it means
they’re imbalanced.
While in the same position, look at your hands in the mirror. Do you
see the backs of your hands or your thumb and forefinger? Is it difficult to
keep your pinkies in and your thumbs out? If you see the backs of your
hands, or if you have the urge to rotate your hands forward (because
holding the position feels difficult or unnatural), your shoulders are
internally rotated.
Now, take off your shoes, stand in the same position, and close your
eyes. For thirty to sixty seconds, pay close attention to how your body
weight is distributed on your feet. Is there more weight on one foot than
on the other? Is your weight forward on the balls of your feet or farther
back toward your heels? Is it on the inside or outside of your feet?
Open your eyes and look down. You want both feet to point straight
ahead, with the toes of each foot drawing even with those of the other. If
--- END PAGE 873 ---

--- PAGE 874 ---
your feet turn out, your hips and lower leg muscles likely aren’t engaging
the way they should. If your feet turn in, you may have excessive internal
hip rotation or supination (a turning-inward of the foot).
To see how simple adjusting your symmetry can be, even without
going back in time and selecting new parents, learning proper posture
early in life, or spending your childhood barefoot or in minimalist shoes,
you can perform a few simple symmetrical alignment exercises before
reassessing your posture.
Exercise 1: Sitting Arm Circles
This exercise rebalances your shoulder joints by moving the shoulders
through internal and external rotation.
1. Place a chair in front of a mirror so that you can watch your
shoulders. Start by sitting in the middle of the chair with your feet
pointed straight ahead, 4 to 6 inches apart.
2. Relax your stomach and roll your pelvis forward to create a small
arch in your low back. Hold this position during the entire exercise.
3. Squeeze your shoulder blades back and extend your arms straight
out from your sides at shoulder level. Keep your arms at shoulder
level throughout the entire exercise.
4. Curl your fingertips to your palms, as if you’re making a fist, and
point your thumbs out straight ahead. As you do this, keep your
arms straight and at shoulder level.
5. With palms facing down and thumbs pointing straight forward,
rotate your hands up and forward in 6-inch shoulder circles for
thirty reps.
6. Now reverse direction, with palms facing up and thumbs pointed
backward. Rotate your hands up and backward in the same small
--- END PAGE 874 ---

--- PAGE 875 ---
shoulder circles for thirty reps.
Exercise 2: Sitting Elbow Curls
This next move promotes scapular retraction and helps pull your
shoulders and upper back muscles into place for a tall, proud posture.
1. Stay in the seated position with your pelvis tilted forward, back
slightly arched, and stomach relaxed. Curl your fingertips to your
palms and point your thumbs out. Place your knuckles at your
temple with your thumbs pointed down toward the ground.
2. Pull your elbows back and then close them together in front of
your face, as though you are flapping your wings. Keep your elbows
up at shoulder level the entire time. Keep your head still and erect.
Continue to open and close your elbows with your knuckles at the
temples for thirty reps. Be sure to bring your elbows all the way
back, as if you were sitting up against a wall and trying to get your
elbows to touch the wall. When you bring your elbows together in
front of your face, try to keep them as high as possible.
--- END PAGE 875 ---

--- PAGE 876 ---
Exercise 3: Kneeling Ankle Squeezes
These squeezes promote hip stability through bilateral engagement of the
external rotators of the hips and can “turn on” a weak butt.
1. Kneel with a pillow or block between your ankles and feet. Keep
your pelvis tilted forward and stomach muscles relaxed throughout
the exercise.
2. Focusing on using your glutes and pressing through the entire
inner edges of your feet, squeeze and release the pillow or block
between the entirety of the inner edge of your ankles and feet for
thirty reps. Keep your upper body relaxed and look straight ahead.
--- END PAGE 876 ---

--- PAGE 877 ---
Exercise 4: Supine Foot Circles and Point
Flexes
This exercise targets the muscles of the lower leg and foot and can assist
with ankle, knee, and hip symmetry and function.
1. Lie on your back with one leg extended and the other leg pulled up
toward your chest. Clasp your hands behind the flexed knee. Keep
the foot that is on the floor pointed straight up toward the ceiling,
with your thigh muscles relaxed.
2. Circle the foot of the leg you’re holding in one direction for thirty
reps and then reverse direction for thirty more reps. Make sure the
knee stays absolutely still, with all movement coming from the
ankle, not the knee. Make the biggest, fullest circles you can
possibly make with your foot. Imagine that you’re scraping out the
inside of a bowl with your foot.
3. Do thirty reps of pointing and flexing that same foot, bringing the
toes of the elevated leg back toward the shin to flex, then reversing
direction to point the foot forward.
4. Switch legs and repeat.
After these four simple exercises, you can reassess your posture. First,
stand in front of the mirror and check the position of your hands and
shoulders. Do you notice any difference in your shoulder alignment or
hand positioning? Next, close your eyes and check in on the weight
distribution between your feet. Finally, glance down at your feet. Are they
closer to being straight?
These exercises are derived from a practice called Egoscue, which is a
good form of self-inflicted alignment that I’ll talk about more later in this
chapter. If you sprinkle these moves into your morning movement routine
(see chapter 21 for details on how to create this routine) on a consistent
--- END PAGE 877 ---

--- PAGE 878 ---
basis, you’ll note continued improvements in alignment, symmetry, and
function throughout the day.
HOW TO EAT YOUR WAY TO
SYMMETRY
Before you hit the weights, stretch with bands, do yoga, and foam-roll to
tackle asymmetries, it’s important—for both yourself and any children in
your life—that you begin with an understanding of how to eat your way to
better symmetry. The Weston A. Price diet is well known for providing the
average human body with most of the biochemical constituents necessary
for better bones, skin, nails, teeth, hair, and overall health.
So who was this guy? Dr. Price was a well-known, well-respected
dentist practicing in Cleveland, Ohio, from the 1920s to the 1940s. His
works were widely published in prestigious peer-reviewed journals, and he
even experimented in his home laboratory, evaluating the nutrient content
of different foods.
Price wanted to know how diet impacted human physiological growth
and development. In the 1930s, he traveled all over the world to study
Pacific Islanders, Australian Aborigines, the Inuit, Swiss Highlanders,
South American Indians, and New Zealand Maori. Even at that point in
history, many Indigenous populations hadn’t been exposed to the Western
diet of highly processed, low-nutrient-content foods like white flour and
--- END PAGE 878 ---

--- PAGE 879 ---
sugar. Typically, these people, who consumed the nutrient-dense diets
their ancestors had eaten for generations, were handsome and had broad
faces, wide dental arches, exceptionally aligned teeth, and no tooth decay.
But when these groups began consuming white flour, sugar, and
nutrient-poor Western foods, within a single generation, faces grew
narrower, dental arches became irregular, teeth became overcrowded, and
tooth decay ran rampant. Price determined that these growth
abnormalities and infections were due to poor nutrient availability and
absorption. He also believed that Western dietary patterns promote the
development of allergies and airway obstruction. This, in turn, leads to
mouth breathing, poor tongue posture, and the resulting growth of long,
narrow faces (which, as you’ll learn in this chapter, can be reversed via
breathwork and nutrition). But it all began with diet.
Price also found common factors in the traditional diets of the above-
mentioned groups that promoted the childhood growth of strong, straight,
and symmetrical features. He found that traditional cultures even had
special preconception diets, often one or even two years before birth,
ensuring the mothers had adequate storage of crucial vitamins, minerals,
and nutrients. These diets—and the modern Weston A. Price diet, which I
recommend to just about every woman who is expecting or trying to
conceive—usually included some combination of grass-fed meats and
organ meats such as liver, eggs from pastured chickens, raw milk and
butter, cod liver oil, fish eggs, fermented foods such as cheese, yogurt, and
sauerkraut, soaked nuts and properly prepared grains, wild plants, and
fresh fruits and vegetables. These foods supplied important nutrients
essential for proper infant development, particularly vitamins A, D, E, and
K . As a matter of fact, the last three women I assisted with nutrition
2during their pregnancies, following the Weston A. Price guidelines, all gave
birth to beautiful, perfectly healthy, and symmetrical babies weighing
more than 10 pounds.
--- END PAGE 879 ---

--- PAGE 880 ---
Back when Price was still practicing, experts frequently blamed poor
facial and physical symmetry on racial mixing. Even modern orthodontists
blame poor symmetry and development on everything from genetics to
thumb-sucking to consuming soft foods. All these variables may indeed
affect symmetry, but Price discovered that the largest variable responsible
for asymmetry issues is the steep decline in nutrient density in modern
diets. In particular, his studies led him to the conclusion that facial
narrowing takes place because the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K2
become deficient in the diet.
Current research backs up Price’s theory. Researchers have
demonstrated that in rats, deficiencies in vitamin K during pregnancy
2 cause facial dysmorphology. During fetal development, K -dependent
2proteins concentrate in the nasal septal cartilage to assist in proper
growth of facial bone structure. If the fetus doesn’t receive enough K2
during weeks six to nine of gestation, this cartilage calcifies early, causing
a condition called maxillonasal dysplasia, or the underdevelopment of the
maxilla (upper jaw). This is pretty important when you consider that the
shape of the maxilla bone determines the shape and symmetry of the
entire middle third of the face! K also requires vitamins A and D to
2 function properly, so these three nutrients are critical for the proper
growth of a fetus’s facial bones.
As Dr. Shanahan points out in Deep Nutrition, this also means that to
have the most symmetrical children, adequate time is needed between
babies to allow a mother to replenish these vitamin stores before growing
the next child. She also reveals a surprising body of research that backs up
what Price discovered: children in multiple countries who aren’t exposed
to high levels of vitamins A, D, E, and K when they’re young or in the
2 womb tend to have weak bone structures and significant facial asymmetry.
In addition to vitamin K , let’s take a look at the importance of vitamin
2A for symmetry. Vitamin A is certainly necessary for vision and is often
--- END PAGE 880 ---

--- PAGE 881 ---
marketed as a supplement for eye health, but the truth is that less than 1
percent of the vitamin A you eat is used in this way. Much of the vitamin A
you consume is instead used to maintain the morphological health and
function of epithelial tissues in your body, including your skin and the
lining of your gut. Not only that, but vitamin A is also directly involved in
maintaining normal phenotypic expression, which is the observable
characteristics expressed by your genetic code. By depriving yourself or
your kids of sufficient vitamin A, you might be causing not only less-than-
beautiful skin or an unhealthy gut but also improper genetic expression,
which has obvious implications for physical symmetry, function, and
beauty.
Vitamin D is another perfect example. A study done on the effects of
deficiency in this fat-soluble vitamin, in the absence of exposure to direct
sunlight or artificial substitutes for sunlight, concluded that vitamin D
plays a key role in the deposition of calcium in bones, which means that a
deficiency of these nutrients can result in rickets, osteomalacia (softening
of the bones), and abnormal or asymmetrical bone structure. Vitamin D
plays a particularly important role in the strengthening of bones, as well as
the absorption and mobilization of calcium throughout the body. Once the
prohormone vitamin D3 has been produced by the body or consumed in
the form of vitamin D–rich foods, it’s processed first by the liver and then
by the kidneys, where it reaches its hormonal form. This form of the
vitamin acts through a nuclear receptor to perform calcium absorption,
phosphate absorption in the intestine, calcium mobilization in the bones,
and calcium reabsorption in the kidneys.
Finally, the fat-soluble vitamin E is necessary for circulation and tissue
repair and healing and may slow the aging process because of its potent
ability to quell free radicals. Anyone who has eaten an appreciable amount
of modern processed vegetable oils likely requires high amounts of
vitamin E to combat the damage these polyunsaturated fats can cause.
--- END PAGE 881 ---

--- PAGE 882 ---
Vitamin E is found in animal foods such as butter and organ meats and in
plant foods such as nuts, seeds, legumes, and dark-green leafy vegetables.
As I mentioned in chapter 12, in a two-part podcast series with Dr. Barrie
Tan, I learned that the recovery, muscle protein synthesis, and anti-
inflammatory benefits of vitamin E–based tocotrienols are the most
potent. So, while you can get enough tocopherols from the dietary sources
mentioned above, it’s good to supplement with a tocotrienol source,
particularly from the annatto plant, which contains a high amount of the
extremely beneficial compound geranylgeraniol (GG), producing a side
benefit of reducing muscle soreness, elevating CoQ10 and vitamin K
(MK4) levels, and increasing testosterone. Designs For Health Annatto-E
GG is the best supplement I’ve found for this strategy, and it can be
combined with their other product, Tri-K, for a potent one-two beauty
combo.
By focusing on foods in the Weston A. Price diet, you’ll build better
bones, teeth, hair, skin, nails, and beyond. That’s right: if you currently
have poor bone density, facial asymmetries, tooth decay, dry hair, or brittle
nails, you can change all these things, even if you are out of childhood. In
addition, if you introduce these same foods into your children’s diet,
they’ll grow to be taller, more attractive, more symmetrical people. This is
exactly why we’re raising our twin boys on grass-fed butter, sardines, liver,
raw dairy, fermented foods, and a host of other beauty-producing foods.
There has never existed in our home a version of a kids’ meal, such as
macaroni and cheese, peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, or pizza. These
foods were never an option, and if they didn’t want liver pâté with their
salmon and hollandaise sauce, they could simply go to bed hungry.
Because their palates developed for real, nutrient-dense food, our boys
turned down the children’s menu of chicken wings, mini burgers, and
french fries at restaurants and instead chose the complex, natural, organic,
fat-soluble-vitamin-rich foods from the adult menu. As a result, their jaws
--- END PAGE 882 ---

--- PAGE 883 ---
are symmetrical, their teeth straight, their bones solid, and their brains
well-functioning, and they carry themselves as reliable, capable, and
strong humans. Does this mean that they may get better jobs, their salaries
may be higher, and their coworkers and friends may look up to them more
due to their height and symmetry? While I won’t deny there are a host of
other factors that also affect societal success, I do believe that food
choices play a significant role.
You’ll find a link to a more thorough explanation of Price’s diet on
BoundlessBook.com/17, but here are some of the basics:
• Unprocessed whole foods
• Pasture-fed meats and animal foods like beef, game animals, lamb,
poultry, and eggs
• Wild, non-farm-raised fish, fish eggs, and shellfish
• Full-fat dairy products from pasture-raised cows. Ideally, these should
be raw and/or fermented products like raw milk, yogurt, kefir, cultured
butter, raw cheeses, and fresh and sour cream.
• Liberal use of animal or animal-derived fats, including lard, tallow, egg
yolks, butter, and cream
• Traditional oils like extra-virgin olive oil and expeller-pressed sesame
oil, and limited amounts of expeller-pressed flaxseed oil, as well as
coconut oil, palm oil, and palm kernel oil
• Cod liver oil, enough to provide 10,000 IU of vitamin A and 1,000 IU
of vitamin D. It’s less well-known and less popular, but emu oil can
also accomplish this.
• Organic fresh fruits and vegetables
• Soaked, sprouted, or sour-leavened whole grains, legumes, and nuts.
These processes eliminate antinutrients like phytic acid and enzyme
inhibitors.
--- END PAGE 883 ---

--- PAGE 884 ---
• Frequent consumption of lacto-fermented fruits, vegetables, drinks,
and condiments
• Homemade beef, chicken, and lamb stocks made with the bones of
non-GMO animals, as well as stock made with wild fish
• Filtered water for both drinking and cooking
• Unrefined salts and a wide range of herbs and spices
• Homemade salad dressings made with extra-virgin olive oil, raw
vinegar, and limited amounts of expeller-pressed flaxseed oil
• Moderate use of natural sweeteners such as raw honey, maple sugar,
maple syrup, dehydrated cane sugar juice (sold as rapadura sugar),
stevia powder, and date sugar
• Strictly moderate consumption of unpasteurized beer and wine
• Cooking these foods in cast-iron, stainless-steel, glass, or high-quality
enamel pots and pans
But symmetry doesn’t stop with food. Even with a perfect diet and our
best attempts at adequate nutrition, certain habits can result in distortion
of the dental arches and facial asymmetries, as can movement patterns
and lifestyle habits. Let’s begin with one that we explored in chapter 3:
breathing.
HOW TO BREATHE YOURSELF TO
BETTER SYMMETRY
You already discovered a host of valuable breathing tips in chapter 3—but
what I didn’t emphasize in that chapter is how darn important the practice
of Buteyko breathing and the type of breathwork I learned from Oxygen
--- END PAGE 884 ---

--- PAGE 885 ---
Advantage author Patrick McKeown are to your overall symmetry, physical
performance, and, surprisingly, sleep quality.
When you look at the facial and jaw formation of the vast majority of
top-class athletes and Olympic champions, such as Roger Federer, Rafael
Nadal, Steve Hooker, Sanya Richards-Ross, and Usain Bolt, what’s
immediately noticeable is the forward growth of the face and wide,
symmetrical jaws.
One likely reason for this prevalence is that high-level athletic ability
and success depends on having an open, well-formed airway, which, in
turn, depends on symmetrical facial structure. Interestingly, the most
decorated Olympian of all time, Michael Phelps, is one of the few athletes
of his caliber who does not possess a strong, forward jaw and wide facial
structure—but he’s also participating in a sport heavily dependent on
mouth breathing.
In chapter 3, I explained that—as detailed by the late Dr. Konstantin
Buteyko and author Patrick McKeown—the best, most natural way to
breathe is through the nose, although many children, especially those with
autoimmune issues such as asthma, heavy mucus, or nasal congestion,
tend to breathe through the mouth. Unfortunately, young children who
develop a mouth-breathing habit typically develop asymmetrical faces and
poor jaw and tooth alignment. This is because mouth breathing impacts
facial growth in a couple of ways. It can cause the face to grow lengthwise
and become long and narrow, and it inhibits the full development of the
jaws, which shift slightly back from their ideal positions, reducing the
openness of the airway.
You can try a little experiment to see how this works: close your
mouth, stick your chin out, and breathe deeply in and out through your
nose. Pay attention to how the air freely and naturally flows down and
back out behind your jaws. After that, retract your jaw and pull your chin
in toward your neck and throat as far as you can, and try taking another
--- END PAGE 885 ---

--- PAGE 886 ---
breath. Most likely, you’ll feel like your throat is too narrow and restricted
for you to breathe properly. This is the same effect that poorly developed
facial and jaw structures have on the airway.
The Link Between Breathing and Sleep
Dr. Mark Burhenne, author of The 8-Hour Sleep Paradox and an authority on
dental health, points out in his blog, AskTheDentist, that humans are
developing smaller jaws and airways than our ancestors had, and this
prevents us from reaching and sustaining deep, restorative sleep. He also
believes that—in addition to mouth breathing, prolonged bottle-feeding,
sippy cups, and the consumption of soft, processed foods—autoimmune-
induced food allergies cause nasal congestion that further impedes proper
jaw and facial development.
Burhenne has noted that when the jaw and face are not properly
symmetrical, the airway is compromised. Normally, as you approach the
deepest stages of sleep and your body goes limp, your jaw falls back and
your tongue relaxes. But the tongue normally doesn’t block your airway
because of the ample room created by a fully developed jaw, wide arch,
nasal breathing, and proper swallow reflex.
However, in the modern era of mouth breathing, poor intake of fat-soluble
vitamins, allergies, and poor oxygenation, we struggle to get good sleep
because of sleep apnea. When you are in deep stages of sleep, the muscles
that keep your airway open go limp. The tongue muscle softens and
becomes a wide, floppy lump at the back of the throat, and in those with
sleep apnea, it falls back into and partially blocks the airway. At the same
time, the airway narrows and can potentially become too flaccid to support
normal breathing. In extreme cases, the airway becomes so narrow that
breathing can stop completely.
Each time the brain has to deal with these breathing interruptions, it halts its
entry into deep sleep, and your body is never able to complete stages of
deep and restorative sleep. You toss and turn, talk in your sleep, kick your
legs, grind your teeth, or snore, which are all signs your body is attempting
to reopen your airway for more efficient breathing. These interruptions keep
--- END PAGE 886 ---

--- PAGE 887 ---
you from achieving the ideal stages of deep, restorative sleep. It is now
known that sleep disturbances and sleep apnea, a growing issue in younger
and younger populations, are a contributing factor to chronic diseases such
as Alzheimer’s, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, ADHD, mood disorders such
as depression, and cognitive learning disorders.
There are two primary methods to determine if you have sleep apnea:
• Use a continuous pulse oximeter to monitor your oxygenation levels
(SPO2) during a night of sleep. If they drop dramatically at several points
throughout the night, you are likely experiencing sleep apnea. You
learned in chapter 16 about several wearables that can measure SPO2,
like the Oura ring and the WHOOP wristband.
• Get a sleep study polysomnography. A physician usually prescribes this
test. If yours won’t, there are decently accurate alternatives to
conventional sleep studies, such as Knit Health, which provides you with
a twenty-one-day sleep assessment for $99.
To remedy sleep apnea and acquire the airway our ancestors had while
obtaining optimum airway efficiency, there are several steps you can take:
• Listen to my podcasts with Dr. Joseph Zelk on obstructive sleep apnea,
including his tips and offer for a customized sleeping mouthpiece. We
also discuss the use of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
therapy, which uses a hose and mask to deliver constant and steady air
pressure. (You’ll find links to these podcasts on BoundlessBook.com/17.)
• Consider mouth taping during a night of sleep, using tape specifically
designed for this strategy, such as Hostage Tape or Somnifix. (See
chapter 3 for more on mouth taping.) Consider combining it with a nasal-
opening strategy like nasal tape or a small plastic piece such as the
Turbine device that rests inside the nostrils during sleep.
• Regularly perform all the posture- and symmetry-fixing strategies spread
throughout this chapter, including a monthly postural assessment.
• Get regular jaw realignment therapy or some form of massage work on
your jaw, face, and neck muscles.
• Pay attention to the information on sleeping position in this chapter, and
consider converting to a side-sleeping position, which can result in fewer
sleep apnea issues.
--- END PAGE 887 ---

--- PAGE 888 ---
• If you must sleep on your back, shop for a specially designed back-
sleeping sleep apnea pillow that you can use to position your neck so
your airway is more likely to stay open. A zero-gravity mattress and bed
frame can also work well.
• When your tongue and other tissues in your throat fall back and block
your airway, a small device called a hypoglossal nerve stimulator can
help.
In addition, here are a few more tips for you and the kids in your life:
• If your kids spend a lot of time sucking their thumbs or letting their
mouths hang open, their faces will grow differently than how nature
intended. Avoid thumb-sucking, extended bottle-feeding, sippy cups, and
mouth breathing as much as possible.
• Look into and learn more about orthotropics, an orthodontic alternative
and treatment focused on proper and harmonious facial development.
• Consider chewing natural gum that is firmer and can strengthen the jaw
with repeated use. Naturally flavored mastic gum is an excellent option.
• Keep a jaw-strengthening device like the Jawline or Jawzrsize on your
desk or in your home gym. These devices fit into the mouth and serve to
lift the facial and jaw muscles while providing resistance against the
closing of your mouth, a bit like weight training for your jaw.
• While looking into orthotropics, avoid orthodontics, since getting braces
and especially headgear to straighten teeth can significantly compromise
your airway.
• For any dental work, use a holistic dentist. Holistic (aka biological)
dentistry is the equivalent of complementary and alternative medicine for
dentistry.
• Consume foods rich in vitamin K2, such as egg yolks, liver, butter, and
natto, or consider a K2 supplement that includes a blend of MK-4 and
MK-7, like Designs For Health Tri-K. (For more on the importance of K2,
read Vitamin K2 and the Calcium Paradox by Dr. Kate Rheaume-Bleue.)
• Chew each bite of food twenty-five to forty times (yep, you read that
right) and, rather than give your young children high amounts of pureed
foods such as applesauce, cottage cheese, milk, and yogurt, feed them
whole, unprocessed foods that they can chew. When you chew, consider
the impact of your posture on the motion of chewing. Studies have
shown that keeping your head upright, as opposed to reclining or
--- END PAGE 888 ---

--- PAGE 889 ---
slouching forward (e.g., being hunched over your phone as you chew),
activates more mastication muscles. A forward, slumped-head posture
pulls the food away from the back of mouth, which disrupts the natural
rotary motion of chewing. (To see what I mean, try to tuck your chin
against your neck and swallow.)
• Complete one of my favorite Ayurvedic cleansing practices, oil pulling,
which I consider to be both a detoxification technique for the mouth and
exercise for the jaw (see here).
To ensure correct development of the jaws, face, and airway and proper
oxygenation through the upper airway, it is imperative that a child habitually
breathes through the nose and that you make every attempt possible to
engage primarily in nasal breathing, even during difficult exercise sessions.
This is the entire thesis of my friend John Douillard’s book Body, Mind, and
Sport, and I recommend you give it a read to learn a host of drills that teach
you the same techniques John used to breathe through his nose during
difficult workouts and even entire Ironman triathlons. Of course, all of
Patrick McKeown’s books and his ButeykoClinic.com and
ButeykoForKids.org websites are also excellent resources.
Patrick McKeown was part of a recent study on the Buteyko method at the
University of Limerick to determine the method’s efficacy as a therapeutic
treatment for rhinitis, or inflammation and irritation of the nose, in asthma
patients. The results? Patients experienced a whopping 70 percent
reduction in symptoms like snoring, difficulty during nasal breathing, nasal
stiffness, poor sense of smell, difficulty sleeping, and forced mouth
breathing. In the box on here is one of the primary exercises Patrick taught
to participants in the study. It is the same exercise I often perform during my
breath-hold walks, as detailed in chapter 3.
In contrast, nasal breathing enhances smell, improves oxygen
absorption in your lungs by increasing nitric oxide production in the
sinuses, warms and humidifies the air you breathe before it reaches the
lower airway, and helps filter impurities from the air via the hairs and
cavities within the sinuses. But the benefits don’t stop there, because nasal
--- END PAGE 889 ---

--- PAGE 890 ---
breathing is also responsible for proper craniofacial development,
temporomandibular joint function, head posture, and overall facial
symmetry. As you can imagine, when nasal breathing does not occur
because we are stressed, are sick, or have developed mouth-breathing and
shallow chest-breathing habits, the body is forced into a series of reactions
that prioritize getting oxygen into our blood, including sleep-disordered
breathing, which is becoming pandemic in children and directly affects
their growth, development, academic performance, behavior, and much
more. Think of the classic hyperactive, bratty kid with an annoying
personality, a runny nose, and a constantly wide-open gaping jaw. This
isn’t actually a stereotype—it’s a reality.
One reason nasal breathing significantly affects facial symmetry is that
the forces exerted by the lips and tongue can actually influence facial
development. As you breathe in, the lips and cheeks exert a slight inward,
sucking pressure as the tongue exerts an opposite force. But when you
breathe through your nose, the tongue should lie naturally against the roof
of the mouth, pressing against the roof of the mouth and causing it to
grow wide and U-shaped, just like the tongue. This creates room for all
your teeth.
Patrick himself has pointed out to me studies that were performed on
young monkeys in which the researchers forced the monkeys to mouth-
breathe. As might be expected, the monkeys developed facial
abnormalities and crooked teeth, which also happens in human kids. This
is why so many people need to have their overcrowded wisdom teeth
removed later in life.
Now, try mouth breathing. You’ll find it quite difficult to rest your
tongue on the roof of your mouth. Instead, the tongue of a mouth breather
tends to rest near or on the floor of the mouth. The top jaw therefore isn’t
shaped by the tongue resting against it, leading to the research-proven
development of a V-shaped mandible, narrow facial structure, and crooked
--- END PAGE 890 ---

--- PAGE 891 ---
teeth. On the other hand, a nose-breather’s jaw is typically square, wide,
and jutting forward to the point that the chin sticks almost as far forward
as the tip of the nose. The classic comic book illustration of a dominant
male, such as Superman, Wolverine, or Mr. Incredible, conveys strength by
displaying a rugged and exaggerated jaw, while many comic book villains
have narrow faces and recessed jawlines! Just watch any cartoon or read a
comic book to see what I mean. For the same form-implies-function
reasons I addressed earlier, a strong jawline is considered healthier and
more attractive.
When the jaws are set back and the airway is smaller, there is poor
definition of the cheekbones as the face sinks downward, the nose
becomes asymmetrical, and upper back and neck postural changes occur
that result in decreased muscle strength, less chest expansion, impaired
breathing, disrupted sleep, and even subpar athletic performance. When
kids develop a mouth-breathing habit instead of breathing through their
noses, the tongue isn’t in the correct position to act as a natural form of
braces and cause the teeth to grow straight. But the bigger concern isn’t
how crooked the teeth are: it’s that crooked teeth are a sign of a restricted
airway. This leads to poor oxygenation throughout your entire body,
causing far more serious problems than an ugly mouth. Furthermore,
mouth breathing can dry up your saliva, contributing to tooth degradation.
This reduced salivary flow, also known as xerostomia, can cause
difficulties in tasting, chewing, swallowing, and speaking and can increase
the chance of developing dental caries, demineralization of teeth, tooth
sensitivity, and oral infections.
Should you want to learn more, the book Jaws: The Story of a Hidden
Epidemic by Sandra Kahn and Paul R. Ehrlich takes a deeper dive into this
silent epidemic in Western civilization, describing how our jaws are
getting smaller and our teeth crooked and crowded, creating not only
aesthetic challenges but also breathing difficulties. Modern orthodontics
--- END PAGE 891 ---

--- PAGE 892 ---
has persuaded us that braces and oral devices can correct these problems,
but the root cause lies in the biomechanics of proper breathing and,
secondarily, 24-7 access to highly palatable soft and ultra-processed foods
that don’t require much chewing.
Patrick McKeown’s Nose-Unblocking
Exercise1.

Take a small, silent breath in and a small, silent breath out through your
nose.
2. Inhale as much air as you can without excessive straining, then pinch your
nose with your fingers to hold your breath.
3. Walk as many paces as possible with your breath held.
4. When you resume breathing, do so only through your nose. Try to calm
your breathing immediately.
5. After resuming your breathing, your first breath will probably be bigger
than normal. Make sure that you calm your breathing as soon as possible
by suppressing your second and third breaths.
6. You should be able to recover normal breathing within two to three
breaths. If your breathing is erratic or heavier than usual, you have held
your breath for too long.
7. Wait for a minute or two before repeating the breath-hold.
8. Repeat this exercise five or six times until your nose is decongested.
Generally, this exercise will unblock your nose even if you have a head cold.
But as soon as the effects of the breath-hold wear off, your nose will likely
feel blocked again. By gradually increasing the number of steps you can
take with your breath held, you will find the results continue to improve.
When you are able to walk a total of eighty paces with your breath held,
your nose will be free permanently. Eighty paces is an achievable goal, and
you can expect to progress by ten paces per week.
Each week, Patrick teaches this exercise to groups of five-to-ten-year-old
children, many of whom have serious breathing difficulties. Within two to
--- END PAGE 892 ---

--- PAGE 893 ---
three weeks, most children are able to walk sixty paces with their breath
held, and some quickly achieve up to eighty paces. Try it yourself and see
how you do!
--- END PAGE 893 ---

--- PAGE 894 ---
THE MOST IMPORTANT BODY PART
FOR BETTER SYMMETRY
I have a confession to make: I am very, very uncomfortable when standing
around at a party or social gathering wearing shoes. I don’t like shoes. As a
matter of fact, I avoid shoes anytime I can, and as a result, I have large,
flat, tough, calloused, highly functional feet that get me no compliments
on aesthetics but that I know can tackle just about any surface on the face
of the planet. See, when it comes to body alignment, there’s no body part
more important than your feet.
Two of the smartest folks I know in the realm of adjusting beauty from
the ground up are the brilliant biomechanist Katy Bowman, author of
Whole Body Barefoot, and podiatrist Emily Splichal, author of Barefoot
Strong. I’ve learned from both these women, whose books I highly
recommend, the crucial role the feet play in posture and symmetry. So
why are the feet so darn important?
First, it’s important to understand that 25 percent of your bones are
located in your feet, and these delicate entities that support your whole
body have thousands of nerves on their soles that can affect nearly every
organ and part of your body. So standing incorrectly can have a negative
impact not just on your posture but also on your organs and health. For
instance, foot researcher and nutritionist Norman Walker posits that
consistently wearing heels over 2 inches high can throw the digestive
system out of alignment and contribute to constipation and poor digestive
function. Thousands of years of Chinese medicine are based on foot
reflexology, which involves the stimulation of different areas of the foot to
eliminate toxins, improve circulation, target specific organs, and soothe
nerves. One large research review summarized 168 research studies and
--- END PAGE 894 ---

--- PAGE 895 ---
abstracts from journals and meetings around the world and found that
reflexology can increase blood flow to the kidneys and intestines, decrease
blood pressure and anxiety, reduce pain in AIDS patients, control
peripheral neuropathy due to diabetes mellitus, kidney stones, and
osteoarthritis, and even produce a positive effect on type 2 diabetes by
stabilizing blood sugar. There is a growing body of biomechanics research
linking shoes with a heel significantly higher than the toe to a host of joint
issues, including knee, hip, and lower back pain.
What Kind of Dentist Do I Go To?
While I see a holistic dentist once per quarter in my hometown, I also hop on
a plane a couple times a year to fly to Phoenix, Arizona, where I receive
more advanced jaw alignment and cosmetic dental work from Dr. Eniko
Loud. Why would I go through all the fuss to fly nearly three hours to visit a
dentist?
Several years ago, I thought I knew everything there was to know about
healthy dental practices. I’d done plenty of podcasts about oral care and
holistic dentistry, but when Dr. Loud walked up to me at a health conference
and began telling me about a host of issues she saw from across the room,
specifically related to my jaw and teeth, I perked up and listened, because I
could tell right away that she was very smart—smart enough to be able to
diagnose some significant jaw and teeth issues of mine from thirty feet
away.
Then I visited Dr. Loud at her Whole Health Dentistry clinic in Phoenix, where
she offers functional dentistry and holistic care via advanced dental
procedures and health and nutritional coaching for adults and children.
Being trained in functional medicine and equipped with advanced dental
training, Dr. Loud implements a host of cutting-edge tools and techniques
I’d never heard of before.
Her Whole Health Wellness philosophy involves balancing the three body
systems. Your hormonal system produces your sex and stress hormones;
your digestive system breaks down food for use by the body; and your
--- END PAGE 895 ---

--- PAGE 896 ---
detoxification system protects you from free radicals and chemical toxicity
both from your environment and from your diet. Every health issue can be
traced back to a problem within one or more of these systems. Through
targeted lab testing, Dr. Loud assesses how each system is working and
designs a program to rebalance your body. But she doesn’t stop there.
On my first visit, Dr. Loud not only did the type of extensive lab testing I’d
expect from a concierge medical clinic, not a dentist, but also performed the
following tests:
• A Columbine Scan that uses 3D imaging to look deep into the teeth,
joints, and sinuses; measures the airways; and looks for hidden infections
and systemic diseases. This is important because 80 percent of heart
attacks and strokes are triggered by mouth bacteria.
• A DNA saliva test to sequence my oral microbiome
• A cone beam scan to measure the bone density of my jaw and teeth and
look for degenerative disease in the joints, along with constricted airway
and nasal passages that could cause poor oxygenation and sleep apnea.
Tooth wear is also related to a restricted airway; the more teeth wear
down, the more the airway and tongue get pushed back.
• An Intraoral scan that creates a cast, which is then 3D-printed and turned
into a bite appliance that gradually and gently realigns the teeth and jaw
back into the proper position to develop a balanced bite and eliminate
nighttime grinding, which can wear away enamel and the soft inner part
of the tooth, eventually causing cracking and tooth loss. The end result is
that a patient chews better, and, impressively, the face changes: eyes
open wider and wrinkles lessen as there is less strain on the facial
muscles.
Dr. Loud also used an ozone generator to perform a safe mercury removal
for my wife’s tooth and connected me with a multi-functional therapist to
retrain chewing muscles to correct the lateral chewing that was causing my
teeth to collide and wear unevenly. She gave me Biocidin toothpaste,
chewable probiotics, and mouth HOCl spray to nuke the oral bacteria that
were putting me at high risk for cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer’s;
taught me how to use a water flosser and an electric toothbrush properly;
and even demonstrated a laser therapy device that can penetrate up to 100
microns into the bone, which she uses for bone and periodontal disease. She
is truly an example of the dentist of the future, and her method of dentistry
--- END PAGE 896 ---

--- PAGE 897 ---
is well worth looking into if you want to optimize your beauty and symmetry,
beginning with your mouth. Even if you can’t make it to Phoenix, if you
contact her clinic, she’ll point you in the direction of someone who uses the
same strategies.
Then there’s your lymphatic system. Pete Egoscue, who developed the
Egoscue training program mentioned earlier in this chapter, teaches that
the feet are crucial to the normal function of the lymphatic system. Just
like the circulatory system, the lymph system has to pump against gravity.
It drains upward, just like the veins, and muscular contractions in the feet
act like tiny elevators that return waste back up your legs. The muscle
contraction that takes place when your bare foot touches the ground helps
the lymph nodes drain to their interlinking vessels. Egoscue also teaches
that proper foot strength is crucial to balance, digestion, absorption,
elimination, and bowel movements.
Problem is, any issues that you have with your feet most likely began
early in your life when Mom and Dad decided to slap a pair of big, clunky,
--- END PAGE 897 ---

--- PAGE 898 ---
built-up shoes on you before you headed off to your first day of school. But
back in 1991, long before tales of Tarahumara runners and the growing
body of barefoot and minimalist shoe research by folks like Harvard
professor of human evolutionary biology Daniel Lieberman (the
grandfather of the barefoot running movement, who once took me on a
seven-mile barefoot run through Boston), Dr. Lynn T. Staheli pointed out
in his paper “Shoes for Children: A Review” that optimum foot
development can only occur with a barefoot, uncoddled foot environment
early in life. Staheli, who also wrote several books on pediatric
orthopedics, explained that stiff and compressive footwear can cause
deformity, weakness, and loss of mobility, and that shoe selection for
children should be based on a barefoot model.
In other words, aside from times when the foot is injured or foot and
sole protection are absolutely necessary—such as when strolling through
big-city streets strewn with broken glass or syringes, or when at church or
a wedding, cocktail party, or other social event where modern manners are
a must—both children and adults should set their feet free. And in
situations where shoes are required, zero-drop or minimalist footwear
should be your selection of choice.
For the first ten years of their lives, my sons rarely wore shoes. Like
ancient tribesmen—and their own dad—they play outside, hike, run,
stand, and move primarily barefoot, and they wear minimalist shoes to
school. I go unshod as much as possible, even on gravel, pavement, and
uneven trail terrain, and as a result I have splayed toes, calloused heels,
and ugly—but strong and functional—feet.
The reason it’s so important to set your and your children’s feet free is
that the shape and density of your bones is a direct result of the loads and
geometry placed on the body. So the way a foot is loaded in childhood will
affect the lifelong shape of the pelvis, hips, knees, back, and even the space
in the chest where the lungs reside!
--- END PAGE 898 ---

--- PAGE 899 ---
This is why kids with poor posture and coddled feet often grow up to
be adults with poor posture. Kids who haven’t had their bones exposed to
a variety of loads, such as running or lifting and moving objects, have been
shown to have lower bone density later in life and to suffer from flat feet.
Furthermore, pediatric research is showing that overprotective, built-up,
stabilizing modern footwear can interfere with the development of proper
foot strength, ankle stability, and movement patterns because the foot
muscles atrophy and foot bones degrade. Another problematic effect of
wearing shoes too often, especially tight-fitting athletic shoes or dress
shoes with a tapered end and a small toe box, is a condition known as toe
crowding, in which little space is available between the toes, resulting in
the loss of balance and proper muscle function within the entire foot.
Fortunately, this is all reversible. Of course, you can’t reverse it in two
weeks by buying Vibram FiveFingers, getting a stress fracture, and then
filing a lawsuit against the minimalist shoe company for false advertising.
Just like losing weight after twenty years of poor eating, movement, and
lifestyle habits, reinventing your feet takes patience. For most of my
clients who wore cushioned, overprotected shoes much of their lives, it
took years to transition to fully minimalist or barefoot and to develop
strong and natural feet. Fortunately, with kids, things happen faster.
Because they have a greater ability to remodel bone and build muscle,
children can reshape and redevelop foot structure and bones within just
three months.•

Walk barefoot as much as possible, without even socks. Removing your
socks allows for the development of more proprioceptive nerve
--- END PAGE 899 ---

--- PAGE 900 ---
endings on the bottoms of your feet.•

Walk with your feet pointed straight ahead. To test this, you can find
straight lines on the floor or sidewalk and see how closely your feet
align to the line. Most people walk with their toes slightly turned out,
which can interfere with the proper use of muscles and ligaments in
the feet, knees, and hips.•

Choose shoes that are super flexible or minimalist. Good brands
include but are not limited to Peluva (my favorite toe shoe due to the
little-to-no drop from heel to toe, increased flexibility, wide toe box,
and thinner soles), Xero, Vibram, Vivo Barefoot, Happy Little Soles,
Bobux, Merrell, and Nike Free. If you have bunions or foot pain, you
may need to ease yourself into this type of shoe, and you may require a
more cushioned shoe with a wide toe box, such as HOKA or Brooks,
for longer walks, hikes, or time spent on your feet.
--- END PAGE 900 ---

--- PAGE 901 ---
• Play foot games yourself or with your kids to encourage motor skills
and healthy foot development. For example, you can pick up marbles
with your toes and then drop them into a cup, or scrunch up a towel
with your toes before using your hands to return the towel to its
original position. Both are fantastic exercises for plantar fasciitis as
well.•

If you get a massage, be sure that your therapist spends plenty of time
on your feet. A traditional Chinese medicine practitioner well versed
in foot reflexology can work on your feet as well. Look for one certified
by the National Certification Commission for Acupuncture and
Oriental Medicine.•

Every day at your desk, while talking on the phone, or even while
seated and eating, roll a golf ball, lacrosse ball, or tiny foam-roller-like
device made specifically for foot massages up and down and side to
side on your feet. TheraFlow is a good brand that’s readily available
online; I’ll include a few other choices on BoundlessBook.com/17.
--- END PAGE 901 ---

--- PAGE 902 ---
•

Throughout the day, try lifting and spreading your toes and holding the
position for thirty to sixty seconds. This exercise will help you develop
stronger toe flexors, which are the muscles that help lift your toes
toward your shins. Studies show that the strength of these muscles is a
surprisingly good indicator of your overall health. In addition, you can
use Happy Feet Socks, which spread the toes and strengthen the feet.
Happy Feet makes options for children and adults.•

If you live near sand or have beach access, run and walk barefoot in the
sand, which is one of the best ways to both strengthen and stretch the
feet.• 
Do regular mobility exercises and stretches for the toes. Often, while
using the toilet, sitting in the sauna, or even with my shoes slipped off
on an airplane, I tug, pull, pop, and stretch my toes. A couple nights a
week, I wear toe-splaying devices to spread my toes during sleep. Trust
--- END PAGE 902 ---

--- PAGE 903 ---
me: they get tight and immobile just like any other area of the body if
you don’t regularly give them some movement and massage.•

Try socks and insoles that have small ridges and points to improve
proprioception, or use a yoga mat that has similar topography. Dr.
Emily Splichal, mentioned earlier, owns a company called Naboso,
which specializes in such devices and produces the toe splayer that I
use.•

If you’re a real masochist, grab some nail boards for your feet. I own
two sets—one in my recovery den and one in my office—
manufactured by Gravity Mind. These are yogic tools that originated in
India over 2,000 years ago, also known as sadhu boards or “bed of
nails.” Based on the concept that the feet and palms have thousands of
energy points and nerve endings linked to all internal organs and
systems of the body, standing on nail boards regulates the nervous
system and trains the mind to respond to any stressors with resilient
calm and focus, like an ice bath without the cold! Of course, using
these tools is also a fast track to training the proprioceptors and nerve
endings in your feet for better symmetry and foot health.
--- END PAGE 903 ---

--- PAGE 904 ---
HOW TO HACK YOUR WORKPLACE
FOR OPTIMIZED SYMMETRY
When I post photos of my elaborate home office setup to social media
outlets, trolls often come pouring out of the woodwork to ridicule every
last shred of my existence with comments about “how complex it all
seems” or “why can’t I just sit in a chair at a desk like normal people?”
Fact is, I am neither embarrassed by or shy about my unique workplace
environment. Why? Frankly, because after years of finishing up a day at the
computer feeling as though my eyeballs were burning out of their sockets,
my back was a chunk of immovable concrete, and my elbows and wrists
were throbbing with overuse pain, I now feel like a million bucks after a
day of typing, calls, writing, podcasting, research, and more. In my
opinion, unless you’re baling hay in the hail or sucking down coal dust in a
mine, you should feel healthy and full of energy after a day of productive
work, not beat up, locked up, and ready to stay couch-bound for the
remainder of the evening. Or think of it this way: going to the gym after
work should be an option, not a necessity, because you’ve hacked your
workspace to allow you to maintain some level of physical activity or
bursts of more intense activity all day long.
After all, did you know that the average 85-year-old American spends
up to 280,000 hours of their lifetime sitting? That’s the equivalent of 32.6
years of butt-planting. Without proper support, the aftermath of all that
sitting, if that’s what you do all day or some of the day, can be quite
uncomfortable—perhaps you can relate. In fact, the American Academy of
Orthopedic Surgeons reports that 85 to 92 percent of back injuries stem
from poor postures in daily life or the workplace.
The good news? There are simple fixes. Each day, I spend six to eight
hours at my desk working (notice that I did not say “sitting”—I alternate
from standing to seated to walking, etc.). Although I have plenty of
--- END PAGE 904 ---

--- PAGE 905 ---
strategies for optimizing the air, light, water, and electricity in my office—
most of which you’ll discover in chapter 20—in this section, I’m going to
focus on workplace ergonomics: specifically, how to align a desk with a
human body to lessen muscle fatigue, increase productivity, and reduce
the number and severity of work-related musculoskeletal disorders, such
as low back pain, carpal tunnel syndrome, and elbow tendinitis, all of
which can produce biomechanical disorders and asymmetries.
Stand-Up Desk
I don’t sit all day. I also don’t stand all day. Instead, I switch positions as
frequently as possible (about every fifteen to thirty minutes), from seated
to standing to lunging to kneeling to walking to right leg up on a stool to
left leg up on a stool . . . you get the idea. This is because standing for long
periods has been shown to be just as bad for you as sitting for long
periods, as anyone who has stood all day and experienced blood pooling,
stiff knees and hips, a locked-up back, and eventual varicose veins can
attest. Enter the stand-up desk, which I talked about in chapter 12. I
currently use an Ergonomyx, which is a simple nonmotorized model with
a push button that adjusts the desk height. Conveniently, it also includes
an under-the-desk recumbent bicycle for pedaling while working. For a list
of some of the better stand-up desk models, visit BoundlessBook.com/17.
Saddle Chair
The Salli saddle chair that holds a hallowed place in my office was
designed by my friend and former competitive bareback-riding champion
Veli-Jussi Jalkanen, a seventy-year-old Finnish inventor who plays tennis
right-handed and left-handed, swims buck naked every morning in an ice-
cold river, spends hours each evening planning new inventions in his giant
--- END PAGE 905 ---

--- PAGE 906 ---
sauna, and is obsessed with both prostate and low-back health. This guy
goes by the nickname “Vessi” and is one of the most physically talented
older men I’ve ever met. He competes in several sports on a national and
competitive level, including shooting, diving, and sprinting. He still rides
horses, skis, skin dives, walks extremely long distances with heavy packs,
and swing dances. The guy can crank out twenty-five pull-ups, speaks
multiple languages, owns several multinational corporations, and looks
like he’s about forty years old. Most relevant to what you’re now reading,
he designed what I consider to be the Cadillac of ergonomic back- and
butt-friendly chairs to keep your posture upright, your pelvis in a neutral
position, and, most important for you guys out there, your balls and
prostate happy and free.
Stool
When I’m not standing upright at my desk, I’m typically leaning back
against a stand-up, height-adjustable stool called a Mogo (basically,
imagine a stool designed for you to lean against at an angle). It is a simple,
no-frills standing desk accessory equipped with a nonslip rubber foot that
works on indoor surfaces, along with a reinforced-fiberglass turf tip that
keeps you stabilized on grass, dirt, and turf, making it perfect to toss in the
car for the kids’ soccer games. The seat collapses down and folds to take
on the go, easily fitting in a backpack or suitcase, and only weighs about 2
pounds. The seat pan is designed to cradle your bum in a pelvis-friendly
position, similar to the Salli saddle chair.
Lumbar Support Chair
There is no standard desk chair in my office, but I do own what I consider
to be the “Cadillac” of more standard chairs: an Anthros. My wife has
--- END PAGE 906 ---

--- PAGE 907 ---
stolen it and uses it in her workspace, probably because she likes to sit
more than I do. If you like to sit or have to sit for work, the Anthros chair
should be in your arsenal of ergonomically friendly work tools. It’s hands-
down the best, most supportive pelvis- and back-friendly office chair I
have ever owned. My wife reports that the difference is palpable not just in
her lower back but across her body—including enhanced pelvic support
and reduced neck and shoulder discomfort.
Anthros is a scientifically backed ergonomic office and gaming chair (if
gaming is your jam), registered by the FDA as a posture-correcting chair.
It’s crafted to be supremely comfortable while enhancing posture, warding
off pain, and boosting productivity. Basically, it improves rather than
deteriorates your posture while sitting.
Even if you don’t choose this particular chair, there are a few key
features to look for in a proper lumbar support chair. First, it should have
a seat width and depth that can comfortably accommodate most users’—
you guessed it—arses. Sadly, many standard office chairs are too narrow. A
good seat width is around 17 to 20 inches, and there should be space
between the front of the seat and your knees. Next, look for a lumbar
support cushion near your low back and preferably another one near your
upper back. The best lumbar support when sitting provides enough
cushioning to maintain the natural curvature of your spine. A pillow or
cushion that is contoured to fit the curve of your lower back can be a great
option to add to an existing chair.
Next comes tilt. A forward tilt mechanism allows you to change the
seat’s angle to slightly improve your posture. It does so by promoting your
pelvis’s neutral position, distributing your weight evenly, and taking
pressure off your legs.
Finally, the armrests are important. Armrests on a chair with low-back
support should be adjustable to allow you to rest your shoulders and arms
comfortably in a relaxed position while working. In addition to the
--- END PAGE 907 ---

--- PAGE 908 ---
Anthros, a couple other brands that fit these criteria are the Kinn Chair
and the ErgoChair 2.
Manual Treadmill
I’ll admit that it can be tough to type or engage in deep work while walking
on a treadmill, but for phone calls, consults with clients, Zoom meetings,
team huddles, and other tasks conducive to talking rather than typing,
you’ll usually find me churning out miles on my treadmill—I often achieve
more than ten thousand steps in a day without ever stepping foot out of
my office. I opt for a manual treadmill with a curved belt for two reasons:
(1) electric treadmills are notorious for churning out massive amounts of
dirty electricity, along with Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, and (2) I wanted a
treadmill that would double as a workout tool I could perform high-
intensity sprints on. An added bonus is that this style of treadmill trains
your body to both walk and run with flawless biomechanics. The best
model I’ve found is the Walkolution, which has a whisper-soft surface
made of a foamlike material that stretches and strengthens the feet with
each step while supporting healthy walking and running biomechanics. I’m
so addicted to it that I’ll often save up a bunch of random YouTube videos
folks have sent me to watch, then slip into my office to crank out a plush
walk and binge-watch my videos.
Balance Board
You’ve no doubt seen or toyed around with balance-challenging devices
and boards like a BOSU ball or a Wobble board. Problem is, these tools are
so difficult to balance on that they make it hard to focus while working.
I’ve settled on a happy medium: a beautiful, wood-finished, slightly but
not overly challenging balance device called the FluidStance, which I take
--- END PAGE 908 ---

--- PAGE 909 ---
breaks on to wiggle and squat throughout the day. For an upgraded option,
check out the GIBBoard, which is like a miniature indoor slackline on a
skateboard—it’s the closest I’ve ever come to crashing through my office
walls as I fall off of it while attempting more advanced balancing moves.
Mat
There are a variety of topographical or cushioned mats that you can stand
on while working to stretch and entertain your feet and tone your tiny foot
muscles, and they provide you with a more comfortable surface and
greater variety of standing positions than a hard floor or carpet. I have two
such mats in my office: a TerraMat antifatigue mat equipped with terrain
features that encourage frequent movement and a special design to engage
the blood-pumping mechanism of your calves, and a kybun kyBounder
mat, which was designed by former podcast guest and Swiss inventor Karl
Müller after he was inspired by walking in rice paddy fields in South Korea.
It’s made of the same soft material as the belt on my Walkolution
treadmill.
Golf Ball
While there are about eight billion varieties of fancy body-massage balls
and tools that you can use to massage and strengthen your feet while
standing or seated, I’m partial to the perfectly sized, ideally textured,
inexpensive, easy-to-find golf ball. I simply roll one around under each
foot for about fifteen minutes at any given point during the workday. If I
lose one, there are always plenty more to be found.
Doorframe Pull-Up Bar
--- END PAGE 909 ---

--- PAGE 910 ---
If you want to build upper-body and grip strength fast, while also
stabilizing your shoulders and back, you need an easy-to-install pull-up
bar in at least one doorframe of your house, office, garage, or all three.
Even if you can’t crank out a few pull-ups every time you walk under it, it’s
perfect to simply hang from with one or both arms to stretch the
shoulders, decompress the spine, and traction the wrists. You’ll find a
multitude of options online, and I’ll link to a few of my favorites on
BoundlessBook.com/17. My rule: every time I walk under my pull-up bar, I
must hang for thirty seconds or do five pull-ups. As you can imagine, that
adds up to plenty of strength-building over the course of an average
workday!
Ergonomic Keyboard
For a long time, I resisted the idea of venturing beyond my simple
MacBook Pro and into the realm of giant external monitors and cushy
ergonomic keyboards. But after making the switch to both (see below for
my monitor choice), I’ll never go back. Sure, I can’t easily take my
ergonomic keyboard with me when traveling or use it while working on an
airplane, but for cranking out several hours of writing with pain-free
wrists and elbows, it sure beats being hunched over my tiny laptop
keyboard with my giant hands and fingers in a cramped-up clawed
position, hunting for keys. I currently use the Ergo Pro keyboard
connected to my MacBook Pro (I prefer the non-Bluetooth version to
reduce dirty electricity, a concept I’ll talk more about in chapter 20).
Antiglare Monitor
Do you ever get headaches after working at a computer for a long time?
Eyestrain? Mild irritation? Brain fog? It’s not all in your head. See, just like
--- END PAGE 910 ---

--- PAGE 911 ---
most televisions, computer monitors flicker. Most people don’t realize this
because the flicker is invisible, but the flicker is hard on your eyes and is
just one of the computer monitor issues responsible for the growing
epidemic of nearsightedness and myopia—also known as computer vision
syndrome.
Even fancy LCD monitors are not flicker-free, though many people
think they are. LCD monitors started out using CCFLs, or cold cathode
fluorescent lamps, as a backlight source, but in recent years manufacturers
have shifted to using LEDs, or light-emitting diodes. If you have one of
those thin monitors, then you probably have an LCD screen with LEDs,
and if you are unsure, you can check the model number on the back of the
monitor and Google it. The use of LEDs has numerous benefits, including
lower power consumption, far fewer toxic substances because of the
absence of the cathode, and some fantastic picture-quality advantages, but
along with all these benefits come potential eyestrain issues that can
damage and destroy your eyes over the long term.
See, when your monitor is set to maximum brightness, the LEDs are
glowing at full strength. If you reduce the brightness, the LEDs need to
emit less light, and this is accomplished with small breaks or pauses
(flickers!)—the LEDs turn off for a short, nearly imperceptible time.
When you reduce the brightness even more, the breaks get longer. This
creates a catch-22: a bright screen can strain your eyes, but the flicker
created by a dimmer screen can also strain your eyes. Compared to old-
school CCFL monitors, the newer LED-based monitors carry the greatest
risk of giving you eyestrain, tired eyes, or nasty headaches. Finally, TVs
and monitors are now available with OLED, which produces less blue
light, and are often available with flicker- and glare-free features.
My friend and software designer Daniel Georgiev, a brilliant young
computer programmer from Bulgaria, has fixed this issue by inventing
software called Iris that controls the brightness of the monitor with the
--- END PAGE 911 ---

--- PAGE 912 ---
help of your computer’s video card, allowing you to have adequate
brightness without the flicker. It even automatically adjusts your
monitor’s settings based on the sun’s position wherever you happen to be
in the world. When paired with my eye-friendly, low-flicker Eizo monitor
and a decent set of blue-light-blocking glasses, I can type for hours with
zero headaches or vision issues. You can learn more about this setup in my
podcast with Daniel, linked to at BoundlessBook.com/17.
The Bottom Line
Are there other tactics you could use? Sure. You could get a fancy AI-
driven Carol bike for a quick ten-minute sweat-free workout in your office,
a couple of light hand weights for some overhead knee-to-elbow touches
(one of my favorite work break exercises), or even a kettlebell for swings
in a cubicle. If you’re a real overachiever, you could slap some gravity
boots on the ol’ pull-up bar for some Batman-style decompression, or
perhaps hire a Zen master bodyworker to gently massage your tight traps
while you’re hunched over the keyboard.
But what I’ve just shared with you are the tried-and-true tools that
have worked best for me—without littering my office with every biohack
known to man. For even more, listen to my podcast “The Healthy Writer:
How to Keep Your Keyboard, Mouse, Laptop and Writing Habits from
Destroying Your Health” and read the book Deskbound by Kelly Starrett—
you’ll find links to both on BoundlessBook.com/17.
Finally, even in the absence of a standing workstation or other fancy
devices in your office, you can adopt a wide variety of sitting postures
when working on a laptop or reading magazines, papers, or books at a
coffee shop, in a living room, at a restaurant, or elsewhere. Amazingly, new
research reveals that adopting a wide variety of sitting postures can help
--- END PAGE 912 ---

--- PAGE 913 ---
control blood sugar and the development of tendinopathies. These
postures can include the following:
• A full squat, with heels down (stretches the back, glutes, quads, and
calves)
• A high kneel (stretches the quads, Achilles tendon, and foot fasciae)
• A low kneel (stretches the feet and quads)
• A long sit (stretches the hamstrings and wrist flexors)
• A side sit (stretches the external and internal rotators of the hip)
• A cross-legged sit (stretches the hip adductors and rotators)
Office Stretches
--- END PAGE 913 ---

--- PAGE 914 ---
Standing or sitting in one position all day while you’re working can cause
your joints to become stiff and subject your neck and back to long-term,
chronic compression, which can lead to back pain, poor posture, and
physical performance degradation. Ideally, you should switch your working
positions throughout the day, take short exercise and walking breaks, or use
a treadmill workstation to avoid these problems, but if you find yourself
forced to be seated for an extended period, you can perform the following
exercises to decompress your joints, improve blood and lymphatic flow,
eliminate aches, and keep your energy levels higher throughout the day.
When I’m at conferences or in meetings, I often use these stretches and
poses, which take full advantage of what causes many of the problems in
the first place: a chair. You don’t need to perform all these stretches at once
but can weave them in throughout the day.
1. Standing Overhead Reach
Stand with your feet hip-width apart and your toes pointing forward.
Grasp your fingers together and turn your hands so that your palms face
up. Reach overhead with your clasped hands and press your palms up
while engaging your shoulders and core. Hold the position and take five
deep breaths. Release the position, then repeat twice more.
2. Butterfly Elbows
--- END PAGE 914 ---

--- PAGE 915 ---
While seated, sit tall and place your fingertips behind your ears (without
interlocking them). Make sure you’re not applying any pressure to your
neck or the back of your head. Lift up your chest and ribs and pull your
elbows back until you feel a stretch across your chest. Inhale deeply,
and, as you exhale, round your back, drop your chin and bring your
elbows together in front of you while pressing your elbows forward to
stretch out your upper back and shoulder blades. As you inhale again,
return to the starting position. Repeat the full sequence for a total of
four reps.
3. Chair Chest Opener
While sitting on the edge of your chair, reach your hands back and grab
the sides of the back of the chair with your thumbs pointing down. Roll
your shoulders back and down, lift your chest, and elongate your neck
(imagine you’re pressing into the ceiling with the top of your head). To
stretch out your chest, lean deeper into the movement. Take five deep
breaths, release, then repeat once more.
4. Standing Chair Lat Stretch
Stand about three feet away facing your chair. While keeping your knees
slightly bent, bend at the hips and reach out to grab the top of the back
of the chair, keeping your arms straight. Flatten your lower back and
--- END PAGE 915 ---

--- PAGE 916 ---
lengthen your shoulders to form a straight line from your hands to your
hips. Line up your head between your arms and take five deep breaths.
Release the position, then repeat once more.
5. Standing Chair Lat Twist
In the position held at the end of the Standing Chair Lat Stretch, with
your knees slightly bent and your lower back flat, reach down with your
right hand and touch your left foot. Hold this position and take two
breaths, then return to the original position with both hands on the back
of the chair. Twist in the opposite direction and touch your right foot
with your left hand, holding for two breaths. Repeat the movement
twice more on each side.
6. Mirrored Chair Pose
Face your chair and put your feet together. Squat and try to match the
height of the chair with the tops of your thighs. While maintaining a
straight spine, reach overhead with your palms facing each other. Hold
the position and take five breaths. Release and repeat twice more.
--- END PAGE 916 ---

--- PAGE 917 ---
7. Seated Figure-4 Hip Stretch
Sit with both feet flat on the ground. Place your right ankle across your
left knee and flex your right foot. Sit tall with your back straight and lean
forward while pressing down on your right knee until you feel a stretch
in your hips. Hold the position and take three breaths. Release and
repeat with your left ankle, then repeat twice more on each side.
8. Seated Spinal Twist
Start by sitting with both feet flat on the ground. Put your right arm
over the back of the chair, and put your left hand on your right knee.
Press with both hands as you look over your right shoulder and twist
your torso. To give yourself more space to twist, lean slightly forward.
Hold the position and take two deep breaths. Release and repeat on the
other side. Repeat the movement twice more on each side.
--- END PAGE 917 ---

--- PAGE 918 ---
9. Bound Neck Stretch
Sit tall in your chair and reach down with your right arm (you can grasp
the seat of the chair as long as you’re still able to keep your arm
straight). Reach behind your back with your left hand, clasp your right
wrist and tilt your neck to the right. You can enhance the stretch by
gently pressing your arm away from your torso. Hold the position and
take two deep breaths. Release and repeat with the opposite arm.
Repeat the movement twice more on each side.
10. Alternating Fingers Wrist Stretch
Sit tall in your chair and stretch your right arm straight in front of you
with your fingers pointing down. With your left hand, gently pull on the
back of your right hand to stretch out the top of your right wrist. Hold
the position and take two breaths, then flip your right hand so that your
palm faces out and your fingers point up. Pull gently on the front of your
right hand with your left to stretch out the bottom of your right wrist.
Hold the position and take two breaths. Stretch the top and bottom of
your right wrist twice more, then repeat the movements for three reps
with the opposite hand.
11. Hamstring Stretch
Stand about two feet away facing your chair. Place the heel of your right
foot in the middle of the chair while flexing your right foot (try to point
--- END PAGE 918 ---

--- PAGE 919 ---
your toes upward). While keeping both knees slightly bent, put your
hands on your hips and bend forward until you feel a stretch in your
right hamstring. Hold the position and take three deep breaths. Release
and switch to the left leg. Repeat once more with each leg.
12. Chair Pigeon Pose
Stand facing your chair, bend your right knee, and place your right calf
across the front of your chair while flexing your right foot (your knee
should be on the chair while your foot should be off the edge). Grab
both sides of the seat and step back with your left leg until your left
knee and hip are straight. You can make the stretch deeper or shallower
by bending or straightening your elbows. Hold the position and take
three deep breaths. Release and switch to your left leg. Repeat once
more on each side.
13. Single-Leg Toe Pull
Stand facing your chair. Bend forward from the hips and place both
hands on the front of the seat. Reach down and grab your right toes
with your right hand while keeping your left hand on the seat and
slightly bending your left leg. Gently pull up on your right toes until your
calf and hamstring feel stretched (try to keep your hips square and your
lower back flat). Hold the position and take two breaths. Release and
switch to the left arm and leg. Repeat twice more on each side.
--- END PAGE 919 ---

--- PAGE 920 ---
DAILY MOVEMENT TIPS FOR
SYMMETRY
When it comes to daily movement, the five most potent movement habits
I utilize for mobility and symmetry are as follows: daily morning mobility
snacks, Foundation Training, ELDOA exercises, Egoscue training, and Ben
Patrick’s “Knees Over Toes” moves.
Mobility Snacks
Let’s begin with the first habit: mobility snacks. See, it’s relatively rare that
I can find the time to spend a solid ninety minutes getting a full-body
massage therapy session, or even hunt down an hour for a self-inflicted
deep tissue session with a foam roller, deep tissue massage ball, vibration
tool, or any of the other strange tissue-mobilization devices from what my
wife refers to as my medieval torture box of body tools. But while the
water for my French press coffee is heating and the coffee is steeping, I
can indeed find just ten to fifteen minutes to hunt down and mobilize any
tight, sore, or adhered areas from the previous day’s activities. With this
approach, I spend 70 to 105 minutes each week fixing my body and
symmetry. For example, just this morning I performed these activities:
• Rumble Roller on my shoulders (the Rumble Roller is a foam roller
equipped with teeth-gritting ridges)
• Lacrosse ball on the back of each knee to mobilize the hamstring
attachment in popliteal space
• Myobuddy massage tool on both wrists and inner elbows
• Elastic band traction on my right shoulder
• Rumble Roller on my left and right hips
--- END PAGE 920 ---

--- PAGE 921 ---
• Peanut (two lacrosse balls taped together) up and down my spine
• Light stretching after all of the above
Each morning, the routine slightly changes, but the goal is always the
same: spend just ten to fifteen minutes in a desperate act of self-love,
keeping the many pieces of my body together.
Foundation Training
My second habit is Foundation Training, which, along with the third habit
of ELDOA stretches, I weave in throughout my day during work breaks,
when I’m in the sauna, as a workout warm-up or cool-down, or even if I
have a few minutes left after my morning mobility snacks.
To understand how Foundation Training works, you must understand
how gravity affects your body. Just think about all the different things that
happen when gravity hits your body—specifically, gravity’s ability to
adversely affect the following physiological systems:•

Respiratory system: A compressed rib cage limits the lungs’ ability to
expand and diminishes your breathing capacity.•

Digestive system: Squashed organs don’t function nearly as well as
they should, and that burdens the body’s ability to gain nourishment
from food.•

Circulatory system: Squeezed blood vessels are not as efficient or as
effective as they ought to be in transporting nutrients, oxygen, carbon
dioxide, hormones, and blood cells to where they need to be.•

Nervous system: A compressed spinal cord and constricted neural
pathways slow the progress of all those neurotransmitters trying to
communicate from the periphery to the central nervous system—and
--- END PAGE 921 ---

--- PAGE 922 ---
back again—and can undermine the brain’s ability to coordinate and
influence all the activities of your body.
Hunching all day at a keyboard, tilting our heads forward over our
phones, commuting long hours, and slouching on the couch simply
magnify and aggravate these problems, resulting in poor posture that
throws our bodies out of balance, causing unnecessary stress and strain
that compromises our joints, restricts organ function, and weakens our
force output.
So the reasoning goes something like this: If you can wake up in the
morning and do something that fights all the effects of gravity and restores
your body to a decompressed state that theoretically allows you to feel
better and stand taller all day long, with better digestion, no low back pain,
and enhanced circulation . . .
. . . why not try it?
Dr. Eric Goodman, as you may recall from chapter 3, developed
Foundation Training to heal and correct back pain by training your
posterior chain muscles—your shoulders, back, butt, and legs—to
properly support your body. Now, many professional and Olympic athletes
use his system every day to enhance performance and force output while
maintaining the health of the entire spine. Fans of Foundational Training
include Chad Reed, a motocross and supercross world champion; Lakey
Peterson, a women’s surfing champion; Tour de France cyclists; and many
more.
Foundation Training is all about your core, and, as Dr. Goodman
explains in True to Form, a book that systematizes his entire approach,
your core is anything that connects to your pelvis, whether above or below
it, including your hamstrings, glutes, and adductor muscles. Your
functional movement capacity, your athletic ability, flexibility, balance,
and strength all depend on a powerful core, and Foundation Training
teaches all those core muscles to work together through specific full-body
--- END PAGE 922 ---

--- PAGE 923 ---
movements and breathing patterns. Foundation Training includes moves
that target the following muscles:•

Glutes: Properly activated glutes, otherwise known as a “turned-on
butt,” are crucial for correct movement patterns and posture.•

Adductors: Your inner thigh muscles are your built-in traction system.
When this muscle group remains strong, you have increased hip
stability, stronger arches in the feet, and a pelvic brace that protects
your back with a couple of the strongest muscles in your body.•

Deep lower-back muscles: These facilitate the proper integration of
the posterior chain muscles and the “talk” between your glutes and
pelvis.•

Abdomen and hip flexors: It can seem like a bit of a disconnect, but
think of these front lower muscles of your body as directly affecting
the mobility and function of the back lower muscles. If the front is too
tight, the back will not work properly.• 
Transverse abdominis: These deep ab muscles are your built-in
bracing system, and when the transverse abdominis is tightened
against the other muscles in this core group, the entire system
becomes stronger.
Founder
Here’s one Foundation Training exercise: the Founder.

1. Stand with your feet hip-distance apart and your weight on your heels.
2. Let your knees unlock and pull your hips back as you push your chest
forward.
3. Without moving your feet, pull your heels together to activate your
adductor muscles.
--- END PAGE 923 ---

--- PAGE 924 ---
4. You should feel tension in your low back, adductors, glutes, and
hamstrings; these muscles let you know your posterior chain is active.5.

Chest is high with arms back and your thumbs out to the side, shoulders
pulling back and down. Hold for 15 seconds.
6. Bring your arms out in front as you pull your hips away from your ankles.
Hold for 15 seconds.
7. Bring your arms all the way up as you lift your chest slightly higher. Hold
for 15 seconds.
Source: FoundationTraining.com. Used by permission.
Every exercise in Foundation Training is designed to include as many
muscles in a given movement as possible, disperse more force throughout
your body, and take friction away from your joints by placing that tension
into the proper core muscles instead. Every exercise lengthens the front of
your body, where the overtightened, overshortened muscles in your body
are, and strengthens and lengthens the back of your body, allowing you to
stand tall and to move powerfully, gracefully, and with a lot of flexibility.
So what exactly is happening to your body when you implement moves
like this?
--- END PAGE 924 ---

--- PAGE 925 ---
1. You turn your butt on. The contract-and-hold nature of
Foundation Training is technically a form of eccentric force
dispersion, especially among the posterior chain muscles such as
your glutes and hamstrings. Improved muscle tone, muscle chain
integration, and more efficient muscular contractions are all
consequences of this type of eccentric training. When you
stimulate a muscle’s ability to absorb force before you ask that
muscle to generate force, it learns efficiency and proper posture. In
short, you turn your butt on so that you use your glute muscles
well throughout workouts, standing postures, and sitting postures
during the rest of the day.2.

You breathe more deeply. When it comes to oxygenation,
mitochondrial health, and overall nervous system strength, there is
nothing you can do that is more important than breathing well.
Your serratus muscles are of key significance to rib cage expansion
during inspiration, and during the decompression breathing that
accompanies every Foundation movement, you train your serratus
musculature, particularly during the exhalation of each breath.
(Important note: Your lungs are in your rib cage, not your
abdomen.) Considering you breathe twelve thousand to twenty-
two thousand times per day, it’s pretty dang important that you
execute this repetitive pattern properly.3.

You increase innervation and blood flow to your skull. You have
important neurological and vascular tissue traveling through the
area on which the base of your skull rests. To open blood flow to
these areas, you must actively lengthen and increase space along
the back of the neck as well as the front of the chest. The cranial
nerves deserve more respect, attention, and space than they can
receive in the postures associated with anterior head carriage, such
as sitting at a desk or driving in a car. Foundation Training
--- END PAGE 925 ---

--- PAGE 926 ---
lengthens the spaces around these nerves and pulls your head and
neck into a more appropriate position.
There are also a host of other benefits to Foundation Training, from
improved digestion to increased force output from the powerful glute
muscles, but you now know everything you need to know to explain to
your loved one or neighbors why you’re sticking your butt out and
breathing with your hands clamped across your rib cage every morning,
right?
I’m a big fan of the minimum effective dose of any body-enhancing
program like this, so I personally keep the chart below, from Dr.
Goodman’s book, on my phone and try to perform the list of exercises for
each respective day, weaving them throughout the day. Each day’s
exercises take about ten minutes to incorporate.
Monday, Wednesday, Friday 
Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday
3 repetitions of each 
3 repetitions of each1.

Standing Decompression
1. Supine Decompression
2. Lunge Decompression
2. Prone Decompression
3. Woodpecker
3. Founder
4. Internal Leg Tracing
4. Woodpecker
5. Anchored Bridge
5. Woodpecker Rotation
6. Anchored Back Extension
6. Integrated Hinges7.
Kneeling Decompression

ELDOA Exercises
Next, there are the ELDOA exercises. Seven years ago, a guy flew all the
way from Alabama to train me in a new method of movement and deep
fascial stretching that I had never before encountered, something he
called the ELDOA Method. Now don’t get me wrong: as you’ve probably
--- END PAGE 926 ---

--- PAGE 927 ---
already suspected, I’ve done my fair share of mobility training. But this
guy, Jacob Schoen, spent the weekend at my house and trained me for
eight solid hours, introducing me to a completely new form of extremely
intensive stretching, which I now take breaks from work to do each day. It
is one of the best ways to eliminate lower back pain, heal the spine, and
get a full-body myofascial stretch.
ELDOA is a French acronym that stands for étirements longitudinaux
avec décoaptition ostéo-articulaire, which translates to “longitudinal
stretching with osteoarticular decoaptation.” Yep, that’s a mouthful. The
method consists of postural exercises that target specific joints to
decompress, relieve pain, and restore function and balance. With the
primary goal of applying high amounts of internal tension to reduce
pressure on the spinal discs, increase blood flow, and reduce back pain,
ELDOA is based on the concept of using self-induced myofascial
stretching and traction to put tension around a joint.
The method itself consists of multiple positions that maximize fascial
tension around a joint, typically over a series of transitions that
progressively increase fascial tension and cause decoaptation at the
desired spinal level (decoaptation describes a reduction in compression
forces at a joint). Each rep of an ELDOA stretch is held for ten to thirty
seconds and is performed with deep, diaphragmatic breaths. When
performed correctly, these stretches literally make you feel as though
you’re being quartered by a horse, medieval-style, but the rush of blood to
the joint, the extreme stretch, and the mobility of the body parts you
stretch with ELDOA is unparalleled.
On BoundlessBook.com/17, you’ll find several helpful videos of what
ELDOA looks like, along with my podcast with Jacob. But I focus on three
primary ELDOA stretches that give me the most bang for my buck: T6–T7
(this stands for thoracic vertebrae 6 and 7), T8–T9, and L5–S1 (lumbar and
sacral vertebrae, respectively).
--- END PAGE 927 ---

--- PAGE 928 ---
Egoscue
Founded by Pete Egoscue in the 1970s, the Egoscue Method is a form of
postural therapy designed to fix misalignment in the body. It’s a series of
simple exercises and stretches that restores musculoskeletal balance and
symmetry, returning the body to its proper posture and bringing you back
to an active, pain-free lifestyle. The Egoscue Method re-educates your
muscles on how to function to maintain proper alignment. Recently, I
watched with fascination as one of the Egoscue master trainers, Brian
Bradley, showed me a video of a ripped thirteen-year-old soccer player
decimating his entire soccer squad by over ten seconds on a 400-meter
track run. The difference between this young man and the others? He did no
weight training—only bodyweight training and Egoscue.
To get a better idea of how Egoscue works, watch the five-minute video of
Egoscue Train Anywhere exercises on YouTube—you’ll find a link on
BoundlessBook.com/17—and visit egoscue.com. This five-minute series fits
into the movement snacks I perform each day and, when combined with Stu
McGill’s “Big 3” exercises for back stability (the curl-up, side bridge, and bird
dog), can help you build a bulletproof and pain-free back.
--- END PAGE 928 ---

--- PAGE 929 ---
Knees-Over-Toes Exercises
If you’re an athlete who’s been told never to let your knees go over your
toes during squats or lunges, it’s time to reconsider. Ben Patrick, founder
of Athletic Truth Group, informed me in my podcast episode with him
that this pressure can actually strengthen the knees, providing greater
protection and longevity. By emphasizing this range of motion in his
training, Patrick was able to avoid surgeries and painkillers.
To help you achieve pain-free knees, Patrick has put together a plan of
the exercises that can be scaled to all abilities. They should be done at
least once a week and can be added to body-part-specific or full-body
routines to create a balanced program. These exercises will not only
increase your knee strength and protection but also provide nutrient
delivery to help your knees last longer. These exercises also seem to help a
ton with low back pain and contribute to overall athleticism—and they
can be isolated and spread à la carte throughout the workday as a part of
your movement snack protocol.
Ben’s ten key exercises include the backward sled pull, forward sled
push, Poliquin step-up, ATG split squat, dumbbell VMO squat, tibialis
raise, Nordic hamstring curl, hip flexor lift, rear-foot-elevated hip flexor
stretch, and incline pigeon pose. You’ll find detailed explanations for each
of these somewhat unconventional exercises via a link on the resources
page for this chapter.
Want a couple more of the best-of-the-best stretches to spread
throughout the day? Check out Kelly Starrett’s infamous couch stretch and
the Weck Method Core Coiling Exercise, which are particularly useful if
you struggle with hip tightness or low back pain. I’ll include videos for
both on the resources page for this chapter.
--- END PAGE 929 ---

--- PAGE 930 ---
SLEEP YOUR WAY TO SYMMETRY
I’m a bit of a diva when it comes to my sleep surface and sleep posture—
which I’m not ashamed of when you consider the fact that I spend about
one-third of my life in a bed, as most humans should. Even if you sleep
just 7 hours a night, this means you lie down for over 2,400 hours each
year!
An improper sleeping position can be a notorious cause of bad posture
and poor symmetry, resulting in a spine that isn’t able to distribute forces
as optimally as it was intended to, poor posture during the day after a
night of bad sleep, and a body that’s wracked with aches and pains. The
good news is that there are sleeping positions and sleeping surfaces that
promote the greatest amount of symmetry, equally distribute stress
throughout the body, provide the optimal position for back health, and
minimize uncomfortable compression of joints and muscles.
Your chosen sleeping posture should encourage symmetry and
alignment of your entire body. Because each body type and body
symmetry is highly variable, there is no single, perfect sleeping posture—
but there are definite pros, cons, and best practices for each posture.
Back Sleeping
Let’s begin with sleeping on your back. This position promotes symmetry
the most, equally distributes stress throughout the body, and compresses
joints the least. The cons? It can contribute to sleep apnea and snoring,
can place more stress on the lower back, and can be uncomfortable for
people with preexisting poor posture. If you decide to sleep on your back,
I recommend you place a pillow underneath your knees. This will create a
--- END PAGE 930 ---

--- PAGE 931 ---
slight bend in your hips and knees and allow your lower back to flatten
against your mattress. This position can also alleviate any tension
throughout the lower back. Try setting pillows under your knees at
different heights until you find the most supportive position.
At your head, place the pillow so that it supports the small of your
neck. There should be complete contact of your neck on the pillow and no
contact on the backs of your shoulders. Make sure that the back of your
head is in contact with the pillow, and not the top of your head. The pillow
I use for back sleeping is the Neck Nest, which was designed by my friend
Peter Martone. (On BoundlessBook.com/17, you’ll find a discount code for
the Neck Nest, along with a link to my interview with Peter on this and
many of his other sleep posture tricks.) Other good options include
TempurPedic, Saatva, and Dosaze—or fluffing up just about any blanket or
soft pillow and wrapping it around the base of your neck so that your chin
and head tilt slightly upward.
If you’re sleeping on your back, you can also place a pillow by your side
to help offload the weight of your arms, and if you want to truly upgrade a
back-sleeping position, shop for a zero-gravity bed or listen to my podcast
on zero-gravity sleeping. Finally, if you are going to sleep on your back,
when you first get into bed, try my friend Esther Gokhale’s method of
stretch lying:
1. Lie on your back.
2. Bend both knees and plant your feet on the bed hip-width apart.
3. Prop your upper body up on your elbows.
4. Slowly lower yourself onto the bed one vertebra at a time.
5. Place your hands behind your head and slowly elongate the back of
your neck.
6. Pull your shoulder blades away from your ears and down toward
your feet.
--- END PAGE 931 ---

--- PAGE 932 ---
Straighten out your body and allow your legs to relax to the sides.
You’ll find a helpful video for this technique at BoundlessBook.com/17.
Side Sleeping
Although I nap on my back, for a full night of sleep I’m a side sleeper, and
I’ve found that the hip-misalignment issues that can be brought on by side
sleeping can be alleviated by ensuring that the spine is in a straight and
neutral position while sleeping. Side sleeping reduces snoring and sleep
apnea issues, and if you, like me, lie awake at night staring at the ceiling
when you attempt to sleep on your back, side sleeping is a perfect
alternative sleeping position. But it does increase stress on one side of the
body and can have a high risk of misalignment, especially if you have wide
shoulders or hips.
Proper side-sleeping alignment is also highly dependent on proper
mattress support, which I’ll talk about later in this chapter. For a proper
side-sleeping position, first place a pillow between your legs (a quick
online search for “side sleeping pillow” will give you a host of good
options, and a few of my favorites are listed on BoundlessBook.com/17).
This will prevent your upper legs from rotating the rest of your body. You
can also support your upper arm with a pillow to offload any stress on
your shoulder. For your head support, place the pillow in the small of your
neck. There should be complete contact of your neck and no pillow
contact on the back of your shoulders.
While a slight bend of the knees is fine, avoid the curled-up-in-a-ball
fetal position, which can compress your entire body and cause bad posture
and hunched shoulders. Instead, remain lengthened and elongated
--- END PAGE 932 ---

--- PAGE 933 ---
through the spine. It helps to imagine someone is pulling your head up to
make you taller. You may not be able to stay in the same side-sleeping
position throughout the night, and many people rotate from the left side
to the right side, which is completely normal, although you will likely
spend the greatest percentage of time on one side or the other.
Finally, the added benefit to side sleeping? Glymphatic drainage of
toxins from your head (see the box on here).
Stomach Sleeping
So, as you’ve just learned, the back and the side sleeping positions are
both acceptable. But what about sleeping on your stomach? Unless you
want a neck injury, a sore jaw, or a hyperextended low back, I do not
recommend stomach sleeping. The only time this position is
biomechanically appropriate is if your bed has a face hole in it, like a
massage table, allowing you to sleep with your neck straight. While I have
a couple of friends who do indeed sleep on their stomachs on a massage
table, even they primarily use it for naps, not for a full night of sleep.
There are simply too many head, neck, sinus, and shoulder issues that
arise from attempting to spend eight hours laid out on your stomach.
Choosing the Right Mattress
--- END PAGE 933 ---

--- PAGE 934 ---
Of course, no discussion about sleep would be complete without a
consideration of the sleeping surface, aka your mattress. When I first
started down my healthy mattress journey, I began by sleeping on a
spendy 100 percent organic nontoxic Essentia mattress equipped with
memory foam, organic latex, and a host of other frills, including organic
essential oils, hevea milk, and rare plant extracts. I was getting the
ultimate in super-soft hippie sleep, and I was limiting my exposure to
polybrominated diphenyl ethers (which can poison your thyroid gland),
formaldehyde (a known carcinogen), chemical flame retardants,
polyurethane foam (which releases volatile organic compounds around
your body while you sleep), and bioavailable antimony, a heavy metal
notoriously found in mattresses.
Later, as I continued my mattress exploration, my friend Katie Wells,
the famed health blogger of WellnessMama.com, told me about a special
gel-matrix sleep surface called Intellibed. While it’s still toxin-free, the
Intellibed also has a gel matrix that’s designed to reduce joint pressure
during sleep—by up to 80 percent compared to popular memory foam or
adjustable air mattresses. It was even found to reduce bedsores and
pressure wounds in hospitals. The mattress fabric stays cool during a night
of sleep, which is integral to quality sleep, and provides all the comfort of
memory foam with all the support of a firmer mattress. Some EMF-
mitigating enthusiasts claim that the springs used in the Intellibed may be
transmitting dirty electricity, but even this is only an issue if there are a
significant number of electricity-producing devices scattered about the
bedroom, such as Wi-Fi routers, Bluetooth smart home apps, televisions,
and other items I consider to be unnecessary in a hallowed sleep space.
Now, I’m on my third mattress, a SAMINA sleep system, which is more
than just a mattress. The top layer of this mattress/frame combo is hand-
washed merino wool (hand-washing keeps the lanolin intact—which
naturally repels dust mites and mold) covered in unbleached organic
--- END PAGE 934 ---

--- PAGE 935 ---
cotton. Just beneath it is a grounding pad layer made of organic wool,
cotton, and a fine silver mesh. It plugs directly into your wall-outlet’s
ground, creating an electrical connection from the bed to the earth itself.
This system works through indirect contact rather than by putting you in
physical contact with the pad itself, meaning that your body’s perspired
moisture passes through your bed sheet and the merino wool bed topper
and then contacts the conductive silver mesh, which carries the electrical
signal to the earth. The grounding layer also contains magnets that give
your bed the polarity of a north/south orientation (with your head facing
north), no matter how your bed is actually oriented, which supposedly
reduces geopathic stress, though research on that concept is somewhat
weak. The next layer is natural tree latex pads, which are also covered in
organic cotton. They have a feel similar to a synthetic memory foam but
are much more natural, and add cushion to the bed that provides a good
balance between firm and soft. The final layer really sets SAMINA apart:
instead of the classic mattress or box-spring design, wooden struts sit atop
pieces of natural latex, creating a unique suspension system that supports
your skeleton independent of the strut above or below it, giving the sleep
system a truly flexible feel. To top things off, SAMINA allows you to sleep
on a mild incline for better lymphatic drainage (see here).
In summary, whether you sleep on your back or on your side, be sure
to support your body accordingly and select a mattress you’re comfortable
spending a third of your life on—guilt-free. I’m a fan of any of the options
above, unless you want to try the approach of biomechanist Katy Bowman,
who informed me during our last podcast interview that her bones and
body have become incredibly strong and her joints far more supple and
pain-free via her practice of sleeping on thin foam, or simply spreading a
sheepskin on a wood floor and curling up on it. This is a budget-friendly
approach that you’ll obviously need to toughen up a bit to adapt to, but
she swears by it. Warning: In the same way that it takes time to transition
--- END PAGE 935 ---

--- PAGE 936 ---
from cushioned to minimalist shoes, it takes time to transition from a
mattress to a minimalist sleeping surface. Katy reported that it took her
eighteen months to go from her mattress of five years to a three-inch foam
mattress pad from Costco.
How to Drain Your Brain During Sleep
A term that emerged in science only when research revealed its existence in
2016, brain drain refers to the glymphatic system, which, you’ll recall from
chapter 7, is a functional waste-clearance system for the central nervous
system, similar to the lymphatic system for the rest of your body.
The glymphatic system facilitates the exchange of cerebrospinal fluid for
interstitial fluid to clear interstitial waste from the brain parenchyma, the
functional tissue of the brain (both white and gray matter). This waste is
moved into venous pathways and ultimately cleared via lymphatic vessels in
your cervical spine. Activation of the glymphatic pathway is controlled by
the brain’s arousal level. During sleep, when the brain is relatively quiet, the
volume of its interstitial space expands. This increased interstitial space,
when paired with a solid night of sleep, results in efficient waste removal.
Perhaps the most notable waste cleared by the glymphatic system is the
soluble amyloid that can otherwise build up and accumulate as amyloid
plaques in the brain. Research has shown that patients suffering from
chronic impairment of the glymphatic pathway function due to traumatic
brain injury are more vulnerable to neurodegeneration and have an
increased chance of developing dementia and Alzheimer’s. So it turns out
that draining the brain is important!
Interestingly, research has also confirmed that glymphatic transport and
clearance is significantly superior when you sleep on your side or your
stomach. Sleeping on your stomach is not great for back health, posture, or
symmetry, but sleeping on your side with a small pillow between your legs is
actually an ideal sleeping position, especially if it doesn’t bother your head,
neck, and hips.
One other fascinating fact I noted while reviewing the scientific literature on
glymphatic drainage is that any sleep medication that mimics anesthesia,
--- END PAGE 936 ---

--- PAGE 937 ---
including, most notably, popular sleep pharmaceuticals such as Ambien and
Valium, limits glymphatic drainage—meaning that although you may be lying
in bed for eight hours, you’re definitely not going through normal sleep
cycles, nor are you engaging in efficient waste removal.
SELF-CARE ROUTINES
No discussion of beauty would be complete without a discussion of daily
cleansing and care routines for your teeth and skin. You should already
know the basics—wash your face every day, brush and floss your teeth
regularly, don’t use harsh cleansers, and so on. But here are the routines
and compounds that I’ve found to be the most effective for maintaining
my own healthy teeth and skin.
Oil Pulling
Oil pulling is a proven and time-honored method, particularly in
Ayurvedic medicine, to remove bacteria and promote healthy teeth and
gums. It can be more effective than flossing and is one of the best ways to
naturally whiten your teeth, even without toothpaste or charcoal powder.
The procedure is simple: you simply swish about a tablespoon of oil,
typically coconut oil, olive oil, sesame oil, or a blend of cleansing oils, in
your mouth for five to twenty minutes.
This works by removing fat-soluble toxins and bacteria from your
mouth when you spit out the oil and creating a clean oral environment
that contributes to the prevention of gingivitis, bad breath, cavities, tooth
decay, and gum infection. The Journal of Ayurveda and Integrative Medicine
recently published a study that reviewed holistic approaches to oral
health. The analysis revealed not only that oil pulling is one of the most
--- END PAGE 937 ---

--- PAGE 938 ---
effective natural solutions for preventing tooth decay and premature tooth
loss but also that the effects of oil pulling reach far beyond oral health. For
example, it may help prevent heart disease ( just Google “heart disease
oral health” to see what I mean), systemic inflammation, acne, and throat
dryness, and it can also whiten teeth, strengthen the jaw, and, of course,
help with TMJ symptoms.
Here are the exact details for correct oil pulling:
1. Do it first thing in the morning, before you brush your teeth or
drink anything. I wake up, walk to the sink, put a tablespoon of oil
in my mouth, and then swish for about ten minutes while
preparing coffee, stretching, and performing other routine morning
activities. I currently use a brand called SimplyO3, which combines
organic olive oil with ozonated oil and peppermint oil. Another
good brand is The Dirt, which is a blend of coconut oil, sesame oil,
and essential oils of peppermint, cardamom, clove, tea tree,
turmeric, and rose, along with a hexane-free stevia extract, natural
menthol, and rosemary extract. Finally, you can add a few drops of
peppermint, oregano, lemon, or other refreshing essential oil to
coconut oil or extra-virgin olive oil for a good DIY version.
2. Gently swish 1–2 tablespoons of the oil in your mouth and between
your teeth for five to twenty minutes, but be sure that you don’t
swallow any of the oil, since it does contain toxins and bacteria
from your mouth.
3. Spit out the oil in a trash can. Do not spit into the sink or toilet; it
can clog the pipes. Then immediately rinse your mouth with water,
swishing and spitting several times.
Within one week of oil pulling each morning, you’ll likely notice that
you have a cleaner mouth and better morning breath, and it can
conveniently replace a morning tooth brushing. I floss once a day, brush
--- END PAGE 938 ---

--- PAGE 939 ---
once a day, and pull once a day, and my dentist reports very clean teeth
and gums when I go in for my quarterly cleaning.
Supermodeling Your Skin
Let’s talk about what you slather—or don’t slather—on your skin. The
host of chemicals and harsh irritants present in most personal care
products, as well as completely safe and natural solutions, will be covered
in detail in chapter 20, but in this section, I’ll share with you a few of the
more potent skincare compounds I’ve discovered and personally use on a
daily basis.
To enhance the radiance of my skin, I used to smear extra-virgin olive
oil on my face every morning. Olive oil? Yep, and here’s why: Olive oil
contains three major antioxidants—vitamin E, polyphenols, and
phytosterols. These antioxidants can protect skin from premature aging.
Vitamin E partly accounts for the antiaging benefits of olive oil because it
helps restore skin smoothness and protects against ultraviolet light.
Hydroxytyrosol, a rather rare compound found in olive oil, also prevents
free-radical damage to the skin, particularly sunlight damage. Olive oil
doesn’t clog pores and doesn’t give skin the annoying sheen that coconut
oil (another natural moisturizer and skin protectant) does, and the color
in a good extra-virgin olive oil can add tone and glow to the skin.
Although I often still use olive oil as a moisturizing and glow agent,
particularly when I’m traveling and I’ve forgotten other skincare products
(you’d be surprised at how simple it is to hunt down canola oil–free extra-
virgin olive oil at any hotel or airport restaurant), I’ve upgraded my
skincare protocol.
The long and short of it is this: Your skin is one of the largest organs in
your body (the largest is your muscles) and is colonized by a diverse array
of microorganisms. This is driven by the ecology of the skin surface, which
--- END PAGE 939 ---

--- PAGE 940 ---
is highly variable and depends on, among other things, geographic
location, the health of the host (you!), and exogenous environmental
factors, like whichever skin products you happen to be using. These skin
microbiota play a role in educating your immune system by passing
information from the environment into your body, allowing you to better
thrive in whichever geographical location you happen to be in and helping
you build a healthy and robust immune system. Yep—your skin
microbiome actually changes as you travel. Fascinating, eh? In research,
the human body plus all its microbes, including viruses, bacteria, fungi,
and mites, has even been referred to as a superorganism.
Of course, you won’t get any of the positive, immune-boosting,
complexion-enhancing effects of a healthy skin microbiome if you are (1)
constantly bathing yourself in antibacterial soaps and cosmetic toxins; or,
perhaps less well-known, (2) not feeding your skin compounds that allow
your good skin bacteria to flourish.
Unfortunately, olive oil—while rich in skin antioxidants—doesn’t
really feed the skin microbiota. There’s also little evidence that olive oil
alone can help produce youthful collagen and elastin, remove wrinkles,
shrink cellulite, nourish connective tissue, fade scars, kill bad bacteria, or
rejuvenate damaged skin. One of the reasons your skin ages and gets
wrinkles is that your body’s cellular defense systems deteriorate over time,
and the free radicals that are produced as part of normal metabolic
processes can overwhelm your skin’s natural antioxidant defenses. Olive
oil can help a little bit with this, but it isn’t a panacea.
As I age, I’ve been searching for a better solution. On a podcast
interview with Amitay Eshel, founder of Young Goose skincare, I realized
that my oil-only regimen was falling far short of what I needed to truly
protect and nourish my face. Having always been a guy who’s pretty
confused about why there are so many different types of lotions,
moisturizers, serums, and sprays available, I asked Amitay all the dumb
--- END PAGE 940 ---

--- PAGE 941 ---
questions I had about how to use all this stuff, including how often and in
what order.
So there are specific steps that I learned and now follow for my daily
morning and evening skincare routine—and I no longer have smoke
coming out of my ears when I open my bathroom drawer and try to figure
out what to do with all the different products. As a result, my skin seems
to be “reverse-aging” and growing more supple and less wrinkled—
particularly when I combine the following steps with a weekly derma
roller and clay mask treatment, along with a red-light mask for the face.
Given the thousands of dollars that some of my friends pay for fancy
medical spa facial treatments, my at-home protocol seems relatively
inexpensive, quick, and pretty darn effective.
STEP 1: CLEANSER
The first step in a proper skincare routine is cleansing. Cleansers are
designed to remove dirt, debris, and makeup. Cleansing in the morning is
necessary to remove oil and buildup that may happen overnight. Cleansing
at night is equally important, especially to remove makeup, if you wear it.
As I do my morning oil pulling, I jump straight into a quick thirty to sixty
seconds of cleansing.
STEP 2: TONER OR ASTRINGENT
A toner or astringent—often in the form of a spray—helps rebalance and
refine your skin, provides exfoliation, and can help restore hydration.
Astringents play an important role in minimizing the appearance of pores
and help rebalance the appearance of your complexion. This step should
be done prior to applying serum or moisturizer to help the skin retain the
moisture that they both provide. So, after cleansing, I simply spray on a
toner.
--- END PAGE 941 ---

--- PAGE 942 ---
STEP 3: MASK OR EXFOLIATOR
I only do it once a week, but a face mask is a way to get professional-
medical-spa-facial results at home, especially if you do derma-rolling
before applying the mask. Masks are applied to the skin’s surface to help
the beneficial ingredients soak in for a period of time before being
cleansed off. Masks come in different forms, such as creams, clays, sheets,
and gels. Creams and gels can help hydrate; clay-based masks can help
exfoliate and remove excess oils; and sheet masks can apply a multitude of
skin-beneficial ingredients that can help brighten, hydrate, and reduce the
appearance of redness. See below for more about the Alitura mask I use
once per week—and, yes, as a dedicated biohacker, I don a red-light-
producing face mask as soon as I get the clay mask on.
Exfoliating with a scrub two or three times a week can help remove
surface dead skin cells. Dead skin cell buildup can leave skin looking dull
and can contribute to oiliness, problem skin, dry skin, and skin aging. With
age, the natural exfoliation process slows down and causes skin to look
dull and tired. Exfoliation is also good for sun-damaged skin, oily skin, and
dry skin. I often use coffee grounds to exfoliate since their grainy texture
provides a perfect scrub texture and removes dead skin cells—and this is
of course a good, budget-friendly way to repurpose old coffee grounds.
Coffee is also rich in antioxidants, which can slow the skin-aging process.
Other good DIY scrubs are brown sugar, coconut oil mixed with sugar,
lemon juice and sugar, oatmeal and honey, or green tea and sugar or salt.
STEP 4: SERUM
Applying a serum is an optional step, but it can make a big difference in
skin glow and health. Serums are formulated with a high concentration of
key ingredients but are lightweight so they can be layered under creams or
lotions. This is why they are supposed to go on before moisturizer, not
after. You can think of a serum like a vitamin for your complexion: the
--- END PAGE 942 ---

--- PAGE 943 ---
more beneficial ingredients you provide to the surface layer of your skin,
the better it will appear. Look for ingredients like vitamin C for damage,
niacinamide for elasticity, hyaluronic acid for tone, retinol for collagen
synthesis, and green tea for oxidation from UV light or pollution.
STEP 5: MOISTURIZER
Applying a moisturizer helps hydrate the surface layer of the skin to help
keep it younger-looking. As you age, your body produces less of its natural
moisturizers, and collagen production slows down so that your skin loses
elasticity. Newer ingredients in moisturizers like seaweed and peptides
help restore moisture and improve skin’s texture. For the longest time, I
did only the cleanser and moisturizer, but now that I’ve added the other
steps included here, the moisturizer is far more effective.
STEP 6: EYE TREATMENT
The eye area deserves special attention. Why? Because it is so delicate, and
one of the first areas to show signs of aging, such as crow’s feet, dark
circles, puffiness, fine lines, and wrinkles. There are now creams and
serums with hyaluronic acid and peptides that are designed specifically for
the eyes, and taking a bit of time for eye TLC can be the icing on the cake
for your personal skincare routine, especially if you happen to be sleep-
deprived or are traveling and have puffy eyes or bags under your eyes.
Once I switched from using a regular serum on my eyes to using an eye-
specific serum, I noticed a profound difference in the appearance of the
area around my eyes.
On the resources page for this chapter, I’ll include links and discount
codes to some of my favorite sources for skincare products, including
Alitura, YoungGoose, Caldera Labs, and Greenfield Naturals.
In chapter 20, you’ll learn plenty more about age reversal, but for now,
it’s important to know that according to research, the perceived age of
--- END PAGE 943 ---

--- PAGE 944 ---
your face is likely a better predictor of your mortality risk than your actual
age, cognitive function, or health markers. The obvious way to track this
variable is to pay close attention to your “mirror, mirror on the wall” and
occasionally, without being too narcissistic, inspect your face for signs of
oxidative damage or excessive wrinkling. If you want to use a more
advanced and precise measurement, check out NOVOS Labs facial age test
at Novoslabs.com/faceage. This tool has been trained on twelve million
images and validated by human dermatological experts to give you an
approximate measurement of the biological age of your face.
Red-Light Mask
Red-light therapy masks utilize wavelengths of red and near-infrared light
to penetrate the skin at varying depths, stimulating cellular processes that
promote skin health and rejuvenation. When applied to the face, these
wavelengths of light are absorbed by cells in the skin, particularly by the
mitochondria, the energy-producing organelles within cells. This
absorption triggers a cascade of cellular responses that can lead to various
skin benefits.
Once-a-Week Mask
Of all these steps, the mask deserves a bit of special attention since it’s
probably the single biggest component of my skincare routine that gives me
the same type of results I would pay thousands of dollars for via micro
needling and wraps at a medical spa. I use a mask from Alitura that removes
dead skin, tightens pores, promotes blood flow, and encourages the growth
of new skin cells. It blends these nine nutrient-dense ingredients:• 
Freshwater pearl powder, which is a natural exfoliant that has the
remarkable ability to even skin tone, smooth wrinkles, eradicate sun
spots, reduce redness, and mitigate irritation. It is a well-known
--- END PAGE 944 ---

--- PAGE 945 ---
ingredient in traditional Chinese medicine and is used in tonics to treat
skin disorders and beautify the skin because of its high antioxidant,
protein, and mineral content. Indeed, research suggests that pearl
powder substantially increases total antioxidant capacity, particularly the
activity and levels of the antioxidants glutathione and superoxide
dismutase. Research also suggests that pearl powder considerably
suppresses lipid peroxidation, the oxidative degradation of fats in the
body. This means that not only is pearl powder a potent skin treatment,
but it can also treat age-related degenerative disorders.•

Grass-fed colostrum, which is a potent source of a variety of nutrients,
such as vitamins, minerals, amino acids, and enzymes. Colostrum is
particularly high in insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1). IGF-1 is widely
distributed in the skin and is concentrated in injuries, where it promotes
skin regeneration. Research suggests that topically applied IGF-1
stimulates collagen synthesis in skin fibroblasts, the growth of fibroblasts
and keratinocytes, and angiogenesis (the growth of new blood vessels),
all of which promote healthy skin elasticity and blood flow.•

American ginseng, which is known to eliminate impurities in the blood
and facilitate skin cell oxygenation. American ginseng also contains
numerous phytonutrients and has a high antioxidant content.•

10 percent L-ascorbic acid, the form of vitamin C that is absorbed most
rapidly through the skin. With consistent use, L-ascorbic acid can fade
sun spots, acne scars, and skin discoloration and reduce the appearance
of wrinkles. Topical L-ascorbic acid is also necessary for collagen
production and healthy skin tone and acts as an antioxidant to eliminate
free radicals in the skin.•

Rhassoul clay, which is rich in minerals that purify pores, balance oily
skin, and exfoliate dead skin cells, making it a potent detoxifying agent.
Research has shown that rhassoul clay can also improve skin elasticity.•

Green illite, which is a stable and efficient medicinal clay that is widely
used in natural healthcare.•

Calcium bentonite clay, or green desert clay, which contains minerals
that help remove toxins and clear up the skin. It also shrinks pores and
controls the overproduction of sebum, an oil produced in the sebaceous
glands in the skin. Calcium bentonite clay develops a mild electrical
charge when saturated with liquid, which makes it particularly helpful in
--- END PAGE 945 ---

--- PAGE 946 ---
extracting acne-producing toxins and metals and shrinking and
tightening inflamed pores.•

Kaolin clay, or illite clay, which acts as an antibacterial agent. Research
has shown that ion-exchanged kaolin clay can significantly reduce
bacterial load, skin inflammation, and wound morphology. Kaolin clay is
effective for treating irritated, sensitive skin because of its ability to
purify pores, treat acne, and reduce oil production.•

Organic kelp powder, which is a rich source of vitamin B12, vitamin E,
and other nutrients that soothe and heal the skin. The sodium alginate in
kelp is a topical cleanser and antioxidant that can promote a healthier
complexion by penetrating pores and drawing out impurities.
All these ingredients come blended in a powdered form, and once a week I
simply mix them with a few ounces of apple cider vinegar—a perfect liquid
blending agent for a mask—and smear the mixture on my face and hair, slap
on a red-light mask (see below), and then let it dry for about thirty minutes
before rinsing it off with warm water, closing my pores with cold water, and
finishing with a toner, serum, and moisturizer sequence.
Since beginning a weekly mask protocol, I’ve been approached by complete
strangers who ask me what I do to keep my face glowing and young, and by
family members and close friends who have commented on the reverse-
aging of my face. In other words, this stuff works, and just like brushing your
teeth, it’s far simpler than you’d think once you make it a habit!
Medical Spas
Although I tend to do most of my own face, hair, and beauty treatments at
home, my wife often visits a medical spa or cosmetic or dermatology clinic.
These places are increasingly popular locations to do even more advanced
protocols than you can get at home. One of my friends, Dr. Cameron
Chesnut, is a three-time podcast guest on the Ben Greenfield Life show, and
on the resources page for this chapter, I’ll link to some detailed discussions
we have had about the types of treatments he does at his Eterna5 clinic in
Spokane, Washington—treatments that can work for everything from
--- END PAGE 946 ---

--- PAGE 947 ---
reversing gray hair to growing new hair to eliminating wrinkles, tightening
skin and facial muscles, and much more.
Medical spas, also referred to as med spas or medi-spas, aim to provide the
best of both worlds by combining a traditional day spa ambience with
medical expertise and procedures that are typically only available at a
doctor’s office. The main difference between a medical spa and a day spa is
the types of treatments offered. Medical spas offer medical procedures that
cannot be performed at an average day spa, and they must be affiliated
with, overseen, or run by a medical doctor. While not every procedure is
performed by a doctor, they are supervised by a physician, usually a
dermatologist or plastic surgeon. Unlike day spas that focus on relaxation,
medical spas prioritize aesthetic results.
Medical spas and cosmetic and dermatology clinics offer a wide range of
services, including hair restoration, follicular transfer, stem cells, peptides,
exosomes, facelifts, Botox, laser treatments, acne treatments, facial fat
transfers, dermal fillers, CoolSculpting, hyaluronic acid injections, stretch
mark removal, temple rejuvenation, chin augmentation, and even
neuromodulators (injectables) such as Dysport, Jeuveau, and Xeomin, which
are invaluable tools that can help smooth away the wrinkles, lines, and
creases that make you appear older and more fatigued than you feel.
One of the key mechanisms by which red-light therapy masks improve
skin health is by promoting collagen production. Collagen is a protein that
provides structural support to the skin, helping to maintain its firmness,
elasticity, and overall youthfulness. By stimulating collagen synthesis, red-
light therapy can reduce the appearance of wrinkles, fine lines, and sagging
skin, resulting in a smoother and more youthful complexion.
Additionally, red-light therapy masks can enhance cellular repair and
regeneration processes in the skin. This includes accelerating the healing
of wounds, reducing inflammation, and improving skin tone and texture.
The increased cellular activity induced by red-light therapy can also help
--- END PAGE 947 ---

--- PAGE 948 ---
repair damage caused by environmental stressors such as UV radiation
and pollution, leading to a healthier and more resilient skin barrier.
Furthermore, red-light therapy has been shown to increase blood flow
and circulation in the skin, which can deliver oxygen and nutrients more
efficiently to skin cells while aiding in the removal of waste products.
Improved circulation can contribute to a brighter complexion, reduce the
appearance of dark spots and hyperpigmentation, and promote skin
vitality. Overall, red-light therapy offers a noninvasive and convenient way
to improve the health and appearance of facial skin, with potential
benefits for individuals seeking to address signs of aging, acne,
inflammation, or other skin concerns.
I use the HigherDOSE mask, which has settings for either a ten- or a
twenty-minute session. This is far more convenient than trying to smash
my face up against a red-light panel: I can walk around, talk on the phone,
get work done, etc. while the red-light therapy takes place. A full-body red-
light bed can also target your face, and companies like 10X even offer
packages that include several more advanced full-body beauty biohacks,
such as a Superhuman package that features a red-light bed, oxygen
breathing device, and PEMF mat.
THE LAST WORD
Phew! This chapter may have seemed overwhelming in terms of the host
of methods you can use to improve your symmetry and give yourself a step
up in your career, beauty, physical performance, sleep, and more. So, for
you and your family, let’s review a few of the biggest tips from this
chapter:
• Eat foods rich in vitamin D, like fatty fish, egg yolks, and butter, and in
vitamin K , like natto and grass-fed butter, or consider using a D/K2 2
--- END PAGE 948 ---

--- PAGE 949 ---
supplement. For more on the importance of these fat-soluble vitamins,
I highly recommend the book Vitamin K and the Calcium Paradox by
2 Dr. Kate Rheaume-Bleue.
• Chew each bite of food twenty-five to forty times, and for additional
masseter hypertrophy (increasing the jaw muscle and width), consider
switching to a special form of jaw-strengthening gum called mastic
gum, although falim gum is also quite good. Feed your children whole,
unprocessed foods that they can chew (although I recommend waiting
to introduce solids until a baby is at least six months old).
• Train yourself to breathe through your nose, don’t habitually mouth-
breathe, and practice proper tongue posture by keeping the tongue
resting lightly against the top of the palate. On BoundlessBook.com/17,
there is a link to an article and research by Dr. Mike Mew that focuses
on how tongue forces can remodel your face and bring your maxilla
bone forward, which affects your entire face and mouth structure.
• Limit stress. Cortisol shows on your face because it leads to shallow
chest breathing and the tightening of the jaw and neck muscles.
• Switch to a holistic dentist if you’re not already using one.
• Do exercises for your posture each day. Your ears should align with
your shoulders, hips, and feet, and your back should be straight. The
type of forward-head posture associated with mouth breathing affects
your back and hips as well as your facial symmetry.
• Set up your sleeping environment and sleeping position to enhance
symmetry during the approximate third of your life that you spend in
bed.
• Oil-pull for five to ten minutes each morning.
• Use natural ingredients and compounds to enhance the beauty and
symmetry of your skin—they make a much bigger difference than
you’d think.
--- END PAGE 949 ---

--- PAGE 950 ---
• For medical spa–esque results at home, consider setting up a regular
sequence of cleanser, toner, exfoliation or mask, serum, moisturizer,
eye care, and red-light therapy.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Mouth breathing is a big cause of facial asymmetries. So, for the next
twenty-four hours, see if you can breathe only through your nose, even
during exercise, unless you’re doing something for which nasal breathing
proves extremely difficult, such as singing, swimming laps, or getting deep
into the throes of a high-intensity interval training session. In addition,
review the practical tips above and identify at least three that you can
implement this week.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/17. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 950 ---

--- PAGE 951 ---
18
SEX
TANTRA, ORGASMS, LIBIDO, SEXUAL
SATISFACTION, HORMONES, AND
BEYOND
Lying facedown and buck-naked, I grimaced and squirmed on the medical
examination table. Behind me, a physician assistant clad in blue scrubs
repeatedly jammed a foot-long needle into and out of my spine and butt. Each
time the entire needle was fully embedded, she yanked it back out, causing a
loud sucking sound to emanate from my fat tissue. “You should’ve eaten more
--- END PAGE 951 ---

--- PAGE 952 ---
doughnuts this week—there’s not a whole lot of marrow back here for the stem
cells.”
I gritted my teeth, hoping the bruising and bleeding would subside before
my foray into the Obstacle Course Racing World Championships just two
weeks away, and pondering whether I’d made a mistake to attempt a fringe
stem cell–harvesting procedure so close to my big race. But the pain from
the fat-marrow-harvesting syringe was actually slightly milder than I’d
anticipated, possibly thanks to the pain-killing lidocaine injection seeping
through my spine, or perhaps thanks to the flood of endorphins still
circulating through my veins from a procedure the day before: an injection
of platelet-rich plasma into my crotch, accompanied by acoustic sound
waves blasting on my gonads and the use of a high-pressure digital pump
to build new blood vessels in my nether regions.
Welcome to a typical weekend in my life. The harvesting of my own
precious fat was meant to collect and concentrate therapeutic stem cells,
which can theoretically be used to rapidly heal my body should I get hit by
a bus or suffer a horrible disease. But the process can also be used—in this
case along with the sexual organ injections, sound waves, and pump—as
fodder for a seasonal Men’s Health magazine article entitled (brace
yourself) “New Year, New Dick.”
So who the heck am I? Some kind of masochistic playboy? A man
obsessed with my own crotch? An orthorexic, hypochondriac hacker
preoccupied with fringe medical procedures that would keep me a teenage
boy forever?
Hardly. Within a few hours of rolling off the examination table and
waving goodbye to the physician assistant, I stepped onto a plane to travel
home to my wife and twin boys, my serene farm in the forest, my organic
vegetable garden, my goats and chickens, my guitar, and my quiet, peaceful
daily routine. Admittedly, my home also contains tens of thousands of
dollars’ worth of cutting-edge, life-extending, performance-enhancing,
--- END PAGE 952 ---

--- PAGE 953 ---
cognition-boosting biohacks—from sound-healing machines to hypoxic
training units to high-speed vibration platforms to microdoses of plant
medicines to infrared saunas to hyper-chilled endless pools and beyond. I
live a life immersed in an odd yet highly thrilling marriage of ancestral
wisdom and modern science, tapping each day into what it means to be
fully human and reaching into every nook and cranny of full mind, body,
and spirit optimization.
But among my forays into relentless self-experimentation, I have
experienced many twists on sexual health hacking. High-intensity acoustic
sound wave therapy blasting my crotch? Been there, done that—multiple
times, in fact. Digital penis pump? Own it. Tantric sex? Yes, even the whole
reverse-orgasm concept. Gas station dick pills? Embarrassingly, yes. Red-
light therapy on the balls? A daily must at the office. Platelet-rich plasma
injections? Sure. I’ve even gotten a full-body stem cell makeover at Docere
Clinics in Utah, complete with cosmetic and sexual enhancement,
including exosome-upgraded bone marrow stem cells from my own hips
injected everywhere in my body—and I do mean everywhere (see chapter
12 for details). And, at Advanced Rejuvenation in Florida, I gritted my
teeth as a 12-inch needle was slid into my prostate gland to inject
methylene blue and ozone for prostate, semen, and sperm optimization.
In this chapter, you will discover not only the host of health benefits of
good sex but also how much sex is too much, the ideal frequency of
lovemaking and orgasms, the best sex-supporting foods and supplements,
the best sexual exercises, and, as you’ve probably already guessed, a few
little-known sex biohacks. Ultimately, after reading this chapter, you’ll
have an intimate understanding of how to optimize hormones (a crucial
component of libido and sexual performance), spruce up your sex life, and
experience a level of sexual health and satisfaction that most people never
tap into.
--- END PAGE 953 ---

--- PAGE 954 ---
HOW MUCH SEX IS TOO MUCH?
Of course, as great as sex is for you, you don’t need to spend every waking
hour as a sex-obsessed maniac in the bedroom, the fancy hotel, and the
heart-shaped hot tub. It turns out there are philosophies and scientific
fields that address how health, longevity, and sexual performance can be
influenced by frequency of ejaculation or orgasm. Admittedly, teachings
and research on the frequency of orgasm in women are scant, but there is
plenty of theory and research in men.
The Taoist Theory of Ejaculation
In the Eastern philosophy of Tao, there is a foundational sex guideline
formulated over centuries that is repeatedly emphasized in Taoist
literature: that a man must preserve and retain his semen in order to
enhance his strength, health, and longevity. This Taoist philosophy
maintains that men who keep their ejaculation to a minimum and retain
their semen can grow stronger and have clearer minds. Men who practice
this type of ejaculation control supposedly also maintain higher levels of
testosterone, sperm, and semen and have a more voracious sexual
appetite.
Taoist theory also teaches that semen retention via reduced
ejaculation frequency strengthens the brain, claiming that the essential
nutrients in semen are absorbed by the prostate when they don’t seep out
elsewhere, and that they can then enter the bloodstream and circulate
throughout the body to nourish other tissues and organs, including the
brain. Since semen and cerebrospinal fluids contain the same basic
ingredients, preserving semen could theoretically nourish the brain by
making more essential nutrients available to it.
--- END PAGE 954 ---

--- PAGE 955 ---
These Taoist principles are built on the premise that the human body
is endowed with a limited supply of primordial energy and that your
lifespan (including your sexual lifespan) is determined both by the rate at
which this energy is used up and by your lifestyle, which either does or
does not replenish and strengthen that energy. Since a man’s life force—
which is commonly referred to as his jing—is theoretically used up with
each ejaculation, ejaculation frequency should be regulated, the theory
goes, to allow the body to rebuild before the jing is used up again through
ejaculation.
What the Evidence Says
So what does more modern medical evidence suggest? Studies do indeed
show that men experience a significant loss of zinc with each ejaculation,
which is probably why eating foods high in zinc, such as pumpkin seeds,
shellfish, or even black ant powder (yes, that’s a thing) before or after sex
is recommended. Long-term excessive ejaculation may cause chronic zinc
deficiency, which can lead to chronic fatigue, mental confusion, and
significant loss of sexual drive. Research published by the National
Institutes of Health has found that after seven days of not ejaculating,
men’s testosterone levels reached 145.7 percent of their baseline. There is
also evidence that when ejaculation frequency exceeds the capacity of the
body to fully replenish semen, men can experience chronic fatigue, low
resistance to stress, loss of sexual drive, loss of focus, and irritability.
On the flip side, a 2004 study in the Journal of the American Medical
Association concluded that ejaculation frequency does not increase the risk
of prostate cancer, and other studies suggest that frequent ejaculations
may actually decrease the risk of developing prostate cancer. According to
researchers at the Boston University School of Public Health, ejaculating
at least twenty-one times a month may reduce a man’s prostate cancer
--- END PAGE 955 ---

--- PAGE 956 ---
risk. Of course, the question remains whether in the study, men who were
healthier in the first place were the ones with more ejaculations, so their
health could have had absolutely no relation to ejaculation frequency.
Then there’s the testosterone component. There haven’t been any
extremely compelling studies on sex frequency and testosterone
correlation in young men. But one big observational study on 1,226 men
aged seventy or above found that regular sex helped diminish the decline
in testosterone that naturally occurs with age. The study authors reported:
“We found a consistent association among older men followed over two
years between the decline in sexual activity and desire, but not in erectile
function, with a decrease in serum [testosterone]. Although these
observational findings cannot determine causality, the small magnitude of
the decrease in serum T raises the hypothesis that reduced sexual function
may reduce serum T rather than the reverse.”
One small study also found out that men having sex in a sex club had,
on average, 72 percent more salivary testosterone after sex (I am not
endorsing sex club visits as a staple in your sexual health routine, but just
sayin’). Interestingly, men at the club who were only masturbating while
watching sexual acts raised T by only 11 percent. The logistical questions I
have about how this study was conducted are obviously numerous.
Another study showed that abstaining from sex for three weeks can
increase testosterone slightly, and a follow-up study verified that—for
testosterone-increasing purposes—the optimal ejaculation frequency for
men is about once every seven days. The study noted that on the seventh
day of abstinence, there was a 146 percent increase in testosterone
production. But too long a period of abstinence—over three months—can
actually suppress testosterone production. Granted, there are other
elements involved with frequency of sex, such as happiness, connection,
longevity, and prostate cancer risk, but it does appear that for
--- END PAGE 956 ---

--- PAGE 957 ---
testosterone-production purposes, having sex once a week (not
masturbation, but sex with a partner) is a good frequency.
Then there’s the age-old debate about having sex before a game or big
workout. When it comes to sports and competition, many Western and
Eastern athletic coaches advise their athletes not to ejaculate the day of a
competition because it is scientifically documented that testosterone
levels might drop immediately after ejaculation and theoretically diminish
athletic performance. One sexual performance anecdote, mainly derived
from athletes, is that sex the previous day or even many days before
competition somehow hinders performance.
But this theory has actually been researched and may be non-scientific
lore. For example, one study comparing the maximal effort on a cycle
ergometer test found out that having sex two hours before performance
slightly diminishes recovery capacity, while having sex ten hours before
the event had absolutely no effect on performance or recovery. Another
study found that having sexual intercourse twelve hours prior to maximal
treadmill effort didn’t produce any negative effects on performance,
though I’m convinced it could depend on how long or rigorous your romp
in the bedroom is.
Why Sex Is So Good for You
Pardon the expression, but I suspect your mind will be blown by the
seriously legit biological and spiritual benefits that regularly getting busy
with a partner can produce. These effects go far beyond orgasms or
propagation of the human race and include the following.
--- END PAGE 957 ---

--- PAGE 958 ---
1.

A stronger immune system: Researchers have discovered a direct
correlation between sexual activity a few times a week and higher
salivary levels of immunoglobulin A (IgA), an antibody that helps fight
infections and the common cold. In contrast, IgA levels were lowest in
people who had no sex or lots of sex (more on excessive sex later in this
chapter).2.

Less depression and stress: Contact with semen during intercourse has
an antidepressant effect on women. Regular intercourse also makes
blood pressure more resilient to stress, reduces overall psychological
stress, and reduces plasma and salivary cortisol while producing
beneficial mental health effects.3. 
Better brainpower: A study on rodents found that sexual activity
increases neurons in the hippocampus, the section of the brain that
stores memories. In addition, sex may increase analytical thinking
capabilities.
--- END PAGE 958 ---

--- PAGE 959 ---
4.

Improved physical fitness: Depending on how you do the act, a half hour
of sex can burn close to 150 calories (that counts for at least a couple of
those chocolate-covered strawberries). By the way, the reverse is also
true: frequent exercise has been shown to enhance sexual performance.5. 
Reduced pain: Oxytocin is the trust hormone that makes you want to
snuggle up to your partner after sex, and it also reduces stress and
promotes feelings of calm and well-being. In addition, sex causes a
release of serotonin, endorphins, and phenylethylamine, which are all
hormones that generate intense feelings of pleasure while eliminating
pain. This is likely why studies have shown that intercourse can stop
migraines and lower the discomfort of arthritis.
--- END PAGE 959 ---

--- PAGE 960 ---
6. Improved sleep: Following an orgasm and even during sex, the brain
releases norepinephrine, serotonin, oxytocin, and vasopressin, all of which
can help you fall asleep faster and increase the amount of time you spend
in deep sleep. Men are especially likely to succumb to the sleep-inducing
effects of sex because the prefrontal cortex, the part of the brain
responsible for interpreting and responding to new information, slows
significantly in men after orgasm.7.

Enhanced sense of smell: After sex, the body produces the hormone
prolactin. Prolactin can generate new neurons in the olfactory bulb, which
is the part of the brain that controls how you understand and react to
smells.8.

Antiaging effects: Studies have shown that couples who had intercourse
three or more times a week appeared on average ten years younger than
their chronological age. Orgasms also trigger the release of estrogen in
both men and women, which can improve hair and skin quality, making
people look more attractive.
--- END PAGE 960 ---

--- PAGE 961 ---
9. Better heart health: Research suggests that sex reduces the risk of stroke
and coronary heart disease in men. Men who have sex once a month or
less are 45 percent more likely to contract cardiovascular disease than
those who have sex more frequently. Research also suggests that men
with better overall health have higher libidos and therefore more sex
overall, which creates a positive feedback loop that further builds a
healthy cardiovascular system. Interestingly, results from most studies
suggest that high sex frequency is positively related to later risk of
cardiovascular events for men but not for women, whereas good sex
quality (a high perceived rating of sexual satisfaction) seems to protect
women but not men from cardiovascular risk in later life.10.

Regular menstrual periods: The odorless pheromones in male
perspiration can have a significant effect on a woman’s mind and body.
Scientists have found that women exposed to male sweat are calmer and
more relaxed. These women also experience smaller changes in their
levels of luteinizing hormone, which controls the menstrual cycle. The
stress-reducing effect of sex is another contributing factor in maintaining
regular periods.11.

Lower blood pressure: High blood pressure can cause erectile
dysfunction in men and reduced arousal and ability to orgasm in women.
But multiple studies show a link between low testosterone and high
--- END PAGE 961 ---

--- PAGE 962 ---
blood pressure, and the spikes in testosterone associated with sexual
activity may help lower blood pressure in men and women.12.

Possible lower risk of prostate cancer: There is a link between regular
ejaculation and prostate health. Some studies suggest that sex flushes
out any carcinogens in the prostate gland. On the other hand, a recent
study showed that frequent sexual activity in young men (in their
twenties and early thirties) could actually increase the risk of developing
prostate cancer. But frequent ejaculation in middle-aged or older men
(age fifty and above) decreased disease risk. In other words, the verdict
is still out on this one—and later in this chapter, I’ll cut through the
confusion and address what frequency of sex means for your health.13. 
Lowered risk of pregnancy complications: Frequent sexual intercourse
and exposure to semen can reduce women’s risk of developing a serious
pregnancy complication called pre-eclampsia, which can cause swollen
extremities, headaches, nausea, and seizures. This is because a protein
found in semen called HLG-A can regulate women’s immune systems.
--- END PAGE 962 ---

--- PAGE 963 ---
14. Enhanced sperm: Studies show that men who ejaculate daily for seven
days have higher-quality sperm at the end of the week, and the sperm’s
rate of DNA fragmentation drops from 34 to 26 percent, meaning it is
more likely to fertilize an egg. This is likely because frequent ejaculation
means that sperm spends less time in the testicular ducts and is therefore
less likely to be damaged.
I find it interesting that expressing and receiving the emotion of love
combined with experiencing the physical act of sex builds just about every
health base you need to cover, which makes frequently loving and making
love one of the most powerful things you can do to become boundless.
Speaking of which, if you want to enjoy a bit more time in the
bedroom, you may be interested in shortening the amount of necessary
recovery time between ejaculations, known as the refractory period.
Typically, the length of the refractory period varies greatly from person to
person, from a few minutes to twenty-four hours or longer. But there are
methods—both scientifically proven and anecdotal—to shorten it. Some
people successfully use pelvic floor exercises such as Kegels or pelvic floor
muscle training (PFMT). For example, whenever I do breathwork, I
squeeze my glutes and the same muscles I would squeeze to stop the flow
of urine every time I inhale, then relax those muscles on the exhale. A
muscle trainer called the EMSELLA is an electrical muscle-stimulation
seat that can do this for you, which can be handy if you need to train your
brain to properly recruit your pelvic musculature. Rectally inserted
electrical muscle-stimulation devices commonly sold for incontinence or
prolapse can achieve similar results. Another option is any medication
belonging to a class of drugs called PDE5 inhibitors, which work by
increasing blood flow to your penis when you feel sexually aroused. The
most popular of these is a drug you’ve likely heard of: Viagra. Finally, some
men swear by a quick carbohydrate-rich snack after the first orgasm, like a
few bites of dark chocolate, a handful of blueberries, or a sip of a sugary
--- END PAGE 963 ---

--- PAGE 964 ---
energy drink or sports gel, which is especially useful to know if you follow
a low-carb or keto diet that seems to have deleteriously affected your sex
life.
How It Works in Practice
So let’s say you do decide to experiment with ejaculation frequency. How
can you, in practical terms, pull this off (excuse the pun)? The most
common system is to simply limit ejaculation to once every few days. One
popular theory among Tao practitioners is to base ejaculation frequency
on intercourse frequency, with ejaculation occurring only two or three
times out of every ten sexual encounters. One Tao theorist, Sun Simiao,
recommends ejaculation no more than once every twenty days for men
over fifty and no more than once every one hundred days for men over
sixty. Another Tao theorist suggests that ejaculation frequency should be
regulated according to the seasons; he recommends ejaculating no more
than once every three days during spring, twice a month in summer and
fall, and not at all during the cold of winter! Many men I know, including
Pedram Shojal, author of The Art of Stopping Time, practice reduced
ejaculation frequency as a lifestyle.
In his book, Pedram recommends the following frequency:
Twenties: All you want
Thirties: Three or four times per week
Forties: Two or three times per week
Fifties: One or two times per week
Sixty and above: Once a week or less, depending on health
From a practical standpoint, you injaculate rather than ejaculate by
squeezing the same muscles you’d squeeze if you were trying to stop the
--- END PAGE 964 ---

--- PAGE 965 ---
flow of urine while breathing the energy up your spine. And if you get too
close? Jam your fingers and apply pressure into your perineum, the soft
tissue between your scrotum and your anus. I learned this tactic in the
book The Multi-Orgasmic Man, which is an excellent read if you’d like to
learn more.
But it’s much harder than you can possibly imagine to finish a good
romp in the bedroom without blowing your load. Call me a weakling, but I
lasted about a month attempting sex without ejaculation. It’s difficult
enough for a busy father of twins to find a quiet lovemaking moment with
his wife. When those times arise, I don’t want to hold anything back.
Cookie Monster’s balls were never so blue, but patience can be a virtue.
The beauty of this tactic for you male readers is that it’s free, aside from
the tranquilizers you might need to keep from transforming into a pent-
up, angry, moody, aggressive, blue-balled man on those days you decide to
have sex but not ejaculate. After having sex frequently without ejaculating,
I felt like someone had handed me a double espresso, especially when it
was a morning romp. I had a lot more energy during my midday workout.
At night, though? I missed that cuddly, post-sex, oxytocin-induced coma. I
felt like I needed to take a sedative to get to sleep post-intercourse on
those nonejaculation days.
So ultimately, the decision of how frequently you’re going to ejaculate
is up to you, but I find that in an era of loneliness, internet addiction, and
reduced personal interactions, most human beings need to be having more
sex, not less. If you’re going to experiment with reduced ejaculation
frequency, it’s important to understand that it does not mean less physical
interaction or even less sex. It simply means that you may want to think
twice before you blow your load every time.
A Note for Women
--- END PAGE 965 ---

--- PAGE 966 ---
Interestingly, things are a bit different for women. Although women do
indeed ejaculate, there isn’t much research on the frequency of ejaculation
in women. But there is research on the frequency of vaginal intercourse.
Specifically, women who have more sex (once per week or more) have
better mental health and higher levels of emotional satisfaction, higher
heart rate variability, lower resting heart rate, lower levels of the
inflammatory markers homocysteine and hs-CRP, and lower risk of
mortality.
Unlike for men, neither being sexually active nor frequency of sex is
significantly related to cardiovascular risks for women, but the majority of
data suggests that the more sex a woman has (within reason), the better—
and, as you learned earlier, the perceived quality of a woman’s sex life is
correlated with decreased cardiovascular risk.
THE BEST FOODS AND
SUPPLEMENTS FOR SEX
Whether you’re doing the deed once a day, once a week, or once a month,
there are herbs, supplements, brews, and blends that have been proven to
enhance libido, orgasm, blood flow, and other determinants of sexual
performance and satisfaction—all without your needing to swallow a
handful of the infamous gas station dick pills.
Maca
Multiple studies show that maca, a root vegetable, enhances libido. Maca
can treat sexual dysfunction caused by selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs), a kind of antidepressant. It can also mildly benefit men
with erectile dysfunction from other causes. Moreover, preliminary animal
--- END PAGE 966 ---

--- PAGE 967 ---
evidence suggests that red maca might improve prostate health and
reduce anxiety. My favorite way to use maca is to toss a teaspoon to a
tablespoon into my morning smoothie or afternoon tea, as it bestows a
pleasant nutty flavor to just about any smoothie or beverage.
Cocoa
Low nitric oxide (NO) levels can cause blood vessels to narrow, leading to
poor circulation, which can result in erections that are softer and more
difficult to maintain. Just like the flavonoids in grape seeds and pine bark,
epicatechin and other flavonoids in cocoa can help support NO levels,
thus improving blood flow and alleviating this type of erectile dysfunction.
Chocolate and red wine used to be my backstage bodybuilding go-to for
enhancing blood flow and vascularity, and a chunk of dark chocolate along
with a glass of wine (which contains the procyanidins and nitric oxide
precursors you’ll discover shortly) after dinner is perfect if sex is in the
plans.
--- END PAGE 967 ---

--- PAGE 968 ---
Yohimbine
Yohimbine is an alkaloid found in the bark of the African yohimbe tree. It
is a stimulant often used to increase rates of fat oxidation but has also
been shown in research to increase virility and erectile rigidity. Viagra and
Cialis make for better erections but have no direct effect on libido;
yohimbine, however, can have a direct, positive effect on libido. Problem
is, yohimbine can also make you extremely anxious and jittery—not a state
you want to be in for a night of romance (although, interestingly, those
with higher-than-normal aerobic fitness levels seem to be partially
protected from this effect). One supplement I’ve used successfully that
doesn’t seem to cause this effect is JOYMODE, which is a powdered
combination of yohimbine, arginine, L-citrulline, and ginseng, along with
vitamin C, which protects vessel-enlarging nitric oxide from degradation.
This stuff works like gangbusters (for both me and my wife).
Eurycoma Longifolia and Cistanche
Eurycoma longifolia is a potent extract that’s also known by several other
names, such as tongkat ali, Malaysian ginseng, and longjack. Evidence
supports its traditional use as a libido enhancer, and in addition to its
aphrodisiac effects, eurycoma can increase sperm production and may
directly act as a pro-erectile agent. Ultimately, based on the research to
date, eurycoma appears to be an effective boner pill if that’s what you’re
looking for.
--- END PAGE 968 ---

--- PAGE 969 ---
A similar compound that I’ve personally found much more success
with is cistanche, known in Chinese herbal medicine as “the stalk
enlarger” (chuckle). Legend is that Genghis Khan consumed cistanche
daily. Considering the guy’s stamina and the fact that 8 percent of Asia’s
population are said to be his descendants (that is one in two hundred
people worldwide!), it’s one that I can recommend even more highly than
eurycoma. I mix some up in coffee or tea before date night.
Fenugreek
In Ayurvedic medicine, fenugreek is called methi (its Hindi name) and is
used to increase virility. In healthy men, high doses appear to significantly
increase libido and sexual satisfaction. Considering that fenugreek is also
a fantastic digestif and a seed you can add to stir-fries, sauté with, or
sprinkle on salads, it makes sense to have some in your pantry anyway.
Osthole
--- END PAGE 969 ---

--- PAGE 970 ---
Research shows that osthole, also known as osthol and cnidium monnieri,
acts on the same physiological mechanisms as sildenafil, the active
ingredient in Viagra. It can enhance erectile function, specifically by
stimulating the release of nitric oxide, which relaxes blood vessels and
appears to increase both male and female sexual performance and arousal.
It has also been shown in rodent models to raise testosterone.
Interestingly, osthole may also help control blood sugar by increasing the
expression of GLUT4 sugar transporters in skeletal muscle, can improve
cognitive performance by increasing the brain’s plasticity and BDNF, can
inhibit histone deacetylase, which can increase gene expression in areas of
the brain related to memory and learning performance, and is currently
being researched as an ingredient in anticancer drugs!
Procyanidins
Like the flavonoids in cocoa, procyanidins and other flavonoids in pine
bark and grape seeds can help support nitric oxide levels, which aids in
preventing the narrowing of blood vessels and thus ameliorates certain
types of erectile dysfunction. Pycnogenol, a patented pine bark extract
standardized to 65 to 75 percent procyanidin, is the best-studied source of
procyanidins. Grape seed extract is cheaper, but its effect on blood flow is
less reliable and could take longer to develop (up to a month). To
approximate the effects of procyanidins, you can knock back a glass of a
--- END PAGE 970 ---

--- PAGE 971 ---
tannin-rich red wine. Just be careful with the alcohol, which is a great
social lubricant but a known libido and sexual performance suppressor.
Nitric Oxide–Producing Foods
From arugula to watermelon to dark chocolate to red wine to pumpkin
seeds, extra-virgin olive oil, beets, avocados, celery, and beyond, a host of
foods can increase blood flow or enhance sexual health. While there is
certainly lore out there that the best way to bump up hormones is to eat a
big fatty cut of steak drenched in butter, you’ll likely find that all this
accomplishes is a food baby in your tummy and a slightly comatose
feeling. Instead, I’d recommend this powerful sex salad recipe that
includes a ton of nitric oxide precursors: to a bed of arugula and spinach,
add cubed or sliced cooked beets and carrots, a handful of chopped
walnuts, sautéed red onions, a few chunks of red apple, and a sprinkling of
fenugreek seeds. Dress with extra-virgin olive oil and balsamic vinaigrette.
Serve with a glass of red wine and a chunk of dark chocolate, then let the
good times roll.
--- END PAGE 971 ---

--- PAGE 972 ---
Other Supplements
Finally, if you’re deficient in certain vitamins and minerals, supplementing
with them can drastically affect fertility and sexual performance. These
nutrients include creatine, vitamin D, vitamin K, magnesium, zinc, and
cholesterol-based compounds such as DHEA. To cover your hormonal and
sexual bases, I recommend supplementing daily with 5 g creatine, 2,000
IU vitamin D, 150 mcg vitamin K , 400 mg magnesium, 50 mg zinc, and 25
2mg DHEA.
BIOHACKING THE BEDROOM
Okay, okay. Perhaps the whole dark-chocolate-and-red-wine thing is old
news to you. Perhaps you’ve covered your vitamin and nutrient bases.
Perhaps you’ve even gotten your hands on some avant-garde Chinese
herbs. But now you want the fringe stuff: the best sexual exercises, sex
--- END PAGE 972 ---

--- PAGE 973 ---
workouts, and biohacks for a better sex life, with a particular focus on
techniques, experiences, and stories about what I’ve personally
experimented with. I’m about to spill the beans on everything I’ve tried
and found success with (and there’s plenty) to boost testosterone, libido,
and overall bedroom performance. And ladies, don’t fret: there’s plenty in
this section for you, too. Let’s begin.
1. Try Weightlifting for Your Genitals
My friend Jordan Gray, a relationship expert and sex coach, first alerted
me to the towel technique for enhancing your sexual muscles. It is just like
it sounds: you hang a slightly wet towel over your erection and practice
repeatedly contracting to lift the towel, eventually progressing to larger
and wetter towels. My former podcast guest Kim Anami, who lifts
everything from kettlebells to coconuts with her vagina, teaches a similar
technique to women with a jade egg. My personal version of the towel
technique involves the use of the Private Gym, a magnetic resistance
device designed especially for a man’s junk. At BoundlessBook.com/18,
you’ll find a link to the nitty-gritty details of my thirty-day training block
with the Private Gym. It’s an entertaining read, trust me (spoiler alert: it
works, but it gets exhausting after a while).
2. Sleep, but Not Too Much
Yawn. I know, I kicked this horse to death in chapter 7. But the majority of
the daily testosterone release in men occurs during sleep. Fragmented
sleep and obstructive sleep apnea are associated with reduced
testosterone levels in both men and women. A study published in the
Journal of the American Medical Association found out that one week of sleep
restriction (five hours of sleep per night) decreased testosterone
--- END PAGE 973 ---

--- PAGE 974 ---
production by 10 to 15 percent! But don’t sleep too much: studies have also
shown that sleep’s effect on testosterone has an inverted U-shaped curve.
Testosterone production increases with increasing sleep duration up to
ten hours, after which it decreases.
3. Get Lean, but Not Too Lean
It is generally noted in research that the higher your body fat percentage,
the lower your testosterone. The correlation works especially in the
direction of getting leaner, which seems to instantly raise testosterone
levels. Longitudinal analyses showing that baseline hormone levels don’t
change anthropometric measures imply that body composition affects
hormone levels, not the reverse. Yep, you read that right: being lean gives
you high testosterone more than high testosterone makes you lean. More
body fat also usually increases aromatase enzyme activity, which converts
more testosterone to estrogen. But you don’t need to be an emaciated
marathoner—too little body fat can actually be detrimental to
testosterone production. It has been estimated that a male body fat
percentage between 8 and 14 percent is optimal for testosterone
production.
4. Train for Testosterone
While strength training and muscle gains often reduce body fat percentage
(which leads to higher testosterone levels), they have an independent
effect on elevating testosterone. Having more muscle mass is positively
correlated with higher testosterone. Lifting medium-heavy weights
explosively can stimulate short-term and long-term testosterone
production. Training progressively by adding more weight nearly every
--- END PAGE 974 ---

--- PAGE 975 ---
time you train causes your body to adapt to higher and higher testosterone
levels via neuromuscular adaptations.
Follow these basic principles when strength training for optimal
testosterone production:
• Lift explosively.
• Lift heavy enough, but not too heavy (to have an optimum force-
velocity curve, because moving weight fast can have a good effect on
testosterone).
• Use compound lifts to activate large amounts of muscle mass.
• Focus on body parts that have a high density of androgen receptor
sites (particularly the chest, shoulders, and legs).
• Do sprint intervals to maximize force production in minimal time and
to activate fast-twitch muscle fibers.
• Do as much work on as much muscle tissue as you can as quickly as
possible.
If your gym time is limited, the deadlift and squat are, in my opinion,
the king and queen of testosterone-boosting exercises, likely due to the
high number of androgen receptors in leg muscles. Of course, as you can
probably guess, too much endurance training or chronic cardio can lower
testosterone levels significantly.
Women Need Testosterone, Too
Lately, my wife, along with a host of other female biohackers, has begun
applying a dab of testosterone cream clitorally prior to sex, for what she
describes as a “screamin’ good” orgasm. Turns out they’re on to something.
While testosterone is often advertised and heralded as the ultimate male
hormone, women need adequate amounts of testosterone, too, and it is
produced by the adrenal glands and ovaries. Although their blood
--- END PAGE 975 ---

--- PAGE 976 ---
testosterone levels are significantly lower than men’s, women start to
produce more of the hormone during puberty, and levels peak for most
women in their early twenties (provided they’re not using hormonal
contraceptives, which unfortunately suppress nearly all normal sex hormone
production). By the time a woman has reached menopause, she may have
only half the level of testosterone she once had.
Because testosterone not only helps maintain muscle and bone mass in
women but also contributes to sex drive, monitoring and maintaining
adequate testosterone levels is important for women, especially as they age.
Several older women I know who use bioidentical hormone replacement
therapy swear by the libido-, mood-, and sex-enhancing effects of just a
touch of testosterone cream applied vaginally (it also assists with vaginal
dryness).
One study in the New England Journal of Medicine evaluated sexuality and
quality of life in women with low blood levels of testosterone. After the
researchers raised the participants’ testosterone levels via a medicated skin
patch, their overall health and sexuality dramatically improved.
Testosterone has powerful antiaging effects for women, too. It is responsible
for enhancing lipolysis of fat tissue, building muscle, keeping skin supple,
increasing bone mineral density, and, as noted above, creating a positive
mood and an improved ability to handle stress. Testosterone levels in women
have also been linked to enhanced cognitive functioning.
At the same time, in men and women, low testosterone levels have been
associated with heart attack, Alzheimer’s disease, osteoporosis, and
depression. If you’re a woman and you’re cold all the time but your thyroid
levels are adequate, you are likely low on testosterone. Other symptoms of
low testosterone in women include sluggishness, muscle weakness, fatigue,
sleep disturbances, weight gain, fertility issues, and irregular menstrual
cycles.
Ultimately, for women, a little bit of testosterone—achieved in youth by
following the same tips dished out to the guys in this chapter and achieved
in age with a touch of bioidentical hormone replacement therapy—can go a
long way toward improving looks, figure, energy level, outlook on life, sex
appeal, and sexual fulfillment. According to the University of Rochester
Medical Center, a woman should have a total of 15 to 70 ng/dL of
--- END PAGE 976 ---

--- PAGE 977 ---
testosterone in her blood, although there are no conclusive guidelines for
what should be considered a low testosterone level in women.
5. Control Stress
Chronic stress eventually leads to chronically elevated cortisol levels in
the blood. Cortisol is necessary for life, but when levels are too high for
too long, testosterone secretion can diminish as cortisol and testosterone
compete for similar hormonal precursors and raw materials (especially
pregnenolone). In military studies, prolonged stress has been shown to
significantly lower testosterone secretion. Meditation, time in nature,
breathwork, evening carbohydrate refeeds on physically active days,
adaptogenic herbs (ashwagandha in particular), vitamin C, and
phosphatidylserine are all strategies I’ve used to kick excess cortisol to the
curb.
6. Eat Enough
Your body needs enough calories to produce adequate amounts of
testosterone. With constant and prolonged caloric restriction, the body
enters survival mode, which means that your reproductive system is not of
great importance anymore—your body simply wants to survive rather
than reproduce. After all, why make babies in times of stress and
starvation? The body instead conserves energy for vital processes and
internal organs. For optimal testosterone production and fertility, you
should eat at energy maintenance or a slight calorie surplus. But if you are
overweight, research suggests that a minor calorie deficit and losing
weight can elevate testosterone production.
--- END PAGE 977 ---

--- PAGE 978 ---
So get lean first and then cycle in higher-calorie days for optimal
testosterone production and maintenance. Losing weight slowly also
appears to be a good idea because a 15 percent daily calorie deficit during
weight loss doesn’t seem to affect testosterone negatively (but if you’re on
a daily caloric deficit, it is still advisable to incorporate regular calorie
refeeds, such as eating to caloric balance or slight excess on one day of the
weekend).
Finally, remember that it’s fine to tap into all the physiological benefits
of fasting, particularly via daily twelve- to sixteen-hour intermittent fasts,
as long as you don’t think of fasting as synonymous with caloric
restriction. I’ll tackle fasting more in chapter 19, but if your goal is to
maximize testosterone and libido, then simply go long periods between
meals, and when you do finally eat, eat a significant number of calories—at
least as many as you need to sustain your metabolic rate.
7. Nail Your Macros
Protein is especially important in the sex and hormone departments.
Chronic protein malnutrition can cause low testosterone levels. The
caveat is that you don’t need as much protein as you may have been told.
For most folks, the recommended daily allowance of 0.45 to 0.64 g per
pound of body weight is enough for optimal testosterone production. I
personally eat 0.5 to 0.7 g of protein per pound of body weight on easy
exercise or recovery days and 0.7 to 0.8 g per pound on hard exercise days.
Exceeding 0.8 g per pound doesn’t seem to give any additional benefit,
even for hard-charging athletes. In addition, the protein source is a major
factor in testosterone production. For example, a study published in the
British Journal of Nutrition found that when healthy men replaced meat
protein with soybean protein, their testosterone-to-estradiol ratio
--- END PAGE 978 ---

--- PAGE 979 ---
decreased significantly. Yes, you read that right: steak beats edamame,
hands down.
Here’s another reason not to go too far overboard on protein: for
optimal testosterone production, it seems crucial that you don’t eat too
much protein and that you eat enough carbohydrates and fat. One study
that compared protein and carbohydrate changes and their hormonal
effects discovered that when male subjects followed a high-protein, low-
carb diet for ten days, their total testosterone levels were 21 percent lower
than in men who ate a high-carbohydrate, low-protein diet. Part of this is
likely due to the fact that excessively low carbohydrates, particularly when
paired with high levels of physical activity, can inhibit thyroid activity,
raise cortisol, increase levels of sex hormone–binding globulin, and
generally lower endocrine function—although many of these issues can be
solved by including plenty of fats in the low-carbohydrate diet, which this
study did not do. (As a matter of fact, adequate fats paired with either a
low-carbohydrate or high-carbohydrate diet seem to do a very good job
maintaining hormonal status.) The high-protein diet also caused
significantly higher cortisol levels (the diets were equal in total calories
and fat), which is yet another reason I’m not a fan of exceeding 0.8 g per
pound of body weight, even for building muscle or muscle maintenance:
you certainly need adequate amino acids, but it doesn’t take as much
protein as many think.
Another study in strength-training men compared ratios of protein to
carbohydrates to different fats and found that diets higher in
carbohydrates that were paired with saturated and monounsaturated fats
were associated with higher testosterone production than high-protein
diets. Previous studies have also noted that men who consume a diet
containing 20 percent fat have significantly lower concentrations of
testosterone in the blood than men who consume a diet of 40 percent fat.
Many other studies have shown that eating enough fat is crucial for
--- END PAGE 979 ---

--- PAGE 980 ---
testosterone production, which makes perfect sense because cholesterol
from fats is a potent raw material for steroid hormone production.
Another study compared the testosterone-to-cortisol ratios in two
groups of carb-consuming men. The study found out that the men who got
60 percent of their calories from carbohydrates had significantly higher
free-testosterone-to-cortisol ratios than those who got 30 percent of their
calories from carbs. This doesn’t mean I endorse a 60 percent carb-based
diet per se, but I stand by my recommendation for active individuals
attempting to optimize hormone production to at least engage in some
kind of daily or weekly carbohydrate refeed of 100 to 200 g of carbs.
Ultimately, when it comes to macros, the bottom line is this: for
optimal testosterone production, you shouldn’t dip too low in calories or
go too high, you shouldn’t consume too much protein (more than 0.8 g
per pound of body weight) or eat too little carbs (below 30 percent of
calories) for long periods of time (especially in active people), and—
whether you’re eating a high-carbohydrate or low-carbohydrate diet—you
shouldn’t avoid saturated or monounsaturated fats.
8. Hydrate
Even mild dehydration (1 to 2 percent body weight loss) can raise cortisol
levels and deleteriously affect testosterone production. In addition, the
more dehydrated you are, the more cortisol and adrenaline rise and the
more testosterone drops. If you are significantly sweating or in a stage of
heavy exercise, drinking water or eating water-rich produce such as celery,
cucumbers, tomatoes, and watermelon becomes even more important for
testosterone maintenance. (My article “10 Things Your Pee Can Tell You
About Your Body” includes a few handy tips for using urine strips to
quantify your level of hydration—you’ll find a link on
BoundlessBook.com/19.) Just be sure to steer clear of estrogen-boosting
--- END PAGE 980 ---

--- PAGE 981 ---
and endocrine-disrupting plastic water bottles (and anything else that
contains the all-too-common additives BPA, phthalates, parabens,
triclosan, and benzophenones).
9. Increase Androgen Receptor Density
Androgens are hormones such as testosterone and androstenedione that
are important for normal sexual organ development before birth and
sexual development during puberty. In adults, androgens play a crucial
role in libido, physical performance, and sexual function, and also act as
precursors to important hormones such as estrogen. Androgen receptors
are what allow the body to respond appropriately to androgens. As a
general rule, the more receptors you have, the better equipped your body
is to respond to your hormones. Here are some of the better-researched
methods for increasing androgen receptor density:
• Fasting (not calorie restriction per se, but ample time between meals
and a twelve- to sixteen-hour daily fast)
• Coffee or caffeine—caffeine, at a dosage of about 2 mg per pound of
body weight before exercise or 240 mg per pound of body weight after
exercise, can raise testosterone level significantly.
• Explosive resistance training (short, fast sessions two or three times
per week)
• L-carnitine (this is a lipid transporter molecule, and supplementing or,
for even more efficacy, injecting with about 2 g per day can increase
androgen receptor activity in cells by providing fuel for the receptors)
• The supplements mucuna (5 g or more), forskolin (250 mg of a
supplement containing 10 percent forskolin taken twice per day), and
creatine (5 to 10 g per day)
--- END PAGE 981 ---

--- PAGE 982 ---
10. Try Electrical Muscle Stimulation
(EMS)
Researchers who conducted a study on rats discovered that electrical
stimulation caused a significant increase in androgen receptors and even
led to an increase in muscle mass by enhancing muscles’ sensitivity to
androgens. In addition, a study on humans showed that electrical
stimulation of meridian points increased concentrations of total
testosterone and DHEA. In addition to the EMSELLA seat I mentioned
earlier, I’m a fan of the Katalyst EMS suit, which provides full-body EMS,
including a workout for the pelvic musculature. Check out chapter 12 for
details on EMS.
11. Use Red-Light Therapy
I’m not really a nudist kind of guy. The last nudist beach I visited primarily
featured lots of curly hair, unattractive gonads, and a disturbing volleyball
game spectacle, so ever since, I’ve tended to stay away from nudist
beaches and bars. But on one particularly sunny spring day, while on a
camping trip, I decided to sunbathe nude in the forest. I lay out in my
hammock with my drawers tossed to the forest floor, my crotch proudly
displayed to the bright blue sky, basking in the glorious feeling of warmth
on my balls. I pondered whether this was some kind of little-known
biohack I was tapping into. After all, enough people expose their crotch to
the warm rays of the sun that there must be some benefit to it, right? I had
to find out.
As a man on a constant quest to optimize my brain and body, including
my own balls, I decided to look into the health effects of UV light on the
genitals. To my surprise, some studies have demonstrated that exposing
the torso or testes to light can potentially increase testosterone. In fact,
--- END PAGE 982 ---

--- PAGE 983 ---
studies on the effects of light on the testes go way back to 1939, when
researchers exposed various parts of men’s bodies to UV light. They found
that men’s testosterone levels went up by 120 percent when the
participants’ chests were exposed to UV light, and they went up by 200
percent with UV exposure to the genital area (this was the same study
former professional baseball player Gabe Kapler cited back in 2015 when
he advocated for tanning your testicles in a blog post that later went viral).
To be fair, the results of the 1939 study are more than eighty years old,
so it’s possible that the effects of sunlight on your nuts have been
overstated. But assuming it is good for you, there’s one major problem
with it: most dudes don’t have the time, desire, or year-round exposure to
sunlight to step out into the backyard buck-naked (not to mention that
most guys have neighbors, many of whom have access to phones and can
call the police). Ultimately, moseying through the neighborhood on a
sunny day with your pants jacked down isn’t a practical way to get your
daily dose of testosterone.
So I delved back into the research and messaged the one guy I consider
to be an expert in all things testosterone and sperm-count related: my
Finnish friend and physician Olli Sovijärvi, who studied at the University
of Helsinki. I met Dr. Sovijärvi when speaking at a biohacking conference
he hosts in Finland. Turns out that since those initial sunshine studies,
many more studies have investigated the effects of direct sunlight on the
torso, which increases a man’s testosterone levels by anywhere from 25 to
160 percent, depending on the individual.
Sunlight directly on the testes reportedly has an even more profound
effect: boosting production in Leydig cells (the cells that produce
testosterone) by an average of 200 percent. Olli went on to inform me that
some animal studies have linked light, particularly red light, to increased
testicular function. (It’s important to note that this is not proven science:
one red-light study conducted on rams, for instance, was inconclusive.)
--- END PAGE 983 ---

--- PAGE 984 ---
The theory is this: While sunlight has many beneficial effects, such as
vitamin D production and improved mood, it is not without its downsides.
Too much exposure to sunlight, particularly in sensitive areas like the skin
around your precious ball sac, can create sunburn, excess radiation,
inflammation, and damage. And let’s face it: you don’t want a shrunken,
shriveled, dehydrated dick, no matter how impressive the tan.
Although it’s part of the light spectrum you receive from sunlight
exposure, isolated red light is different from sunlight. Visible red light is
comprised of light wavelengths in the range of 600 to 750 nm, while
infrared ranges between 700 nm and 1 mm. According to red-light-therapy
proponents, these forms of red light work to stimulate ATP production,
increase the energy available to the cells, and, in particular, increase the
activity of the Leydig cells in your testes.
It’s important to note that there are currently no light therapy devices
on the market cleared by the FDA for the enhanced production of
testosterone (although a few treatments, like LED red-light beds, have
been approved by the FDA for narrow uses, like wrinkle reduction). That
said, the treatment is generally considered low-risk, so the products like
the one I tried do not require FDA clearance. It also should be noted that
most (but not all) of the existing clinical research related to testosterone
production and sperm mobility stems from animal studies, not studies
involving humans.
There is another caveat, and this is the part where Olli just about
scared my pants off (or, more appropriately, back on). Many types of
lamps and bulbs sold for red-light therapy (such as incandescents, heat
lamps, and infrared lamps that generate red light at greater than 1000 nm)
give off a significant amount of heat and can actually fry your testicles. So
you have to be careful when you use red-light therapy—unless self-
castration with a red heating lamp from Home Depot is on your wish list.
--- END PAGE 984 ---

--- PAGE 985 ---
The good Dr. Olli then went on to inform me that each night, he lies
down on his couch, pulls down his pants, and hugs a big long panel of red-
infrared light from an LED source at 600 to 950 nm. It sounds just like
hugging a giant, warm teddy bear (a hard and uncomfortable teddy bear
that’s plugged into a wall outlet and is generating enough red light to turn
the entire room into a video arcade).
I was convinced. The morning after my conversation with Olli, I
ordered something called a Joovv (pronounced “Joove”) light (which you
may remember from chapter 12). This was the red light he recommended
and used himself, and I didn’t want to play around with frying my balls to
a crisp with a cheap knockoff, so I spent the big bucks (a grand total of
$995) for what the website described as a full-body LED red-light-therapy
device.
When my Joovv arrived the next week, I hoisted it downstairs to my
office, leaned it against my stand-up desk, pulled down my pants, and
flipped it on.
I jumped back as best I could with my underwear wrapped around my
ankles. Holy hell. Not only was the red-light panel itself as wide as my
torso and nearly five feet high, but the light coming out of this thing was
freaking blinding. I fumbled for the little sunglasses that were included
with the light panel and slapped them on. There, much better (although I
later learned that sunglasses aren’t necessary and that this form of light
can actually be therapeutic for the eyes).
No longer feeling like I was staring into a semitruck’s brake lights, I
simply stood there, naked. I replied to a few emails, then checked my
watch. Five minutes. That should be good. After all, according to good ol’
Dr. Olli, five to twenty minutes is the sweet spot for red-light exposure to
your gonads, and I didn’t want to overtrain or excessively fry my little
fellas on their first foray into the wonderful world of red light.
--- END PAGE 985 ---

--- PAGE 986 ---
The rest of the morning, my crotch felt warm. Alive. So I did it again.
Glancing out my office window to make sure the lawnmower guy wasn’t
tooling around in the grass, I pulled down my drawers and bathed myself
in the heavenly, warm, tingly glow, this time for eight minutes.
That night, my wife and I made love. Admittedly, I felt—well—a
heavenly, warm, tingly glow in my crotch. Nice.
Two days later, I waited until the evening, then wandered downstairs. I
rubbed my hands together, took a deep breath, and flipped on my Joovv. I
called my mom to see how her day was going (she had no clue what was
going on below the phone). Ten minutes. I read a blog post. Fifteen
minutes. My crotch grew warmer and warmer, but in a pleasant day-at-the-
beach sort of way. I finished an email. Twenty minutes. Mission complete.
That night was date night, and I was a rock star.
I sat at dinner, horny, my penis pulsing, staring across the table at my
wife and feeling like I’d popped a couple of Viagra. Later, I blew the biggest
load I could recall in recent memory.
And from that point on, I’ve stuck with twenty minutes of red-light
exposure on my crotch each day. Actually, I’m afraid to do more. I suspect
there must be a law of diminishing returns, and I don’t want to wind up
with my dick looking like a leather handbag. But it is now a daily habit to
pull down my pants at my desk, flip on my Joovv, and get my red light on,
or travel with a miniature Joovv GO that I gently tuck between my thighs
as I do a bit of nighttime reading.
12. Seek Out Cold
One study conducted in 1988 in Finland investigated serum levels of
hormones, including testosterone, in men after they spent two hours in a
cold room (50 degrees Fahrenheit). Although testosterone didn’t go up,
cortisol decreased, which could free up more raw material for testosterone
--- END PAGE 986 ---

--- PAGE 987 ---
production. In addition, heat exposure on the testicles has been shown to
reduce testosterone levels (one study on over six thousand men showed
that sperm quality and volume are higher in the winter).
Then there are anecdotes from Chinese and Russian powerlifters who
ice their balls after training and before competitions, bodybuilders who
swear by dipping their junk in cold water to increase testosterone (Google
it and prepare to take a deep dive into the ball-icing forums), cooling
underpants like Snowballs, and even a device called the JetPack, which
hails itself as “Performance Enhancing Cold For Men.”
But before you rush out to buy a cold pack for your balls, you can
simply do the following:
• Take cold baths and showers.
• Wear loose boxers or go commando (this is also good for blood flow to
your nether regions).
• Sleep naked or wear loose pajamas (no undies).
• Avoid sitting for long periods of time.
13. Take Minerals
Research has shown that supplementation of the mineral boron at
approximately 10 mg per day can increase free testosterone and decrease
estrogen levels (it can also lower levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines).
Since boron accumulates in the gonads, long-term use may produce the
best benefits.
Iodine is another essential mineral (which means it must be acquired
via diet). The thyroid gland absorbs iodine from the blood to make thyroid
hormones, so 15 to 20 mg of iodine is concentrated in thyroid tissue and
hormones. In addition, 70 percent of the body’s iodine is distributed in
other tissues, such as mammary glands, eyes, salivary glands, and testicles.
--- END PAGE 987 ---

--- PAGE 988 ---
Lack of iodine in the body can cause hypothyroidism, and hypothyroidism
can lead to low free-testosterone concentrations.
One proposed explanation for the high occurrence of hypothyroidism
and hypogonadism in men today compared to decades ago is the increase
in environmental toxic halogens, such as fluoride, chlorine, and bromine.
When concentrated in body tissue in high amounts, these can replace
iodine’s locations inside the cells—most notably in thyroid cells and the
Leydig cells in the testes.
So it is critical to have enough iodine in your system to optimize
testosterone production. Some male biohackers I know even paint their
testicles with the highly concentrated Lugol’s iodine to get better
testicular absorption! One iodine protocol—which is not proven by
science, but many fitness forums claim it doubles testosterone—is a blend
of selenium, magnesium, vitamin C, oral iodine, a B vitamin complex
(which provides cofactors for ATP), and salt. The hypothesis for this
therapy seems legit (replace minerals, vitamins, and iodine), but I’ve seen
neither clinical nor animal studies.
14. Try Pulsed Electromagnetic Fields
(PEMF)
Dirty electricity emitted from smartphones, microwave ovens, Wi-Fi
routers, and other devices has been reported to affect biological systems,
causing, for example, inflammation, radiation damage, and hyperthermia
(heated tissue). What’s especially concerning is that many folks keep their
microwave-emitting phones in their front or back pockets, often quite
close to testicles or ovaries. A number of studies have demonstrated clear
relationships between smartphone use and reduced sperm count and
sperm quality. These signals can also disrupt the Leydig cell population
and testosterone concentration, along with hormonal balance in women.
--- END PAGE 988 ---

--- PAGE 989 ---
PEMF may assist with rebalancing the neuroendocrine system,
including hormone production. One study on rats showed that after
microwave radiation—which caused oxidative stress and lowered
testosterone production—PEMF therapy for sixty days helped the poor
rats bounce back so successfully that testosterone levels ended up even
higher than before.
So, if you know that you are being exposed to dirty electricity,
especially near your nether regions, the use of a small PEMF device near
your crotch (such as the FlexPulse, discussed in chapter 6), a PEMF coil
such as the Haelo device, a full-body PEMF mat, or a chair or massage
table for whole-body PEMF treatment (such as the Pulse XL Pro table
from Pulse Centers, which I discussed in chapters 6 and 16) may be a good
idea.
15. Do Sex-Specific Exercises
Sex can be simultaneously the most pleasurable and the most stressful
experience that you share with another human being. You’ve probably
snickered before at that guy or gal at the gym who’s thrusting their hips
repeatedly toward the ceiling, but they’re actually onto something. From
grinding to thrusting to grunting to lifting to planking, there are some
essential exercises that can help improve your sex life and sexual
performance.
I recommend you begin by improving both the strength and endurance
of your hip flexors, abdominals, and spinal erectors, all of which are
muscles engaged in thrusting, circular hip motions and which stabilize
your body in a number of sex positions. Some of the best moves include
barbell squats, Zercher squats (there’s a video on BoundlessBook.com/18),
glute bridges, hip thrusters, reverse hyperextensions, front planks,
narrow-grip push-ups, reverse-grip chin-ups, and of course, the ab wheel
--- END PAGE 989 ---

--- PAGE 990 ---
rollout (trust me, it’s incredibly effective and one of my go-to exercises for
recovery in between, say, a set of squats and a set of overhead presses).
One of the best authorities on glute exercises is Bret Contreras, who wrote
a book called Glute Lab, which I highly recommend. Another book that is a
bit more pelvic-specific and, despite the name, appropriate for men and
women alike is Empower Your Flower by Denise Conway.
There’s something to be said for Kegel exercises, too, in which you
squeeze and contract the same muscles you’d squeeze if you were trying
to stop the flow of urine, tightening and relaxing these muscles for
intervals of two to five seconds for ten to fifteen reps at a time, several
times a day. As I’ve learned from podiatrist Dr. Emily Splichal and
biomechanist Katy Bowman, it’s important to train these muscles not in
isolation but rather in conjunction with their supporting musculature,
most notably the transversus abdominis. This is best achieved by
imagining that the area just a few inches below your navel is the center of
a clock, with 9 in front of you and 3 behind you, and you are attempting to
draw in 9 toward 3 and noon toward 6 while at the same time squeezing
your Kegel muscles. It sounds complex, but it works, and when done right
you feel your entire lower abdominal musculature contract in unison,
rather than only your Kegels.
With just a few hours a week devoted to exercise, you can indeed
improve your sex life significantly. Should you want to add in a bit more
Eastern, Taoist-like breathwork to take things to the next level,
orgasmically speaking, then see the sidebar on tantric sex on here.
Finally, to develop even better breathwork, more flexibility, and more
cardiovascular endurance, along with a better ability to move energy
throughout your body (which especially enhances intercourse), give
Kundalini yoga a try. When it comes to sex, I’ve found Kundalini to be the
most helpful form of yoga.
--- END PAGE 990 ---

--- PAGE 991 ---
16. Inject with Stem Cells
In 2017, the European Association of Urology published trial results
showing that stem cells can restore sufficient erectile function to allow
previously impotent men to have spontaneous intercourse. It worked for
eight of twenty-one patients, and it’s the first time that such therapy has
enabled men suffering from ED to have sex without needing other
medicines, injections, or implants. The Danish researchers utilized the
same fat-sucking, stem-cell-harvesting procedure that cost me a cool
$8,000 at the US Stem Cell Clinic, which covered about thirty vials.
Before committing to a penile injection as yet another form of self-
immersive journalism to see if a guy can go from good to great in the sex
department via just a little bit of better living through science, I reviewed
the risks. If it was done incorrectly, I could suffer serious infection, nerve
damage, and complete loss of sexual function, going from ramrod straight
to wet-noodle saggy. Then again, I am a relentless self-experimenter who
makes a living pushing the boundaries of sound judgment (I once installed
blue-face-hypoxia-producing devices in my office to train for the Spartan
Agoge, a 38-below-zero adventure race in Vermont). Call me reckless—a
few of my editors sure did—but I’m not one to let reasonable fear get in
the way of a fun story.
First, some of my adipose tissue was removed in a process called
autologous adipose-derived adult stem cell transplantation. Afterward, it
was spun in a centrifuge to remove waste and create a bloody stew rich in
mesenchymal stem cells—the type that can transform into other types of
cells, such as bone, cartilage, or muscle cells. The stem cells were then
isolated using a filtration process, and, just before injection, would be
added to my own platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and activated with a low-light
laser. A roughly decade-old technique used to concentrate growth factors
from blood platelets, PRP has been shown to accelerate healing of
tendinopathy and arthritis in joints, as well as wounds and surgical sites.
--- END PAGE 991 ---

--- PAGE 992 ---
Straight-up PRP injections can be used to treat the penis, but in this
newer technique, PRP is blended with stem cells for their regenerative
benefits. The injection can occur on the same day as the harvest. But in my
case, according to the physician assistant, I was way too skinny (ahem, I
prefer “shredded”) to get enough fat tissue. My stem cells needed time to
multiply.
After returning home, I looked up stem cell and antiaging clinics in
eastern Washington and northern Idaho. Most of the phone calls started
like this: “Hi, have any of your physicians ever injected stem cells into a
penis?” I didn’t want a rookie with trembling hands dropping a syringe of
my expensive stem cells, nor did I want someone’s first time to be with my
penis.
“Well,” the receptionists typically said, “we do joints and skin
procedures, but—”
“Thank you! Have a great day!” Click.
Finally, on my fifth call, the office manager at Lenoue Integrative
Medicine in Spokane told me, “Yes, Dr. Pasma has performed this several
times. Do you have access to your stem cells?”
Eight weeks after being harvested, my baby Frankensteins were ready
to be shipped. The US Stem Cell Clinic sent me an order form, conducted
a virtual swipe of my credit card for $300, and voilà: there was a knock at
my front door at 7 a.m. on the morning of my injection. Bleary-eyed, I
opened it and found a smiling, freckle-faced FedEx driver holding a
potential holy grail of sexual vigor. Two hours later, clutching my precious
stem cells with both hands, I shouldered open the glass doors at Lenoue
Integrative Medicine. An unshaven twentysomething with messy hair and
wearing blue scrubs and orange tennis shoes looked up from behind the
counter.
“Hi, can I help you?”
--- END PAGE 992 ---

--- PAGE 993 ---
I cleared my throat and glanced around nervously, hoping to find a
gray-haired professional in a lab coat or a studious nurse in a clean white
frock—anyone other than this apparent frat boy.
“I’m Ben Greenfield. I’m here for . . . you know . . . the injection.”
He smiled broadly and extended his hand.
“Mr. Greenfield! We’ve been expecting you. I’m Dr. Pasma!”
Gulp. I reached over the counter and shook his hand, hoping it had
been thoroughly washed and looking for even the slightest sign of a
tremor. But I could find no excuse to back out now. After unveiling my
stem cells—two small, unimpressive syringes sat on ice at the bottom of a
large Styrofoam box—I completed a few pages of paperwork and soon
found myself in the exam room.
First, Dr. Pasma gathered a vial of blood from my arm, to be spun in a
centrifuge and blended with my stem cells. Fifteen minutes later, he
returned with a handful of syringes and an iPad. “So, what kind of music
do you want to listen to?”
I shrugged at the unexpected question but thought to myself, The kind
that induces deep focus and concentration, doc. When I opened my mouth, I
said, “Deep house, I guess?” With techno beats thumping in the
background, I fell backward on the table and jacked down my pants.
Remember this the next time your doctor needs to check anything below
the belt: it’s like jumping off a cliff into the ocean—the longer you wait,
the more awkward and difficult it becomes. In my year of
“dicksperiments,” I had mastered the drill: wear loose pants, preferably no
underwear, and expose yourself as if it is the most natural thing in the
world.
The next few minutes went by quickly. Dr. Pasma injected a nerve
block into the right and left sides of my penis. A few seconds later, he took
the two syringes of stem cells, mixed them with plasma, and injected one
into each side of my corpus cavernosa. I sighed with relief—this guy was
--- END PAGE 993 ---

--- PAGE 994 ---
no slack, just a fast-working professional. The entire procedure took less
than five minutes.
As I pulled up my pants, he held out another syringe. “You want this?”
he asked, smiling.
I furrowed my eyebrows. “You didn’t inject all the stem cells?”
“Nah, this is just leftover plasma. But it makes a great facial
moisturizer.”
So is this alternative-medicine junk science, or junk science?
“For men without any symptoms of erectile dysfunction, stem cell
injections in the penis are unlikely to cause any benefit but are more likely
to cause harm,” says Dr. Alex Shteynshlyuger, the director at New York
Urology Specialists. “We know that the injection of medications into the
penis predisposes men to a small risk of scar formation called Peyronie’s
disease, which can lead to erectile dysfunction, bent penis, and shortening
and narrowing of the penis. While the risk from a few injections is small, it
is not a pleasant risk for men who have no problems to start with.”
Dr. Shteynshlyuger also said that penile stem cell injections currently
being marketed to men should really be called “god-knows-what
injections,” because there is no quality control to determine what kind of
cells are being used and no scientifically valid method of injecting a
specified dose. While the hope is that these presumed stem cells lead to
penile regeneration, there is no assurance that they won’t become
abnormal cells, such as scar tissue cells or precancerous cells.
I didn’t know this until several months after the procedure, but I had
already started questioning things the day after my stem cells were
harvested in Florida. That’s when the FDA issued the US Stem Cell Clinic
a warning letter for violating safety protocols and, in the words of FDA
commissioner Scott Gottlieb, MD, misleading “vulnerable patients into
believing they are being given safe, effective treatments that are in full
compliance with the law.” (The clinic says that procedures “in which a
--- END PAGE 994 ---

--- PAGE 995 ---
patient’s own cells are reinjected back into the patient is based on sound
science and is conducted by a licensed healthcare professional in a safe
environment. However, FDA claims that the clinic’s procedure constitutes
drug manufacturing, and thus must be approved by FDA. We do not
agree.”)
But what about my positive findings?
Three hours after the stem cell/PRP injection in Spokane, my dick was
black and blue. The next morning, before I left town for business, I had a
quickie with my wife. I felt firmer, bigger even, and the orgasm was mind-
blowing. Afterward, upon seeing the bruising on my penis, my wife said,
“That must’ve hurt.” It did. A little.
Four days later, back home from my trip, we went at it again. By now
the bruising had vanished, and the sex was even better. We have lived
together for more than twenty years, and although she has rarely uttered a
word about the size of my penis, she remarked, as I emerged from the
shower one morning, “Is that swelling from the surgery, or is it just
growing? It’s bigger.”
According to New York–based urologist Dr. David Shusterman, these
sound like the benefits of PRP—also known as a Priapus shot or P-shot—
which should always be administered by a urologist to minimize bruising.
“PRP is effective for ED and will increase penis size and firmness
during an erection,” he says. “The difference between stem cells and PRP
is that PRP is better studied and is, in my opinion, safer for now. The
introduction of stem cells can attract a number of types of cells that are
not needed or beneficial. PRP attracts the cell types needed for
regeneration of the tissues. Stem cells may offer another treatment option
over time, but stem cell therapy is currently more experimental.”
Should my genitalia turn gray, fall off, or explode, I will cry, curse
myself, and be sure to let everyone know. For now, I just have to figure out
how I’m going to tell my children that Dad spent a hefty portion of their
--- END PAGE 995 ---

--- PAGE 996 ---
college fund on his dick. Admittedly, since then, both my wife and I have
received additional PRP sessions, and she’s even had stem cells injected
into her vaginal tissue. A more advanced version, developed by Dr. Judd
Brandeis and called the P-Long treatment, has been proven to increase
penile size and sexual function via a combination of PRP, nitric oxide–
boosting supplements, and a twice-a-day, twelve-minute use of a vacuum
erection device. Yep, that’s a penis pump.
17. Be a Man
As described in the book The Way of the Superior Man by David Deida, not
only is expression of masculine essence key to being a true and complete
man, but suppression of masculine activities—such as competition,
fighting, hunting, lifting weights, leading your family, caring for your
woman, building a legacy, and spending time with other men—can
actually suppress biological functions, including testosterone production.
I’ve made it a point over the past several years to deeply explore what
is often referred to as the “manosphere,” an informal network of podcasts,
blogs, forums, and websites about optimizing masculinity. While I’m
opposed to the popular manospheric idea that men “don’t need women”
and can operate independently without a feminine essence or a feminine
presence in their lives (often referred to as “MGTOW,” short for “Men
Going Their Own Way”), and I’m not a fan of the infatuation with pickup
artistry that’s so prevalent in the manosphere community, I’ve found
many of the resources within the manosphere to be incredibly motivating
and educational, inspiring me to be a stronger man and better father and
husband. Some of the better resources and books I’ve discovered include
the following:•

The Rational Male book series by Rollo Tomassi
--- END PAGE 996 ---

--- PAGE 997 ---
•

The Way of the Superior Man by David Deida (his book Dear Lover: A
Woman’s Guide to Men, Sex, and Love’s Deepest Bliss is a companion book
for women)•

Wild at Heart by John Eldredge (his book Captivating is a good
companion book for women)•

Be a Man! by Larry Richards•

Future Men by Doug Wilson, and the Canon Press video series of the
same name•

Iron John by Robert Bly•

The Professor in the Cage by Jonathan Gottschall
• The books Fit Soul, Endure, and Precepts by (ahem) yours truly
18. Consider Testosterone Optimization
Therapy
No discussion of hormone optimization would be complete without
addressing the confusing and controversial world of hormone
replacement therapy for testosterone. My friend Jay Campbell is my go-to
resource on this topic, and his book The Testosterone Optimization Bible and
my podcast with him (which you can find at BenGreenfieldLife.com/Jay)
are great sources for everything testosterone-related.
Testosterone is the lifeblood and foundation of all things related to
male health. In fact, suboptimal testosterone levels may be responsible for
a seemingly endless list of diseases, including these:
• Depression
• Inflammation
• Infertility
--- END PAGE 997 ---

--- PAGE 998 ---
• Obesity
• Heart disease
• Prostate diseases
• Diabetes
• Metabolic syndrome
• Insulin resistance
Using testosterone optimization therapy (TOT) is no different than
using a health-promoting substance like aspirin, caffeine, or antibiotics.
Exogenous testosterone has been successfully used to treat hypogonadism
since its recognition as an essential biological molecule for male health in
the 1930s, which won researchers the Nobel Prize for Chemistry.
The rewards of optimizing your testosterone levels via TOT are often
dramatic and transformative. The men who go down the route of
therapeutic administration ultimately classify their lives in two phases: life
before TOT and life after TOT. Here’s just a sample of the ways in which
testosterone can improve your mindset and physical health:
• It’s clinically proven to boost confidence levels, especially among
potential sexual partners who are evaluating your potential as a mate.
• It improves mental outlook and resiliency, allowing you to remain
more composed and tactical in stressful situations.
• It increases assertiveness, leading to greater certainty and faster
decision-making.
• It reduces body fat.
• It increases muscle mass.
• It improves heart health.
• It helps treat depression.
• It improves memory and helps protect against Alzheimer’s.
--- END PAGE 998 ---

--- PAGE 999 ---
• It fights chronic inflammation.
As a man, your health (and your testosterone levels) are in your hands!
Don’t be like the millions of men worldwide who are doomed to low
testosterone levels and suboptimal living. You can learn much more in The
Testosterone Optimization Bible by Jay Campbell and on
BoundlessBook.com/18. Finally, if you are interested in testosterone
therapy but don’t want to impair your fertility or experience the infamous
ball shrinkage, you can look into enclomiphene, which can be used on its
own or paired with testosterone to effectively mitigate these issues.
Studies using enclomiphene for testosterone restoration versus
testosterone gel for testosterone replacement therapy show that it can in
some cases increase testosterone more than testosterone gel and keeps
levels more consistently stable. In addition, enclomiphene stimulates the
testes (and actually increases their size) to produce LH and FSH, which is
how the body naturally and endogenously produces testosterone and
sperm.
Tantric Sex
Tantric sex, or tantra, is a slow, intimate form of sex that leads to a better
connection between you and your partner. While there is no one singular
way to do tantric sex, the simplest way is to slow down, control your
breathing, and be cognizant of your body in every moment. When it comes
to becoming multiorgasmic, especially as a man, cultivating this skill is
simpler than you might think.
Set aside some time to masturbate to arousal, and then consciously raise
and lower your arousal level, alternating between nine and five on a scale of
ten. Use your breathing to circulate the sexual energy throughout your body.
Do this for thirty to sixty minutes a couple of times per week, and you will
become intimately aware of your ejaculatory point of no return. Once you’re
familiar with this arousal zone, you’ll be able to ride the edge of this
--- END PAGE 999 ---

--- PAGE 1000 ---
orgasmic precipice and experience multiple orgasms in no time. But let’s be
clear: don’t think of each orgasm as a ten after a ten after a ten, but rather
as riding the edge of a nine-point-five for seconds and eventually minutes at
a time without having to pause for a break.
If you want to become proficient in the art of being multiorgasmic, it
generally takes anywhere from one to three months of consistent practice. I
learned this tactic from the book The Multi-Orgasmic Male, and when I
began trying it, I noted an increased connection and intimacy with my wife,
more orgasms, greater sexual stamina, and more powerful orgasms. On the
other hand, while the long game between the sheets sounds enticing,
sometimes I don’t like the feeling of holding back and being less animalistic.
When I do it right, though, my body and mind seem to blend, and the
sensation is pure bliss.
Another tactic for tantra is using breathwork for foreplay. Apps such as
Othership include partner sessions perfect for the bedroom.
THE LAST WORD
Let’s finish with a few of the best sex resources for more learning,
including the most cutting-edge, proven, helpful books and programs I’ve
found on sex:•

The Multi-Orgasmic Man, by Mantak Chia and Douglas Abrams•

Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus, by John Gray, PhD•

How to Be a Great Lover and The Great Lover Playbook, by Lou Paget•

The Way of the Superior Man, Dear Lover, and Finding God Through Sex,
by David Deida•

The 7 Principles for Making a Marriage Work, by John Gottman
• Kim Anami’s Sexual Salon, KimAnami.com (caution: some explicit
material)
--- END PAGE 1000 ---

--- PAGE 1001 ---
• Jordan Gray’s sex and relationship counseling,
JordanGrayConsulting.com
• Jon and Missy Butcher’s Category 13 videos, JonAndMissy.com
• Susan Bratton’s books and resources, SusanBratton.com (caution:
some explicit material)
The unfortunate truth is that in today’s hookup culture, it’s too easy to
focus on the carnal aspect of sex and miss out on the deeper connection
that lies just beneath the surface. But there’s a reason physical intimacy is
so alluring. There’s an implicit promise of an emotional and spiritual
relationship, which affects both your mental state and your physical
satisfaction as much as doing it does.
Improving your physical sexual performance with the supplements,
foods, and hacks listed in this chapter is a great way to start spicing up the
bedroom, but you can really amp up your sexual experience by allowing
for and nurturing powerful spiritual satisfaction through one of the most
intimate physical experiences that humans can engage in. You’ll discover
an astounding amount of boundless energy pouring into your life.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
The next time you plan on having sex, forsake any big, rich, heavy, fat-
filled, supposedly testosterone-producing meal such as steak, and instead
eat a simple meal of blood-boosting foods like an arugula salad with beets,
cubed watermelon, pumpkin seeds, extra-virgin olive oil, and a bit of dark
chocolate or red wine.
Already eating the right foods? Then move on to connection and
breath. During lovemaking, look into your partner’s eyes, take deep
--- END PAGE 1001 ---

--- PAGE 1002 ---
breaths, and imagine the energy from each breath moving up your spine
and washing over your head, then traveling down the front of your body
and to your sex organs. You’ll notice a powerful surge of boundless sexual
energy!
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/18.
--- END PAGE 1002 ---

--- PAGE 1003 ---
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 1003 ---

--- PAGE 1004 ---
19
LONGEVITY DECODED
ANCESTRAL WISDOM AND MODERN
SCIENCE TO MAXIMIZE HEALTH AND
LIFESPAN
--- END PAGE 1004 ---

--- PAGE 1005 ---
Demographers, epidemiologists, gerontologists, and other researchers on aging
have long puzzled over the theoretical question of the maximum human lifespan,
along with the host of proposed practices that could help us achieve that
potential. In the past decade alone, we have seen a veritable laundry list of
tactics we can use to make ourselves more age-resistant, from nutrients,
vitamins, and pills—including vitamin D, aspirin, metformin, magnesium,
pterostilbene, resveratrol, blueberry extract, nicotinamide riboside, and rhodiola
—to lifestyle practices such as shivering our asses off; self-imposed starvation;
fecal transplants; strict veganism; injections of growth hormones, testosterone,
stem cells, exosomes, and the blood of younger healthy humans; and, speaking
of younger humans, simply having more children.
The fact is, compared to the biblical Methuselah, who purportedly lived to
the ripe old age of 969, we do not seem to be moving the antiaging dial
much. Researchers estimate that in the US today, the average adult life
expectancy is still only about seventy-seven—and, disturbingly, that’s
plummeting due to high rates of chronic diseases (many of which are
preventable with simple lifestyle changes you’ll learn about in this
chapter). Despite the Chinese lore of the recently perished, allegedly 256-
year-old Li Ching-Yuen, the longest-lived person on record is Jeanne
Calment of France, who died in 1997 at 122 years and 164 days old.
Then there’s a Jamaican woman named Violet Brown, who died in 2017
at 117. (She claimed her secrets to longevity included church, no pork, no
chicken, and no rum!) At the time of this writing, the oldest person alive is
Brazilian Inah Canabarro, who is currently 116 years old. Though the
longest-lived humans on record are female, Venezuelan Juan Vicente
Pérez Mora, who died in 2024 at age 114, was recognized as the world’s
longest-lived man.
But when we observe nature, some amount of immortality, or at least a
significantly longer lifespan, appears to be achievable. Take the naked
mole rat, for example. The naked mole rat’s cells themselves seem to make
proteins—the molecular machines that make bodies work—more
--- END PAGE 1005 ---

--- PAGE 1006 ---
accurately than human cells do, preventing it from developing age-related
illnesses like cancer and Alzheimer’s. And unlike in humans, the way these
ugly little creatures handle glucose doesn’t seem to change with age,
reducing their susceptibility to diseases like diabetes. The naked mole rat
also possesses genes that allow it to process oxygen more effectively than
other rodent species, which may contribute to its impressive twenty-to-
thirty-year lifespan.
The 256-Year-Old Man
Imperial Chinese government documents from 1827 congratulate Li Ching-
Yuen on his 150th birthday, and documents from 1877 congratulate him on
his 200th birthday. This Chinese herbalist and martial artist died in 1933 and
claimed to have been born in 1736, although other records suggest he was
actually born in 1677.
Is this possible? The longest confirmed lifespan on record is that of Jeanne
Calment, who lived to be 122, and Li Ching-Yuen is reported to have lived to
be 256, more than twice as long as Madame Calment! It strains credulity, but
let’s take a look at his life, shall we?
Li Ching-Yuen began his career as an herbalist at ten years old. He spent the
majority of his life in the mountains of China eating a diet of herbs and rice
wine and gathering plants and herbs, including wild ginseng, goji berries,
lingzhi mushrooms, gotu kola, and he shou wu. These herbs are known to
have potent longevity benefits, but are they enough to lend someone 256
years of life?
Surprisingly, Li Ching-Yuen did not ascribe his incredibly long life to his diet
or even to his practice of qigong. While on his deathbed, Li said, “I have
done all that I have to do in this world.” In the West, aging is seen as an
enemy to be conquered and overcome with technology and supplements. In
fact, there’s an entire philosophy, transhumanism, that holds that the human
race can, through science and technology, evolve beyond its current physical
and mental limitations. Li’s last words suggest a very different outlook on
life. He recognized that he had certain tasks to complete in this life, and
--- END PAGE 1006 ---

--- PAGE 1007 ---
when he had performed them, he willingly lay down to rest, knowing that he
fulfilled the entirety of his life’s purpose.
Li also gave longevity advice that flies in the face of the modern, hard-
charging, go-hard-or-go-home outlook that many people subscribe to.
When asked by the warlord Wu Pei-fu what the secret to long life is, Li is
said to have replied, “Keep a quiet heart, sit like a tortoise, walk sprightly like
a pigeon, and sleep like a dog.” Li believed that the calmness and peace of
mind with which he approached daily life contributed the most to his
longevity.
Perhaps there is something to be learned from such a calm, long-lived man.
Setting aside whether he was really 256 years old at his death, it seems
pretty obvious that he did live a very long time and proved that there is
much more to longevity than injecting yourself with all sorts of bizarre
concoctions and engaging in the latest biohacks.
The naked mole rat is not the only animal scientists are now probing
to pick the lock of long life. With a rampant metabolism and a heart rate of
one thousand beats per minute, the hummingbird should, on paper, be
riddled with rogue, DNA-destroying free radicals, but the tiny birds seem
relatively bulletproof against heart disease. Then there are lobsters, which
seem to have evolved a protein that repairs the telomere tips of their
chromosomes, allowing for a decreased rate of telomere shortening that
most animals are incapable of achieving. (Recall from chapter 9 that
telomeres become shorter each time the cell divides; once they’re short
enough, the cell can no longer repair and undergoes accelerated aging or,
worse, becomes cancerous.)
Consider Adwaita, the giant tortoise from India who died of liver
disease in 2006. At the time he died, he looked just as young as a spry
teenage tortoise—but carbon dating of his shell showed that he was over
250 years old. Some clams and oysters also don’t seem to experience an
increased risk of mortality as they age. For example, measuring the growth
--- END PAGE 1007 ---

--- PAGE 1008 ---
rings of one ocean quahog revealed that it had lived 507 years, and annual
growth rings of other bivalves reveal an average lifespan of over 400 years.
Even certain trees enjoy extreme longevity: a bristlecone pine named
Methuselah in California is 4,851 years old!
Finally, as if rats, hummingbirds, lobsters, tortoises, clams, and trees
were not enough to make us longevity-seeking humans a bit jealous, we
mustn’t forget one animal on earth that may hold the master key to
immortality: Turritopsis dohrnii, also known as the immortal jellyfish. Most
jellyfish, when they reach the end of their lives, die and melt into the sea,
but not the immortal jellyfish. Instead, it sinks to the ocean floor and its
body folds in on itself—assuming the jellyfish equivalent of the fetal
position—and regenerates back into a baby jellyfish in a rare biological
process called transdifferentiation, in which its old cells somehow
transform into young cells. The stem cells that allow for this continuous
self-renewal express high levels of FOXO genes, which also play a key part
in human longevity.
So is there a human equivalent to the immortality powers these
animals seem to have tapped into? Many in popular antiaging and
longevity circles have suggested that, in the next several decades, we could
indeed unlock the secrets to living to approximately 120 to 140 years old.
Indeed, many biohackers and antiaging enthusiasts such as Peter
Diamandis, Elon Musk, Dave Asprey, Bryan Johnson, and Tony Robbins
are striving to live longer than 160 years.
This chapter will not only teach you many of the advanced longevity
secrets of the fringe biohackers but also reveal everything you need to
know about why the world’s more traditional longevity all-stars not only
live longer but also tend to live better. They have strong connections with
their family and friends. They are active. They wake up in the morning
knowing that they have a purpose, and the world, in turn, reacts to them in
a way that propels them along. An overwhelming majority of them enjoy
--- END PAGE 1008 ---

--- PAGE 1009 ---
life even in old age. They share common behavioral and lifestyle
characteristics—such as close family relationships, avoidance of smoking,
a plant-based diet, moderate and daily physical activity, social
engagement, and participation in a community that includes people of all
ages—even though they are all from different areas of the world and of
different races, nationalities, and religions.
After spending nearly two decades immersed deeply in the health,
fitness, nutrition, and longevity industries, I have come to the realization
that embracing both modern science and ancestral wisdom can allow one
to live a long and healthy life whose span rivals and even exceeds that of
our ancestors. That is why my children and I forage for wild plants (a
longevity tactic you’ll learn more about in this chapter) but do so using a
plant identification smartphone app that allows us to identify everything
from mushrooms to plants with incredible accuracy—we can tap into a bit
of better living through science so that we don’t get poisoned or make
fatal mistakes that our ancestors might have made while foraging. It’s also
why I own a quaint and simple off-the-grid, barn-style home in the forest
where we grow most of our own food, yet I fill that barn with tens of
thousands of dollars’ worth of modern antiaging biohacking equipment.
And it’s why, the last time I disappeared into a seven-day high-country elk
bow-hunt in the mountains of Colorado, I had a neurofeedback brain-
training device neatly tucked away in my camouflage backpack.
In this chapter, you will discover exactly how to live a happy, long, and
fulfilled life with one foot planted in the realm of ancestral living and the
other planted in the realm of modern science and biohacking. Granted,
there are entire books and fantastic websites—most of which I have read
word for word—that could fill thousands of pages of antiaging advice. My
favorites are linked to on BoundlessBook.com/19. But for the purposes of
this book, I have decided to give you the best of the best: the techniques I
have personally tried, the tactics that are steeped in research, and the
--- END PAGE 1009 ---

--- PAGE 1010 ---
strategies that have thousands of years of practice behind them. So you
can think of this chapter as a cookbook for longevity that gives you all the
low-hanging fruit and teaches you all the basics of living a long and happy
life while also exposing you to the more advanced practices that have
emerged in the past several years.
But first, before I get into life-extending strategies, it is important to
understand exactly how we age in the first place.
HOW WE AGE
There does not appear to be one single cause of aging. When I interviewed
antiaging pioneer and impressively bearded Aubrey de Grey on my
podcast, he outlined seven separate aging mechanisms his SENS Research
Foundation (the acronym stands for “Strategies for Engineered Negligible
Senescence”) has identified and researched: mutations in chromosomes,
mutations in mitochondria, junk inside cells, junk outside cells, cell death,
protein cross-linking, and cell senescence (a phenomenon in which a cell
can no longer divide but does not die, which would let other cells divide).
Many longevity scientists would argue that plenty more than seven aging
mechanisms exist, including my friend Dr. Harry Adelson, who theorizes
that aging is due to a loss of available stem cells, and Dr. Michael Rose,
who argues that aging is related to our loss of reproductive usefulness as
we age.
These mechanisms are important to understand because, in order to
truly enhance longevity, we should ideally address each and every element
that might be causing us to grow old too soon. As you’ll see, most are
related to a simple accumulation of damage: breakages in the molecular
machinery of cells, an accumulation of metabolic waste products that your
body cannot break down, and the failure of biological systems that are
increasingly unable to cope with the damage. Over time, this damage can
--- END PAGE 1010 ---

--- PAGE 1011 ---
affect every cell in every organ, structure, and tissue. Let’s take a closer
look at how this damage process affects the biological systems in your
body.
Bones and Skeletal System
In men, bone density starts to diminish at age thirty-five. In women, this
process begins even earlier, with peak bone density occurring at around
age thirty, and postmenopausal women experience an accelerated rate of
bone loss. The foot arches become less pronounced, contributing to
reduced height. The discs that separate your vertebrae lose fluid, which
aggravates this effect even more. The long bones of the arms and legs
become brittle due to mineral loss. Joints become stiffer and less flexible
and can lose some of their fluid, causing the cartilage to rub together and
wear out. Calcification, the depositing of minerals in and around some
joints, also occurs.
After thirty, skeletal muscle mass declines more than 20 percent in
both men and women in the absence of triggers such as regular exercise,
muscle loading, adequate protein, and, based on recent research, heat
stress. With this gradual muscle loss, known as sarcopenia, strength and
flexibility decreases, along with coordination, balance, and height. The
deterioration of the central nervous system can also lead to a reduced
ability to recruit muscle fibers. Posture deteriorates, and the overall risk of
bone breakage increases. The gradual breakdown of the joints can lead to
inflammation, pain, stiffness, and even physical deformities such as a
hunched back or bowlegs.
Physical activity—particularly stressing the muscles and long bones of
the skeletal systems—can help to slow many of these aging mechanisms,
as can regular sauna exposure, healthy protein intake, and pulsed
electromagnetic field therapy (discussed in chapters 6 and 12).
--- END PAGE 1011 ---

--- PAGE 1012 ---
Digestive System
As digestive activity gradually slows with aging, you are more likely to get
constipated frequently, which can often be exacerbated by medications,
such as proton pump inhibitors and antibiotics, and by medical
conditions, such as diabetes and irritable bowel syndrome. The muscle
contractions that push food along your digestive tract can slow down with
aging, causing waste to move more slowly through the colon, and the
longer it takes to move through the colon, the more water it loses, which
exacerbates constipation. Lower physical activity levels in older people
can also contribute to the effects of constipation.
A condition known as diverticulosis can develop, which occurs when
small pouches in the lining of the colon bulge through weak spots in the
intestinal wall. This can lead to gas, bloating, cramps, and even more
constipation. A more severe form of this condition, diverticulitis, occurs
when the pouches become inflamed, leading to abdominal pain, cramping,
fever, chills, nausea, and vomiting. Cancerous or noncancerous polyps can
also form in the colon. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is the
--- END PAGE 1012 ---

--- PAGE 1013 ---
most common age-related gastrointestinal disorder and occurs when
stomach acid rises into the esophagus, causing heartburn and other
symptoms.
Natural digestive enzyme production decreases with age, leading to a
loss of protein absorption, which can further aggravate sarcopenia.
Enzyme depletion even outside the digestive system can also be an issue,
since enzymes are responsible for constructing, integrating, transporting,
providing, and eliminating a host of nutrients and toxins. Research has
shown that people who have a chronic disease or poor energy levels tend
to have fewer enzymes in their blood, urine, and tissues.
Chewing food more thoroughly, eating adequate fiber and fermented
foods, supplementing with digestive enzymes, and consuming amino acids
—along with implementing the strategies in the gut and immune-system
chapters of this book (chapters 13 and 15)—can all help to slow the aging
of the digestive system and depletion of enzymes.
Respiratory System
Maximum lung capacity and maximum oxygen utilization (VO max)
2 decrease gradually after about age twenty-five, especially if you’re not
frequently exercising. You also experience decreases in measures of lung
function such as vital capacity (the maximum amount of air that can be
breathed out following a maximum inhalation), a weakening of the
respiratory muscles, and a decline in the effectiveness of lung defense
mechanisms, including reduced numbers of white blood cells on the
surface of the lung alveoli.
As the muscles and tissues around your lungs, particularly the
diaphragm, weaken, you experience a decreased ability to breathe enough
air in and out, as well as a decreased ability to keep airways sufficiently
open. The alveoli can lose their shape and become looser and more
--- END PAGE 1013 ---

--- PAGE 1014 ---
dysfunctional. Even the skeletal changes in the spine and ribs can impact
the effectiveness of your respiratory system, and the part of the brain that
controls breathing may also lose some of its function as you age.
All these changes in the lung tissue can cause air to become trapped in
the lungs, making it harder to breathe. Decreased lung capacity negatively
impacts overall health in several ways. For example, one study that
followed 5,200 individuals for three decades demonstrated that lung
volume was the greatest predictor of health and longevity!
Regular cardiovascular exercise and the adoption of the type of
breathwork practices and protocols described in chapter 3 can help to
support the aging respiratory system.
Urinary System
After about age thirty to forty, two-thirds of us undergo a gradual decline
in the rate at which our kidneys filter blood. The kidneys begin to lose
tissue, and the number of filtering units known as nephrons decreases.
The blood vessels that supply the kidneys can harden, further impairing
the kidneys’ filtration rate.
The bladder wall loses its elasticity, meaning it cannot hold as much
urine as before, and the muscles controlling the bladder begin to weaken.
The urethra can become blocked by an enlarged prostate gland in men or
by a prolapsed (fallen) bladder or vagina in women. A loss of bladder
control is quite common for women, especially around menopause, and
medical conditions such as diabetes or a history of voluminous endurance
sports can also contribute to this incontinence.
Simple strategies to control these issues include deep pelvic core
training, adequate hydration and mineral intake, limited consumption of
dehydrating foods such as alcohol and caffeine, and avoidance of excess
protein.
--- END PAGE 1014 ---

--- PAGE 1015 ---
Reproductive System
For women, menstrual cycles stop at around age fifty-one and the ovaries
halt production of estrogen and progesterone. The ovaries also stop
producing eggs, and after menopause, you can no longer become pregnant.
Vaginal walls become thinner, drier, less elastic, and possibly irritated,
which can often cause sex to become painful. The risk of vaginal yeast
infections increases, and the external genital tissue and breast tissue thins.
The pubic muscles can lose tone, resulting in a prolapsed vagina, uterus,
or bladder.
Men do not experience a major change in fertility with age, but
testicular tissue mass decreases and testosterone gradually declines, along
with blood flow to the reproductive organs. Sperm production falls,
though it doesn’t stop. The volume of ejaculated fluid often remains
constant, but there are fewer living sperm in it. The prostate gland
enlarges as some of the prostate tissue is replaced with scar-like tissue.
Men can also experience problems getting an erection. Based on the
theory that reproductive uselessness can accelerate aging because we are
no longer able to propagate the population, it is important to maintain
regular sexual activity with age and even utilize many of the sexual
enhancement biohacks from chapter 18, such as acoustic sound wave
therapy, infrared therapy, or stem cell injections.
Endocrine System
The hypothalamus, located in the brain, produces hormones that control
the other structures in the endocrine system. Although the levels of these
regulating hormones stay the same as you age, the responses of the other
endocrine organs to those hormones can diminish.
--- END PAGE 1015 ---

--- PAGE 1016 ---
At thirty years old, human growth hormone begins its regression in
both men and women and declines at a rate of around 14 percent per
decade. When women transition into menopause, progesterone,
testosterone, and estrogen levels begin to fall. At fifty, thyroid activity
begins to decrease, and hyper- or hypothyroidism may develop.
Also at fifty, men may begin to experience andropause (the male
version of menopause, most notably accompanied by a decrease in
testosterone). In both men and women, a decline in DHEA (a potent
hormonal precursor) can cause increased vulnerability to a variety of
cancers. At sixty, as insulin production decreases and insulin cell receptor
sensitivity lowers, the ability to metabolize sugar declines, and insulin
resistance or diabetes becomes more prevalent. At seventy, hormones that
protect against the loss of calcium in bones decline, making osteoporosis
more prevalent.
One reason that the natural hormone replacement industry is now
booming is that it can be effective for mitigating many of the endocrine
issues that occur with age. However, more ancestral practices, such as
organ meat consumption, regular sex, care for the gut, and the avoidance
of modern plastics and endocrine-disrupting chemicals, can be equally
effective strategies.
--- END PAGE 1016 ---

--- PAGE 1017 ---
Circulatory System
At around forty years old, your heart muscles thicken and blood vessels
stiffen, which can cause the heart to fill with blood more slowly (this can
often occur earlier if you’re a hard-charging athlete). This forces the heart
to work harder to pump blood through the vessels and can lead to high
blood pressure and other cardiovascular problems, such as cardiac
arrhythmias. The receptors that monitor blood pressure when you change
positions can also deteriorate, which can cause dizziness when you stand
up from sitting or lying down. This process can be further exacerbated by
calcification, or excess calcium deposits, in the body, which manifests as
the stiffening of joints, plaque buildup on the teeth, a hardening of the
arteries, impaired brain function, and general aches and pains. Many
individuals over sixty have enlarged deposits of calcium mineral in their
major arteries, often caused by a lack of minerals in the diet, dehydration,
limescale in tap water, and even synthetic calcium supplements.
Abnormal heart rhythms can develop, leading to arrhythmias like atrial
fibrillation. The heart’s natural pacemaker, which controls the rate of the
--- END PAGE 1017 ---

--- PAGE 1018 ---
heartbeat, can develop fibrous tissue and fat deposits in some of its
pathways and lose some of its cells, resulting in a slower heart rate. The
walls of blood vessels, especially the smaller capillaries, can thicken,
resulting in a slower rate of exchange of nutrients and waste products. The
blood itself can change: the total water content of blood falls, and your
ability to produce new red blood cells and certain white blood cells
deteriorates.
The circulatory system also includes the lymphatic fluid that circulates
through the body, and if the lymphatic circulation stagnates, toxins can
accumulate and immune cells are not delivered to the areas of the body
where they are needed most, resulting in the deterioration of immunity
and a weakened ability to fight infection and disease.
Regular cardiovascular exercise, hydration, regular exposure to heat
and cold, and the lymph-fluid-circulating strategies from chapter 15 can all
help to stave off these issues.
Nervous System
The nervous system doesn’t decline with age as dramatically as some of
the other systems, but during normal aging, some nerve cell structure and
function is indeed lost, which causes messages to be sent more slowly.
Waste products can collect in brain tissue, causing plaques and tangles.
The most severe decline in mental function is a result of diseases such as
Alzheimer’s and other forms of dementia, which some doctors attribute to
these plaques and tangles. (Plaques are actually a part of the immune
system and release antimicrobial agents to deal with bacterial, viral, or
fungal infections in the brain, but over the course of a lifetime they can
accumulate in neural tissue, which causes cognitive decline.) Even
diabetes can affect thinking and behavior in older individuals.
--- END PAGE 1018 ---

--- PAGE 1019 ---
By age forty, the lenses in the eyes begin to stiffen, resulting in vision
impairment, particularly when focusing on near objects. Hearing loss
might develop, which occurs sooner in men than in women, and memory
also tends to worsen.
By paying close attention to and implementing the strategies found in
chapters 1 through 7, you can significantly support your nervous system
and keep these issues at bay.
Muscle
As the body ages, the muscular system undergoes significant changes,
leading to a gradual decline in muscle mass, strength, and flexibility. This
process, known as sarcopenia, typically accelerates after the age of thirty,
with individuals potentially losing 3 to 5 percent of their muscle mass each
decade. One of the primary reasons for this decline is a reduction in the
number and size of muscle fibers, particularly the type II fibers
responsible for strength and power. Additionally, aging muscles
experience a decrease in mitochondrial function, leading to reduced
energy production and endurance capabilities. The synthesis of muscle
protein also slows, impairing the body’s ability to repair and build new
muscle tissue. These changes are compounded by hormonal shifts,
including lower levels of growth hormone and testosterone, which further
hinder muscle growth and recovery.
The degradation of the muscular system with age has profound health
consequences, extending beyond a mere loss of strength. Muscle mass
plays a crucial role in maintaining metabolic health, as muscle is a primary
site for glucose uptake and utilization. A decline in muscle mass can
therefore lead to an increased risk of insulin resistance and type 2
diabetes. Moreover, muscles contribute to the body’s overall energy
expenditure; as muscle mass decreases, so does metabolism, often
--- END PAGE 1019 ---

--- PAGE 1020 ---
resulting in weight gain and associated health risks such as cardiovascular
disease. The loss of muscle strength and flexibility also increases the risk
of falls and fractures, particularly in older adults, compromising their
independence and quality of life. Additionally, the decline in muscular
health can affect respiratory function and the ability to perform daily
activities, further impacting overall health and well-being.
To mitigate the effects of aging on the muscular system, a combination
of resistance and endurance training is the best strategy, with the former
being the more potent, though the increased blood delivery to muscle that
occurs with endurance training can certainly help stave off sarcopenia.
Adequate protein and amino acid intake is also crucial to support muscle
repair and growth. This combination of exercise and protein stimulates
muscle protein synthesis, improves insulin sensitivity, and enhances
mitochondrial function. Regular muscle activity can even decrease the risk
of cognitive decline. For more on a concept called “muscle-centric
medicine” and the critical importance of maintaining muscle as an
antiaging strategy, listen to my podcast with Dr. Gabrielle Lyons, which I’ll
include a link to on the resources page for this chapter.
Skin
Stem cell production and stem cell availability both decline with age, and
one result of this is that the skin’s epidermal cells slow in their
reproduction. Melanocytes, which produce pigmentation, decrease in
number while the remaining cells increase in size. This can cause thinner,
more translucent skin, as well as large pigmented spots like liver spots.
Skin injuries, tearing, and infections become more frequent as skin
integrity deteriorates.
Loss of fat and collagen in the underlying tissues can cause skin to sag
and wrinkle, and the connective tissue loses its strength and elasticity, a
--- END PAGE 1020 ---

--- PAGE 1021 ---
process known as elastosis. The blood vessels in the skin become more
fragile, and bruising, bleeding under the skin, cherry angiomas, and other
conditions become more common. The skin becomes dry and itchy as the
glands that produce oil reduce their production levels. The fat layer
beneath the cutaneous layer of skin thins, leading to an increased risk of
skin injury and a reduced ability to maintain consistent body temperature.
Sweat glands produce less sweat, making it harder to cool off and
increasing the risk of overheating or developing heat stroke.
Stem cell–supporting strategies, along with the beauty tactics from
chapter 17, can help to keep all this from occurring or minimize these
effects.
Underlying Causes
So what are the underlying causes of this type of full-body, systemic
damage that occurs with age? There are a variety of factors that can
aggravate or accelerate age-related deterioration, but the following
processes are the major culprits.
CHRONIC INFLAMMATION
Inflammation can often go on for years without your noticing until
accelerated aging and disease suddenly set in. As a matter of fact, of the
ten leading causes of mortality in the US, chronic inflammation
contributes to at least seven:
• Alzheimer’s disease
• Stroke
• Chronic lower respiratory disease (asthma)
• Cancer
• Diabetes
--- END PAGE 1021 ---

--- PAGE 1022 ---
• Heart disease
• Influenza and pneumonia
GLYCATION AND GLYCOSYLATION
Glycation occurs when sugars in the bloodstream attach to proteins to
form harmful molecules called advanced glycation end products (AGEs).
The more sugar in your diet or the more chronically elevated your blood
sugar levels, the more likely it is that AGEs will develop, which can cause
inflammation and cell membrane damage that can result in the
development of degenerative diseases such as diabetes, atherosclerosis,
chronic kidney disease, and Alzheimer’s disease. Glycosylation, which is
different from glycation, is a process where carbohydrate chains (glycans)
are added to proteins or fat, and unlike glycation, this process requires
enzymes. When the enzymatic reactions for this process become
dysregulated, chronic inflammation, accelerated aging, and disease can
occur. An insightful test called a GlycanAge analyzes glycosylation and
provides a surprisingly accurate indicator of the state of your aging,
immune system, and inflammation.
METHYLATION DEFICITS
Methylation—the process of transferring a methyl group from one
molecule to another—is a crucial biological process that’s involved in
removing toxins, growing and repairing cells, and metabolic functioning.
Methylation deficits are linked to a number of health conditions, including
diabetes and cancer, and are caused by a variety of factors, including
stress, nutrient deficiencies, and genetics. See chapter 17 for more
information on genetic tests that can measure methylation.
DEGRADING MITOCHONDRIA
--- END PAGE 1022 ---

--- PAGE 1023 ---
A growing number of cell biologists have proposed that the number and
functionality of mitochondria can determine your potential for longevity,
and one major theory of aging—the free-radical theory—posits that the
oxidation of cells by reactive oxygen species (ROS) plays a leading role in
the weakening of vital functions in aging organisms. The mitochondrial
interior has been researched and found to be particularly susceptible to
this oxidation. In addition, since mitochondria exhibit less damage in
women than in men, scientists have speculated that the health of
mitochondrial DNA might be a factor in why women live longer than men.
Poor lifestyle factors, such as bad air, unclean water, artificial light,
electrical pollution, inflammation, a nutrient-poor diet low in
antioxidants, lack of exercise, and many, many others, can contribute to
poor mitochondrial status. Organic acid testing, CoQ10 and carnitine
measurements, oxidative stress markers, and a fatty acid profile can all be
used to determine mitochondrial health. Details on these tests are in
chapter 17, along with links on the resources page for this chapter.
FATTY ACID IMBALANCES
Fat is a vital nutrient, and the human body needs an optimal ratio of
omega-6 to omega-3 fatty acids to support normal cell membrane function
in aging cells. As you have already learned, a diet high in omega-6 (often
because of a high intake of vegetable oils) and low in omega-3, DHA, and
monounsaturated fats can create deficits or imbalances in fatty acids. The
OmegaQuant test described in chapter 17 can analyze the potential for
these imbalances.
IMMUNE DYSFUNCTION
Autoimmune diseases develop when your immune system turns on itself,
resulting in inflammation and organ and cell damage. Autoimmune
diseases—which include rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, multiple sclerosis,
--- END PAGE 1023 ---

--- PAGE 1024 ---
thyroid disease, and inflammatory bowel disease—are becoming
increasingly common, especially in an era of chemical exposure, antibiotic
overuse, and unhealthy guts. Tests like Cyrex and Zoomer can help
identify the presence of these issues.
TELOMERE SHORTENING
Telomeres are the segments of DNA at the end of our chromosomes, often
compared to the plastic tips of shoelaces that keep the laces from fraying.
Telomeres prevent chromosomes from becoming damaged or tangling
with one another. When chromosomes do become damaged, this can
cause the destruction of genetic information, leading to cellular
malfunction, which increases your risk of disease and overall mortality.
Telomerase is an enzyme that lengthens telomeres and keeps them
from wearing out too fast or too early and can be deleteriously affected by
lack of exercise, chronic stress, low plant consumption, and a lack of
mindfulness practices such as meditation and yoga. An accurate test for
telomeres is a SpectraCell or NOVOS Age analysis.
DNA EXPRESSION
Geneticists and oncologists have long recognized that overexposure to
environmental assailants such as chemicals and radiation can cause DNA
damage and affect the way genes are expressed. Nutrient depletion and
other environmental factors, such as electrical pollution and poor air,
light, and water, can also alter gene expression. Researchers have also
demonstrated that our genes can respond to our conscious thoughts and
emotions and even our unconscious beliefs.
If you feel that you are constantly fighting an uphill battle against the
aging processes of damage and degradation, you are right. Fortunately,
basic and natural habits to enhance longevity have long been studied, and
many directly affect the exact biological mechanisms involved in aging.
--- END PAGE 1024 ---

--- PAGE 1025 ---
Consider this chapter to be your guidebook to managing and mitigating
the issues you have just read about, beginning with the longevity basics,
then progressing to the more advanced tactics and biohacks.
Overmethylation and Undermethylation
For the carnivores out there, those who just have to have their meat, and the
meat eaters who say, “I like my steak. I like my steak with eggs,” there is a
problem. Most meat, particularly muscle tissue, contains high amounts of
methionine, which is a potent methyl donor. Over the next few paragraphs,
you will learn what a methyl group is, why it may be bad for you to
overconsume strong methyl donors, and how to eliminate the side effects of
overmethylation or undermethylation.
A methyl group is a carbon atom attached to three hydrogen atoms. It is an
abundant organic compound that is derived from methane. Normally, methyl
groups are attached to larger molecules, but on their own, they can be a
methyl anion, methyl cation, or methyl radical. Methylation occurs when a
methyl group is taken from one compound or molecule and transferred to
another—for example, a methyl group can be added to your DNA from a
methyl donor like methionine. The process is largely responsible for
switching genes on and off and silencing viruses. When your body
experiences normal methylation, less desirable genes, such as those that
code for cancers and autoimmune diseases, are switched off while helpful
genes are switched on. Methylation is also required for cell division,
neurotransmitter synthesis and metabolism, detoxification, cellular energy
metabolism, the formation of protective myelin sheaths around neurons, and
early central nervous system development.
The critical functions of methylation mean that when the process
malfunctions, your body can go haywire quickly. Undermethylation is a state
of low methylation, either because your body is unable to adequately
transfer methyl groups or because you’re not consuming enough methyl-
donating compounds or foods.
Overmethylation is a state of high methylation. Neither of these states is
necessarily bad (undermethylation, for example, is often associated with
--- END PAGE 1025 ---

--- PAGE 1026 ---
attention to detail, slight perfectionism, and high levels of personal
accomplishments), but they both have the capacity to cause different kinds
of mental and physical stress.
Because it can keep serotonin levels low, undermethylation can cause you to
be a dopamine-seeking, hard-charging high achiever. It can lead you to
pursue perfection and achievement and has been associated with obsessive-
compulsive tendencies, a low tolerance for pain, and ritualistic behaviors. A
state of undermethylation can also make people more susceptible to
depression.
Overmethylation is associated with creativity and sensitivity. If you are prone
to overmethylation, you probably exhibit high levels of empathy for others
but also experience sleep issues, food and chemical sensitivities,
hyperactivity, panic attacks, and a tendency to gain unwanted weight.
Overmethylation has also been highly correlated with schizophrenia.
If you are prone to undermethylation, you will do well with a high intake of
muscular meats. Because you do not have enough methyl groups being
transferred to places that need them—like your DNA—you might need to
consume a higher amount of meat to compensate, especially if you consume
high quantities of plant matter and folate, as these do not supply sufficient
amounts of methyl groups necessary for good health in undermethylators.
In addition, folate acts as a serotonin reuptake promoter. Drugs like
antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are received very
well by undermethylators, so any compound like folate that exerts the
opposite effect could be devastating to undermethylators.
If you are prone to overmethylation, the last thing you need is a higher
intake of methyl donors like muscle meat (such as daily servings of steak
and chicken). This would be an instance where vegetarianism or a largely
plant-based diet could be beneficial. If you are an overmethylator, you need
to consume adequate amounts of protein, but don’t become an extreme
carnivore and load up most of your plate with cuts of animals and the rest of
the plate with one-tenth of an inch of vegetables (that ratio should actually
be reversed!).
The only way to know for sure whether you are prone to undermethylation
or overmethylation is to undergo DNA testing via any of the DNA testing
services described in chapter 17.
--- END PAGE 1026 ---

--- PAGE 1027 ---
12 ESSENTIAL HABITS TO
ENHANCE LONGEVITY
Dan Buettner wrote the book The Blue Zones with the goals of discovering
which populations in the world had the highest number of centenarians
(people who live to be over one hundred) and teaching the world how to
use the lessons from these populations. The five Blue Zones where
Buettner and his team of researchers discovered the longest-living people
on earth were Okinawa, Japan; Sardinia, Italy; Nicoya, Costa Rica; Ikaria,
Greece; and the Seventh-Day Adventists in Loma Linda, California.
Buettner discovered several characteristics that the people in these zones
shared, such as these:
• A lack of smoking
• A high intake of wild plants
• A regular intake of legumes, usually prepared using ancestral methods
such as soaking, sprouting, or fermentation
• Constant moderate physical activity, not as isolated exercise sessions
or gym workouts but as a natural part of life (e.g., gardening, yard
work, walking, and bicycling)
• Healthy family relationships and social engagement (despite less use
of social media, people are extremely socially active and integrated
into their communities)
Other key characteristics Buettner identified were low-to-moderate
alcohol intake (especially wine and other fermented beverages), caloric
moderation and fasting, a strong life purpose, low amounts of stress, and
engagement in a spiritual discipline, religion, or belief in a higher power.
The accuracy and scientific rigor of the methodologies used to identify
these zones and attribute the causes of longevity have been subjects of
--- END PAGE 1027 ---

--- PAGE 1028 ---
controversy. Critics argue that the data collection methods may lack
precision, and the demographic analyses might not fully account for
factors like migration, genetic predispositions, or even inaccuracies in age
reporting. These potential oversights could lead to skewed interpretations
of longevity and the factors contributing to it. Some researchers suggest
that the Blue Zones concept oversimplifies the complex interplay of
genetics, environment, and lifestyle in determining longevity. Additionally,
there is concern that the commercialization of the Blue Zones brand,
including books, dietary supplements, and lifestyle programs, may detract
from the scientific objectivity required to accurately assess and
understand the determinants of healthy aging.
However, despite these considerations, I firmly believe there is
valuable information that can be learned from Buettner’s analyses. So how
can you practically implement these habits into your own life? Here are a
few potent and highly effective strategies, and some of the more common
roadblocks I have seen people run into during my own consulting and
coaching.
1. Don’t Smoke
Your telomere length is measured in base pairs, which are the building
block units that make up the ladderlike rungs of DNA. In childhood,
telomeres are about fifteen thousand base pairs long, but by the time we
reach old age, they have shortened to about three thousand base pairs,
which equates to a loss of about two dozen base pairs per year. The
oxidative damage inflicted by smoking a pack of cigarettes every day
destroys an additional five pairs each year. So, if you smoke for forty years,
it can rob you of more than seven years of life (obesity has a similar effect:
the telomeres of obese women can be as much as 240 base pairs shorter
--- END PAGE 1028 ---

--- PAGE 1029 ---
later in life than those of lean women, which is roughly equivalent to a loss
of about nine years of life).
Granted, there are some cases in which smoking can be beneficial.
Think back to chapter 5’s discussion of smoking or vaping loose-leaf tea,
organic tobacco, essential oils, and marijuana. In moderation, the stress-
reducing and energy-enhancing benefits of this practice likely outweigh
any cons derived from exposure to heated, potentially carcinogenic
compounds, especially when vaping. In addition, as you learned in chapter
5, it really isn’t the nicotine in cigarettes or cigars that is harmful.
But unless you have been living under a rock, you are no doubt aware
of the dangers of chronic smoking. Cigarette smoking causes almost half a
million deaths each year, nearly one in five of all deaths in the United States.
Secondhand smoke isn’t much better, causing frequent and severe asthma
attacks, respiratory infections, ear infections, sudden death in children
and infants, cancers like coronary cancer in adults, and, highly relevant to
what you’ll discover about longevity later in this chapter, extreme
hampering of effective stem cell mobilization (the movement of stem cells
to other areas of the body from their storage in bone marrow). In other
words, don’t smoke—period. As much as possible, limit your exposure to
secondhand smoke. Not only that, but because air pollution has been
directly linked to a decrease in telomere length, act proactively: if you live
in an apartment complex, work in an office, or frequent areas that expose
you to airborne pollutants, then use HEPA air filtration, houseplants that
filter the air, and other air cleanup tactics you will find in chapter 20. In
addition, increase your intake of whole-food, plant-based antioxidants or
full-spectrum antioxidants from supplements.
Undoing the Damage of Smoking
--- END PAGE 1029 ---

--- PAGE 1030 ---
The negative effects of smoking are well known, and it is therefore not
surprising that one feature of Blue Zones is a lack of smoking. Downsides to
smoking, and air pollution in general, include
• Habit formation from the effects of nicotine on the central nervous
system
• Withdrawal symptoms like anxiety, irritability, depression, headaches, and
sleep problems when you try to quit
• Emphysema, the irreversible destruction of the air sacs in your lungs
• Chronic bronchitis, the permanent inflammation in the lining of the
breathing tubes of the lungs
• Lung cancer
• The constriction and damage of blood vessels, which can lead to
peripheral artery disease
• Hypertension, a condition of chronically elevated blood pressure
• Increased risk of stroke
If you have been smoking, the good news is that much of the damage can
be reversed. The first thing to do is to stock up on supportive nutrients and
supplements for the moment you quit. When you quit smoking, your adrenal
glands, which secrete antistress hormones, must adapt to the lack of
nicotine and other addictive chemicals. You can support your adrenals with
adaptogenic herbs or supplements such as St. John’s wort or ginseng, along
with antioxidants like vitamins C and E. Research has shown you can
minimize the damage to your arteries by taking a taurine supplement once a
day for two months. Since smoking also damages skin collagen and elastin,
eat a diet rich in proanthocyanidins, a phytochemical found in red wine,
grapes, apples, blueberries, black currants, hazelnuts, pecans, and
pistachios. The polyphenols found in kale and sprouts can also repair your
lungs’ alveoli and bronchioles, so a former smoker’s diet should contain high
amounts of these foods, too.
When it comes to risk of smoking-related diseases such as esophageal and
lung cancer or cardiovascular disease, Dr. William Li’s excellent book Eat to
Beat Disease points out specific antioxidant-rich compounds that can lower
the risk of these diseases, such as black raspberries, extra-virgin olive oil,
and fermented forms of soy such as miso, natto, and tempeh. In addition,
one study examined the effects of drinking four cups of green tea per day
--- END PAGE 1030 ---

--- PAGE 1031 ---
on the stem cells and blood vessels of smokers, and noted a 43 percent
increase in endothelial stem cells over two weeks, along with a 29 percent
increase in vascular function.
Once you give up smoking, your body will begin to respond immediately. Six
hours after quitting, circulating levels of the poisonous gas carbon monoxide
will decline, and your heart won’t have to work so hard to pump oxygen.
Within twelve weeks, your lung function will significantly improve and
coughing, sinus congestion, shortness of breath, and fatigue levels will all
decline. During this time frame, your lungs’ hairlike cleaning structures called
cilia will regrow, similar to the way that the intestinal cilia can become
restored and renewed after you stop eating an inflammatory diet. After
three months, your sexual performance will improve as testosterone levels
normalize. After nine months, your risk of heart and cardiovascular
complications will fall. After one year, it will be like you never smoked,
especially if you use the strategies above.
Other dietary strategies that can help to reverse the effects of smoking
include these:
• Foods high in vitamin E, like eggs, nuts, and dark leafy greens
• Foods high in CoQ10, like salmon, beef, broccoli, and avocado
• Vitamin-C-rich foods that contain high amounts of bioflavonoids, like
grapefruit, spinach, and citrus fruits (especially kiwi)
• Foods rich in vitamin B complex, like dark leafy greens, eggs, fish, and
liver
• A full-spectrum multivitamin rich in antioxidants
Finally, on a recent trip to India, I was subjected to air-quality hazard indices
that resulted in the equivalent of smoking nearly twenty cigarettes per day,
particularly if I spent too much time outdoors. To treat this acute exposure, I
not only implemented the tips listed above but also took the advice of
several Indian physicians to use a desktop nebulizer for several weeks after
returning to the US. I purchased a $60 nebulizer from Amazon and
alternated between breathing GlutaStat (a liquid glutathione mix from
MitoZen) and a solution of one part 3 percent hydrogen peroxide mixed with
thirty parts saline. This was probably the most effective tactic I’ve ever used
to heal the lungs quickly, with the only more powerful solution being
nebulization of exosomes (details on those later in this chapter)—which is
extremely expensive.
--- END PAGE 1031 ---

--- PAGE 1032 ---
2. Eat Plants
Aside from the Seventh-Day Adventist population of Loma Linda,
California, most centenarians are not vegans or vegetarians. But most do
follow a predominantly plant-based diet, usually because they depend on
their own homegrown or locally grown foods. Long-lived Sardinians,
Nicoyans, and Okinawans tend to consume nutrient-dense produce they
grow in their own gardens and supplement them with smaller amounts of
animal protein, along with traditional staples like legumes, ancient grains
(such as quinoa, amaranth, and millet), sweet potatoes, and corn tortillas.
Plants deliver plenty of fiber, including insoluble fiber, a natural
anticancer agent, antioxidants, oxidized cholesterol reducers, blood-
clotting factors, and essential minerals. Perhaps most notably, plants—
especially wild plants, as I’ll explain later in this chapter—possess natural
built-in defense mechanisms that subject the body and gut to mild
amounts of stress, causing a hormetic response that can allow the body to
better mount its own antioxidant defenses. Thus, trace amounts of
saponins in quinoa; lectins in soy and potatoes; gluten in wheat, rye, and
barley; anthocyanins in berries; resveratrol in grape skins and red wine;
EGCG in green tea; sulforaphane in broccoli and other cruciferous
--- END PAGE 1032 ---

--- PAGE 1033 ---
vegetables; catechins in cacao; and other controversial compounds are
actually good for you. Even plants’ phytochemicals, which contribute so
many of the benefits of a plant-heavy diet, induce a mild, hormetic cellular
stress that precondition your body to respond better to other, more severe
stressors.
Even the mitochondria respond to this acute, sublethal plant-based
stress in a surprising manner. Insults like plant defense compounds, heat,
cold, exercise, and calorie restriction can temporarily impair or damage
mitochondria, but ultimately lead to the activation of adaptive
mechanisms that confer stress resistance and improve mitochondrial
function. This is a concept termed “mitohormesis,” and increasing
evidence indicates that the reactive oxygen species (ROS) such as
superoxide and hydrogen peroxide that accumulate in response to these
stressors can function as signaling molecules that promote health by
preventing or delaying a number of chronic diseases, and ultimately
extend lifespan. Of course, you don’t want to overdo it: the Free Radical
Theory of Aging suggests a linear dose-response relationship between
increasing amounts of ROS and oxidative stress on the one hand and
mortality events on the other, indicating that low doses of ROS exposure
decrease mortality while higher doses promote mortality.
One excellent book that explores this topic of phytochemical stress is
Eating on the Wild Side by Jo Robinson, which even advises cutting up or
tearing apart plants such as kale several hours before eating them. This
action causes the plant to believe it is being attacked by a wild animal and
to amp up its natural defense mechanisms, which then mildly stress your
body upon consumption.
In many of the Blue Zones, red meat is typically eaten only a few times
a month—notably during holidays and festivals—although sheep’s or
goat’s milk, eggs, and fish are eaten often, usually two or three times per
week. The animal products that are consumed tend to be raised locally,
--- END PAGE 1033 ---

--- PAGE 1034 ---
grass-fed, pasture-raised (or wild-caught, in the case of fish), and free
from many of the harmful substances commonly used in conventionally
raised meat and dairy, like antibiotics and growth hormones. Author
Michael Pollan’s recommendation to “eat food, not too much, mostly
plants” is sage advice, especially for those genetically predisposed to
thrive on a higher vegetable intake and lower meat intake. One exception
to this rule is the fermented meat consumed in countries like Portugal,
Spain, France, and Italy. In particular, the region with the world’s longest
average lifespan is actually a tiny country between France and Spain called
Andorra, where residents live for an average of 87.7 years. Andorran
sausages are preserved by fermentation, which concentrates
mitochondrial uncouplers and helps protect cells against death and
apoptosis, along with increasing polyamine bioavailability, which produces
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory capabilities similar to polyphenols.
Perhaps most interestingly, meat fermentation breaks down the sugar
Neu5Gc, which can be responsible for the inflammation that occurs in
response to meat consumption. Some companies in the US, such as
Paleovalley, produce fermented meat sticks should you want to give this
strategy a try; a properly wet- or dry-aged steak or other cut of meat offers
similar benefits.
When you do consume meat, rather than simply consuming the
muscle, which inevitably contains high levels of methionine and low levels
of glycine, which can be a mortality risk factor, consume the glycine-rich
offal, such as the organ meats, marrow, and bone broth. If, for gut health
or immune reasons, you plan to follow a plant-restricted diet such as the
carnivore diet, consider tapping into the cellular resilience benefits that
plant intake can bestow by engaging in other forms of mild stress, such as
frequent sauna visits, cold thermogenesis, fasting, smart amounts of
exercise, and exposure to sunlight radiation, and eat plants low in natural
defense mechanisms or plants treated to deactivate their defense
--- END PAGE 1034 ---

--- PAGE 1035 ---
mechanisms (read Dr. Steven Gundry’s book The Plant Paradox to learn
more about this strategy).
Finally, if you have existing gut issues such as IBD, diverticulosis, or
diverticulitis, you may want to be careful with excessive fiber intake from
plant matter and should instead choose herbs and spices over “big-ass
salads” and giant kale smoothies.
3. Avoid Processed and Packaged Foods
Refined carbohydrates, artificial flavors, processed vegetable oils, and
natural sweeteners are rare in longevity hot spots. It’s not that those living
in the Blue Zones never let themselves enjoy guilty pleasures; it’s just that
their guilty pleasures are typically antioxidant-rich treats such as local red
wine (one to two glasses per day), sake, coffee, herbal tea, or simple
desserts such as nuts, cheese, and berries or grapes. Soda, sports drinks,
candy bars, and packaged baked goods—including giant bags of sweet
potato chips or bottles of sugary so-called superfood kombuchas—simply
are not prevalent in these diets. You also won’t find these populations
consuming high amounts of popular so-called health foods that you find in
the healthy-foods section of many supermarkets, convenience stores, and
airport newsstands, such as packaged dried fruits, trail mix, energy bars,
and other items that notoriously include blood-sugar-spiking or
inflammation-producing compounds such as vegetable oils and simple
carbohydrates, often deceptively labeled as “organic sunflower oil,” “cane
sugar,” or “agave syrup.”
Instead, nutritional evaluations of diets in the Blue Zones have
revealed a high consumption of whole, real foods that your great-
grandparents would have recognized and a nutritional profile similar to
the Mediterranean diet. The diets include plenty of herbs such as thyme
and rosemary, foods low on the glycemic index and free from added sugar,
--- END PAGE 1035 ---

--- PAGE 1036 ---
healthier starches such as purple potatoes, yams, taro, or lentils, and foods
high in natural fats such as extra-virgin olive oil and fish.
The way I like to think about this is to look into what your ancestors
would have eaten, including investigating your genetic history using a
service such as 23andMe or AncestryDNA to see where your ancestors
lived, and then to eat a genetically appropriate diet based on what your
ancestors would have consumed.
4. Eat Legumes
A legume is a dry fruit contained within the shell or pod of a plant; the
most well-known are beans, peas, peanuts, and alfalfa. Beans, in particular,
seem to reign supreme in many Blue Zones. In Nicoya, black beans are
eaten in large quantities. In the Mediterranean, lentils, garbanzo beans,
and white beans are popular. In Okinawa, soybeans are eaten frequently.
This raises an eyebrow among many nutritionally savvy folks, especially in
an era of the popular Paleo diet, which frowns upon beans and legumes
because they contain high amounts of gastric irritants and natural plant
defense mechanisms such as phytates and lectins. But the fact is, legumes
are rich in plant protein, vitamins, minerals, appetite-satiating and gut-
supporting fiber, and, just as significantly, slow-burning carbohydrates that
do not cause a large amount of glycemic variability. Furthermore, the
process of sprouting can deactivate many of these problematic
compounds in legumes.
It is unclear whether the longevity gained from legume consumption is
conferred by the inclusion of slow-release carbohydrates with the
exclusion of blood-sugar-spiking refined carbohydrates such as white flour,
or whether the nutrient density of legumes is what makes them so special.
I suspect it is both. If you want to include a daily dose of legumes in your
diet, I recommend you use the same ancestral preparation techniques
--- END PAGE 1036 ---

--- PAGE 1037 ---
used in longevity hot spots, including sprouting, fermenting, and soaking.
You’ll find instructions for preparing a wide range of legumes on
BoundlessBook.com/19.
What Did Your Ancestors Eat?
Ancestral dieting seems to have become quite sexy of late. As we learn
more about genetics and how diet is controlled by and impacts genetic
expression, it seems to make sense that you should eat what your ancestors
ate. After all, you have inherited a set of genes that developed and adapted
to specific environments and diets, so it seems worth maximizing that
genetic potential.
For example, in my case, as someone from predominantly Northern
European ancestry, I eat plenty of fermented foods, meats, fish, eggs,
berries, and raw dairy, without a large intake of citrus fruits or other foods
my ancestors would not have encountered in their local habitat. If you are of
Scandinavian origins, your ancestors had good access to fish rich in omega-
3s and vitamin D, so you likely need a diet higher in fish and vitamin D for
optimal longevity.
Certain genes can also influence these decisions. For example, MTHFR
mutations that create a poor ability to methylate tend to cluster in regions
and populations where a group’s traditional diet was rich in folate. In a study
of people in sixteen different regions of the world, Mexicans, Hispanics,
Italians, and Chinese were more likely than others to carry MTHFR mutations
that increased the need for dietary folate. So, if you have Chinese heritage,
or your grandparents migrated from Italy, or your dad was Hispanic, you
should probably eat more folate-rich foods, such as leafy greens, organ
meats, and pastured egg yolks.
Or take the AMY1 gene, which codes for salivary amylase production.
Salivary amylase digests starch and carbohydrates, and the more AMY1
copies you have, the more salivary amylase you produce when you eat
carbohydrates—and the more likely it is that your ancestors ate relatively
high amounts of starch, and the more likely it is that you can handle a
slightly higher carbohydrate intake. Populations that are traditionally more
--- END PAGE 1037 ---

--- PAGE 1038 ---
agricultural, such as Japanese and continental Europeans, or populations
that are high-starch foragers, such as the Hadza people in Tanzania, have all
been shown to possess more AMY1 copies than populations that consume
less starch, such as those in areas of Turkey and Congo. If your ancestors
came from a region that ate more carbohydrates, you can likely thrive on
natural starches such as sweet potato, yam, plantain, other roots and tubers,
fruit, and rice.
One final example is the lactase persistence gene. Lactase is an enzyme that
enables an adult to digest lactose without getting gut distress, diarrhea, and
all the other mayhem that can happen with lactose intolerance. As you can
imagine, cultures that have not traditionally raised dairy livestock, including
those in Asia, Africa, and most of India, rarely carry the lactase persistence
gene. In contrast, if you are of European descent, you are probably lactose
tolerant.
Eating according to your ancestry is fascinating, isn’t it? For an even deeper
dive, I recommend reading Returning to an Ancestral Diet by Dr. Michael
Smith and The Jungle Effect by Dr. Daphne Miller.
5. Incorporate Low-Level Physical Activity
Throughout the Day
You won’t find many longevity hot spots engaged in soul-crushing
CrossFit workouts or long, teeth-gritting forays on an elliptical trainer or
stair climber. Centenarians in the Blue Zones tend to lead very active lives,
yet they rarely set foot in a gym or complete a formal exercise program.
Instead, being active is simply built into their life: they walk on average
five to six miles a day, farm, garden, spend time in nature, do many chores
with their hands instead of machines, and tend to engage in spurts of high-
intensity movement or structured movement through enjoyable exercise
that rarely involves pounding away on a treadmill or inching under a
barbell for a squat. These spurts involve activities such as yoga, tai chi or
qigong, hiking, and games or social sports, such as soccer.
--- END PAGE 1038 ---

--- PAGE 1039 ---
Take Shigeaki Hinohara, a Japanese longevity expert and physician
who died at the ripe old age of 105. In a New York Times story on Dr.
Hinohara, he described daily habits such as always taking the stairs (two
steps at a time) and carrying his own packages and luggage (my own rule: I
carry my bags through every airport and up hotel stairs as high as the
fourth floor). Incidentally, in case you are interested in what this fellow
ate, 130-pound Hinohara’s diet was relatively spartan: coffee, milk, and
orange juice with a tablespoon of olive oil for breakfast; milk and a few
biscuits for lunch; vegetables with a small portion of fish and rice for
dinner; and exactly 3.5 ounces of lean meat twice per week.
In chapters 9 and 16, you can learn plenty about how I hack my
environment using everything from a standing desk to kettlebell swings to
replicate the kinds of movements involved in gathering, gardening, and
hunting throughout the day, despite being relegated to a traditional post-
industrial office setting. In stark contrast, my wife Jessa spends her days
hauling alfalfa for the goats, feeding the chickens, pushing around
wheelbarrows full of compost and rocks, chopping wood, fixing fences,
planting trees, raking, shoveling, pulling weeds, and gardening.
Admittedly, I am a bit jealous of her routine because she spends most of
the day in the sunshine and fresh air working with her hands in an
ancestral way, but at the end of the day, we have both achieved a similar
amount of low-level physical activity.
Think about it like this: unless you are a professional athlete or one of
your primary goals in life is to train for and complete a triathlon, an
obstacle course race, the CrossFit Games, or some other modern-day
equivalent of a battle that requires you to train like a warrior, visiting the
gym at some point during the day should be an option, not a necessity.
Research backs this up, showing that it doesn’t matter how hard you
exercise at the beginning or the end of the day if you have your butt
--- END PAGE 1039 ---

--- PAGE 1040 ---
planted in a chair for eight continuous hours during the rest of the day, a
concept explored in detail in chapter 10.
6. Prioritize Social Engagement
In most of the Blue Zones, strong relationships come naturally because
social connectedness is ingrained in the culture. Compared to most
hyperconnected Western societies, they tend to be much more engaged
with, conscientious toward, and helpful to each other and more willing to
empathize, express feelings, and wear their emotions on their sleeves.
For example, Okinawans have moais, which are groups of friends and
families who live together their entire lives, spending time talking, cooking
together, and supporting each other. Sardinians often finish their days in a
local bar, where they meet their friends for a glass of red wine. Seventh-
Day Adventists in California mingle with one another weekly or even daily
during religious services and the observation of the Sabbath.
Family is also very important for people living in the Blue Zones. For
example, during their daylong Sabbath celebration each week, the
Seventh-Day Adventists focus on family, God, socializing, and spending
time in nature. Nursing homes and hospice care are rare in the Blue Zones
because people are expected to honor, value, and take care of the elderly,
especially older family members. As a result of their pivotal role in society,
elders are far more likely to have a social network, frequent visitors, and
trusted caregivers, resulting in less stress, more purposeful lives, and,
ultimately, a longer lifespan. As a matter of fact, I feel that the pros of
prioritizing social relationships and family dinners, even if it means
occasionally staying out past your bedtime or eating late at night,
outweigh the cons of the possible disruptions to your circadian rhythm
(especially because you can limit nighttime artificial light exposure by
--- END PAGE 1040 ---

--- PAGE 1041 ---
donning a pair of blue-light-blocking glasses or consuming a family dinner
by candlelight).
7. Drink Low-to-Moderate Amounts of
Alcohol, Especially Wine
In four of the five Blue Zones, people engage in moderate and regular
alcohol consumption. Take the Sardinians, for example. They are famous
for their regular consumption of a regional red wine called cannonau, a
dry wine that contains two to three times the flavonoid content of other
wines. Not familiar with cannonau? It is known elsewhere and more
popularly as grenache. Consuming wine with or before a meal can improve
the absorption of the artery-scrubbing flavonoid antioxidants in the wine,
and studies have shown that the consumption of wine as part of a
Mediterranean diet can reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and
cancers. Regular low-level physical activity boosts these benefits even
more. According to a study performed by the European Society of
Cardiology, moderate wine drinking and regular physical activity is a
potent combination for cardiovascular disease prevention. Indeed,
Sardinian shepherds often walk up to five miles a day to tend to their
flocks—and carry along a lunch of unleavened bread, fava beans, pecorino
cheese, and a local cannonau wine.
--- END PAGE 1041 ---

--- PAGE 1042 ---
You are no doubt familiar with resveratrol, a polyphenol found in the
skin of grapes that may protect the body against the oxidative damage that
increases the risk of cancer, heart disease, and dementia. Resveratrol can
also combat the formation of the plaque found in the brains of dementia
patients. This may be why the weekly consumption of alcohol is associated
with better cognitive function in old age. Plenty of additional research
backs up the link between wine intake, reduced stress, and longevity (and
as I’ll explain later in this chapter, certain compounds similar to
resveratrol can be used in a more concentrated supplement form). In
chapter 13, I alluded to the mild cellular stress that alcohol consumption
causes, which means that low amounts of a “toxin” can induce the body to
make its own endogenous antioxidants, thus producing increased cellular
resilience, similar to the hormetic effect of wild plants, herbs, spices,
exercise, calorie restriction, cold, and heat.
This type of frequent, moderate alcohol consumption is one of my own
nightly habits—most often accomplished via a digestif and bitters-rich
Moscow mule, a shot of a clean-burning alcohol such as gin or vodka on
the rocks with a splash of lemon and a hefty dose of bitters (a drink I
affectionately call a “Ben and Jitters”), or a glass of organic, biodynamic
red wine. As a matter of fact, I have one drink just about every night and
very rarely have two or more drinks, and since I began this practice six
years ago, I have never once been drunk or experienced a hangover (aside
from my very brief holiday stint investigating hangover pills for a Men’s
Health magazine article). For more on my personal approach to alcohol,
check out the podcast at BenGreenfieldLife.com/alcoholpodcast.
Don’t care for alcohol or have a history that makes it something you
need to be careful with? The good news is that tannin-filled, antioxidant-
rich beverages such as coffee and tea may confer similar benefits.
Sardinians, Ikarians, and Nicoyans all drink copious amounts of coffee,
and people in every Blue Zone drink tea, including Okinawans, who nurse
--- END PAGE 1042 ---

--- PAGE 1043 ---
green tea for much of the day, and Ikarians, who thrive on the frequent
consumption of a tea made with rosemary, wild sage, and dandelion. On
BoundlessBook.com/19, you’ll find links to some blog posts that provide
more information on the benefits of coffee and tea consumption, but in a
nutshell, these types of tannin-rich compounds seem to directly decrease
the rate at which telomeres shorten, even after adjusting for confounding
variables.
8. Restrict Calories and Fast
Caloric restriction (CR) is a reduction in caloric intake that is not
associated with malnutrition or starvation. Long-term CR has been
associated in multiple studies with better weight management and slowed
aging, as well as a reduced risk of diseases related to metabolic health,
such as type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and cancer. But for active athletes,
exercise enthusiasts, or people who already have a healthy body-fat
percentage, long-term CR can have some downsides, particularly making
one cold and hungry because of a drop in metabolism and lean muscle
mass. Who wants to live a long time if you have low libido and look like a
poster child for an antistarvation campaign? Sure, if your goal is rapid
weight loss or you are morbidly obese with lots of stored fat to burn, CR is
a good strategy to accelerate fat loss, but even that strategy should be
combined with periods of time during which you provide your body with
ample calories and nutrients, such as a weekly refeed.
Intermittent fasting (IF) is probably the most popular way to get the
benefits of caloric restriction without starving yourself. Just remember:
the long periods of time without eating are not as important as the fact
that it’s just difficult to eat as many calories when you are restricting the
number of hours you’re able to eat in any given twenty-four-hour period.
--- END PAGE 1043 ---

--- PAGE 1044 ---
At its most basic, IF simply involves alternating cycles of eating and
fasting, but the term encompasses many kinds of fasting, including these:•

Time-restricted feeding: Consuming all food within a three-to-
twelve-hour window each day, so you fast for at least twelve hours
daily•

Alternate-day fasting: Fasting for twenty-four hours, then eating
normally for twenty-fours, then fasting for twenty-four hours again,
and so on•

Eat-stop-eat: Fasting for twenty-four hours once or twice a week•

Fasting-mimicking diet: Consuming small amounts of food, about 40
percent of your usual calories, for three to five consecutive days•

Feast-famine cycling: Eating according to the seasonal availability of
foods•

Warrior diet: Fasting during the day and eating a huge meal at night
I’ll talk in more detail about a fasting-mimicking diet and feast-famine
cycling later in this chapter.
Research suggests that in mice, IF can prevent and reverse obesity and
metabolic problems, even when the mice eat an unhealthy diet.
Researchers at the Salk Institute for Biological Studies performed an
experiment that appeared in the journal Cell Metabolism. During the thirty-
eight-week study, the scientists fed groups of adult male mice one of the
following diets:
• High-fat
• High-fructose
• High-fat and high-fructose
• Regular mouse kibble
--- END PAGE 1044 ---

--- PAGE 1045 ---
The caloric intake for each group was the same, but in each group,
some of the mice could eat whenever they wanted while others were
restricted to feeding periods of nine, twelve, or fifteen hours. On
weekends, some of the time-restricted mice were allowed to cheat and eat
whenever they chose. Halfway through the study, a few of the unrestricted
mice were moved to the time-restricted groups.
By the end of the study, the unrestricted mice of each diet group were
obese and metabolically ill. On the other hand, each diet group’s mice that
were restricted to nine or twelve hours of feeding per day were lean and
healthy, even if they had been allowed to cheat on weekends. In addition,
the unrestricted mice that were moved to the time-restricted groups had
lost some of the weight they had gained! In other words, it doesn’t matter
whether a diet is high-fat, high-sugar, or both, or whether the diet is high-
calorie. The most effective factor in maintaining a lean body is eating all of
a day’s meals within a short period, preferably somewhere in the range of
eight to twelve hours each day.
Research also suggests that IF is effective in people, promoting fat loss
and improving insulin sensitivity. Fasting also allows your gut to heal if
you have been consuming gluten, gliadin, or other gut irritants, although
these benefits, and the many longevity-related benefits of fasting, reach
peak effectiveness after sixteen hours of fasting.
Centenarians in locations like Nicoya, Sardinia, and Okinawa are
unlikely to use fasting-related terms like time-restricted feeding, but they do
tend to eat relatively small portions of whole foods, consuming a low-to-
moderate-calorie diet by being mindful of their hunger and avoiding
calorie-dense, fat- and sugar-laden processed and packaged foods.
Okinawans practice the traditional cultural rule of hara hachi bu, which
means eating until they are about 80 percent full. Most meals are
consumed within an eight- to twelve-hour window, referred to by
--- END PAGE 1045 ---

--- PAGE 1046 ---
researchers as a “compressed feeding window”—which perfectly matches
the “new” 16-8 diet.
So why do all these different forms of fasting seem to work so well?
The most recent research on fasting suggests that it all comes down to
mitochondria, the tiny cellular power plants. Inside our cells,
mitochondrial networks generally alternate between “fused” and
“fragmented” states. Calorie-restricted diets and fasting promote
homeostasis and induce a healthy fluctuation between fused and
fragmented states, allowing mitochondria to live longer by cycling
between a natural growth and repair process. They also increase fatty acid
oxidation, which leads to fewer free radicals and less damage to your cells
and the mitochondria contained within them.
In chapter 12, I detailed my own daily and weekly fasting practices—
which are designed to make sure I get adequate nutrients for my active
lifestyle—and explained who should be particularly careful in their
approach to fasting. Later in this chapter, I’ll talk about my two favorite
longer-term fasting practices.
9. Possess a Strong Life Purpose
An eleven-year NIH-funded study that investigated the correlation
between having a sense of purpose and longevity showed that those who
expressed a clear purpose for their life lived longer than those who did
not, and those with purpose also stayed immersed in activities and
communities involved in fulfilling that purpose. This idea of purpose is
even expressed in idiomatic terms in Blue Zones: Okinawans refer to
purpose as ikigai (translated as “reason for being”), and Nicoyans call it
plan de vida (“reason to live”).
I recommend that you know your purpose and be able to express it in
one succinct sentence. My purpose in life changes every few years, and
--- END PAGE 1046 ---

--- PAGE 1047 ---
yours can too as you go through different chapters of life. For example,
several years ago my purpose was to “empower people to live an
adventurous, joyful, and fulfilling life,” and now it is to be a “wise teacher,
a humble leader, and a gracious human.” Need help identifying your
purpose? A manual to identifying your life’s purpose, such as Mastin
Kipp’s Claim Your Power or Sloww.co’s downloadable Ikigai 2.0 workbook,
can help, as can my spiritual discipline books Endure and Fit Soul. If you
want to begin as simply as possible, start with my friend Mark Manson’s
advice and simply choose to “do stuff that makes you forget to eat and
poop.”
10. Have Low Amounts of Stress
It is a well-known and heavily researched fact that chronic stress leads to
inflammation and serves as the foundation for nearly every age-related
disease. Centenarians in most of the world’s longevity hot spots do not
avoid all stress but do have built-in systems that allow them to manage
stress on a daily basis. For Sardinians, this might mean having a glass of
wine and a social dinner with family or friends at the end of the day. For
Seventh-Day Adventists, it could involve a quiet nature walk on the
Sabbath. For Okinawans, it is the concept of taygay (translated as
“easygoing personality”), which is based on the idea that life simply
unfolds at its own pace. In Okinawa, if an event is scheduled to begin at
noon, taygay may mean that people on Okinawan time begin showing up
thirty minutes to an hour later, which isn’t necessarily something I
recommend if you don’t want to get fired from your job. But you get the
idea: ruthlessly eliminate haste and hurry from your life. For the best
stress-reducing tips, including breathwork strategies, my most potent
tactic for stress, which relies on zero supplements or fancy hacks, revisit
chapter 3.
--- END PAGE 1047 ---

--- PAGE 1048 ---
One breathing concept that was not explored in chapter 3 is quite
fascinating and directly tied to longevity. My friend and former podcast
guest Anders Olsson has studied animals’ lifespans in relation to their
energy expenditure, metabolism, and oxygen utilization. In his blog post
“Breathe Less, Live Longer,” he notes that a common denominator for
long-lived species such as the naked mole rat, the bat, the short-beaked
echidna, the bowhead whale and the Greenland shark is that they have
slow respiration and a high tolerance for carbon dioxide (CO ). A fast and
2shallow breathing pattern corresponds to low CO tolerance, while deep
2 relaxation and breathing (particularly nasal breathing) low and slow
corresponds to a high tolerance for carbon dioxide.
Anders teaches two ways to increase the levels of carbon dioxide in
your body: (1) reduce your outflow of CO , and (2) increase your
2production of CO . When you slow down your breathing, less CO is lost
2 2 via exhalation, and when you perform rigorous physical activity, more CO2
is produced. A great method to train yourself for CO tolerance is to
2 combine the two by performing low-intensity physical activity (e.g., a brisk
walk or bodyweight strength training) while breathing only through your
nose. Over time this CO tolerance training resets the breathing center in
2 your brain stem and allows you to tolerate higher and higher levels of CO ,
2which in turn may help you to live a longer life. In addition, when you
engage in nasal breathing, your nose warms the air, filters it, moisturizes
it, and produces nitric oxide, a gas that reduces inflammation and
increases blood flow. (To learn more about Anders’s research, check out
the link on BoundlessBook.com/19.)
11. Engage in a Spiritual Discipline or
Religion, or Believe in a Higher Power
--- END PAGE 1048 ---

--- PAGE 1049 ---
Life can be more meaningful and hopeful when we believe that our story
has a great Author, rather than believing that everything we see and
experience is meaningless and without purpose, or that we are simply a
bunch of chunks of spiritless flesh and blood floating through space on a
giant rock before eventually dying and passing away into nothingness.
While many would scoff at the belief that there are gods and demons,
spirits and angels, and even one single almighty creator of the planet,
research has shown a connection between longevity and faith. One study
analyzed the relationship between religious practice, stress, and death in
middle age, and controlled for socioeconomic factors, health insurance
status, and healthy behaviors. The researchers found that churchgoers
have a significantly lower risk of dying, and after adjusting for age, sex,
race, and chronic medical conditions, churchgoers were 46 percent less
likely to die in the follow-up period after the study compared to non-
churchgoers. Non-churchgoers had significantly higher rates of blood
pressure and a higher ratio of total cholesterol to HDL cholesterol, along
with a significantly higher mortality rate.
It turns out that data from the Blue Zones backs this up. All but 5 of
the 263 centenarians Dan Buettner interviewed for his book belonged to
some faith-based community. Research also shows that attending faith-
based services at least four times per month can add four to fourteen years
to life expectancy. In all Blue Zones, centenarians were part of a religious
community. I can’t sum it up any better than Buettner, who concluded
that “people who pay attention to their spiritual side have lower rates of
cardiovascular disease, depression, stress, and suicide, and their immune
systems seem to work better . . . . To a certain extent, adherence to a
religion allows them to relinquish the stresses of everyday life to a higher
power.” This is particularly true for intrinsic religiosity, which is embodied
by those who view their religion as the framework for their lives and try to
consistently live the religion they believe, versus extrinsic religiosity,
--- END PAGE 1049 ---

--- PAGE 1050 ---
which is the use of religion to gain social acceptance or reward. In studies,
intrinsic religiosity is correlated to better overall well-being and health.
In the Bible, 1 Peter 5:7 recommends that we “cast all our cares upon
Him,” and in multiple other verses, we are told not to be so stressed about
the common things the rest of the world tends to fret about, like food,
water, and shelter. Being able to trust in and talk to a higher power is
certainly something that has given me a great deal of hope, confidence,
clarity, peace, and direction in life. Frankly, I believe that a religious
practice that includes spiritual disciplines such as fasting, meditation,
prayer, silence, solitude, worship, and study contributes even more
significantly to longevity than a salad of wild plants, a glass of red wine, or
a dose of sunshine. If I had to choose just one section of the Bible that
best explains how to optimize health and longevity through simple
religious practices and commonsense morality, it would be Proverbs 3,
which begins with “My son, do not forget my teaching, but let your heart
keep my commandments, for length of days and years of life and peace
they will add to you.”
12. Remain Reproductively Useful
This last natural strategy for optimizing longevity simply makes logical
sense: don’t become reproductively useless. In other words, the more
consistently you can send your body and brain the message that you are
still a valuable, contributing member of society, particularly when it comes
to the propagation of your species, the longer nature will want to keep you
around. Don’t retire. Don’t quit learning new things. Don’t surround
yourself with older, sedentary people in a nursing home or hospice setting.
Instead, continue to have sex, have children, or both.
Take, for example, the tiny town of Acciaroli, Italy, where one in eight
citizens is over one hundred years old. The elders in this particular Blue
--- END PAGE 1050 ---

--- PAGE 1051 ---
Zone are not your average centenarians—they are healthy, consistently
happy, and, you guessed it, horny. In the findings of a recent study on why
these residents live so long is the observation that sex is rampant among
them. Incidentally, the study also noted that the high consumption of
parsley, sage, and rosemary, all of which are aphrodisiacs, is prevalent in
this region.
Let’s take a closer look at what research has to say about this. In a
fascinating paper on proposed models of aging, one form of aging—
referred to as the Kirkwood and Holliday model—describes mortality as
increasing in direct correlation to decreasing fertility (a drop in hormones,
childbearing, and frequency of sex). According to this model, the more an
organism invests in the maintenance of their own biology (such as feeding
and physical activity) compared to propagation of their species (such as
mating rituals and reproduction), then the faster aging may actually occur.
Basically this model posits that the majority of an organism’s expendable
energy should be focused on reproduction and that when it comes to
prioritizing your antiaging efforts, having sex or making babies trumps
taking care of your body in other ways! A form of this model is also known
as the reproductive potential hypothesis, which maintains that life-span
regulation has evolved in such a way as to maximize individual
reproductive success, and research has indeed shown that women who
bear children later or simply bear more children experience enhanced
longevity.
The benefits of regular sex and childbearing seem to be backed up by
laboratory research from Dr. Michael Rose, who explained his theories on
the evolution of aging to me at a cocktail party at the Ancestral Health
Symposium (you’ll find a link to his website on BoundlessBook.com/19).
Dr. Rose proposed that aging is not a positively selected, programmed
death process and has not evolved for the good of the species, as many
would think. Rather, aging exists because natural selection is weak and
--- END PAGE 1051 ---

--- PAGE 1052 ---
ineffective at maintaining survival, reproduction, and cellular repair as we
enter old age. In a paper published in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B, he described how senescence (age-related deterioration) is
detrimental to reproductive success. The damage that occurs during aging
clearly shortens our lifespan, but longevity can also be shaped by selection
for an increased number of what are called lifetime reproductive events,
or the number of times you reproduce or attempt to reproduce.
In his book Does Aging Stop? Rose suggested that aging can indeed stop
or plateau in the later stages of life, pointing to the demographic data in
his large-scale fruit fly experiments as well as data on humans, both of
which support the hypothesis that acceleration in death rates can halt in
later life. While Rose had plenty of tips for enhancing this plateau,
including the controversial idea that grain and agriculture consumption
could accelerate age-related damage, one of his more potent suggestions
was to have plenty of children and plenty of sex early in life, then continue
to have children as late as possible, or at least to engage in frequent sexual
intercourse to as ripe an age as possible. For multiple reasons, I am a fan
of this idea, although I don’t see any issues with using contraception so
you don’t have dozens of children running around your house, which I
suspect might trigger a stress-related law of diminishing returns when it
comes to longevity.
The quite possibly fabled but intriguing Li Ching-Yuen, who
purportedly lived to the ripe old age of 256, was said to be a much-loved
figure in his community, marrying twenty-three times and fathering over
two hundred children. If it turns out that the story of Yuen is true, he may
be the best example of the fact that maintaining reproductive usefulness
with age could be an excellent idea indeed.
--- END PAGE 1052 ---

--- PAGE 1053 ---
ADVANCED ANTIAGING BIOHACKS
AND STRATEGIES
While the daily practices above are incredibly important for a long life, the
fact is that we live in an era in which those basic antiaging tactics can now
be combined with the more advanced tactics and biohacks used by the
longevity and antiaging community. In this section, I will offer more
advanced tactics that you can implement for longevity, including some
practical recommendations.
Because many of the health, antiaging, and longevity strategies I am
about to explore may seem—and often are—fringe, out of the ordinary, or
even mildly excessive, allow me to clarify my take on the concept of
implementing as many techniques as possible to enhance the quantity and
quality of your years.
I do not believe that immortality for its own sake is a noble pursuit,
nor do I believe that we as humans are capable of attaining a perfect body
or brain. I do not believe that grasping at straws to hang on to every last
shred of life, especially when driven by a fear of death, is a healthy way to
live. I have witnessed many colleagues, friends, and antiaging-industry
leaders spend too much of their precious time biohacking their bodies to
live longer while simultaneously sacrificing time with their family and
friends, a robust spiritual practice, and simple enjoyments, such as
learning to play the harmonica or creating a beautiful watercolor painting
or gardening with their children.
I am a Christian, and therefore I believe in a natural cycle of birth and
death, followed by the ultimate resurrection of our bodies into a state of
heavenly glory, unlike anything we would ever be able to accomplish here
on earth. But importantly, I also believe that each and every person,
including you, was born with a unique purpose, set of skills, and calling,
and that to achieve that purpose to the very best of your ability, you
--- END PAGE 1053 ---

--- PAGE 1054 ---
should equip yourself with a sound body and mind and take steps to
decrease the chances that you come down with cancer when you are fifty
or have a heart attack when you are sixty or lose your memory when you
are seventy because you made poor decisions about your health earlier in
life.
In other words, the longer you are on this planet, the better able you
are to fulfill your purpose in life, whether that’s inspiring others to
greatness, discovering the cure for cancer, making beautiful art, or writing
books that delight children around the world.
Furthermore, God has surrounded us human beings with wonders and
mysteries in both the natural world and the scientific domains that allow
us to engage in better living via a marriage of ancestral wisdom and
modern science, and that to ignore our ability to garden, forage, and create
new tinctures, capsules, oils, devices, machines, and techniques that allow
us to live healthier and longer is to neglect a big part of what it means to
be an intelligent human being who is far different from the rest of the
animal kingdom. It is to neglect our unique ability to explore, to invent,
and, ultimately, to create.
Now let’s dive into some of those discoveries, strategies, and
inventions.
1. Longer-Term Fasting
I’ve already talked about time-restricted feeding and the other kinds of
fasting protocols that fall in the “intermittent fasting” category, along with
all the reasons you may want to make fasting a daily practice. But for the
purposes of overall wellness and longevity, I am also a fan of the two
longer-term fasting approaches.
FEAST-FAMINE CYCLING
--- END PAGE 1054 ---

--- PAGE 1055 ---
Dr. Dan Pompa calls the ancient healing strategy of seasonal diet variation
based on food availability a feast-famine cycle. Many ancient cultures and
modern Blue Zones follow this kind of pattern of fasting and feasting.
Humans have not always had grocery stores, Instacart, and Uber Eats
services that provide food of all kinds 24-7. Instead, we have traditionally
been forced to eat seasonally according to what plants are in season, what
animal protein is available, and what nutrients are needed most at
different times of year. For example, in the winter, many Native American
tribes would give their dogs the muscle meat and subsist themselves
primarily on fats, especially the organ fat from the kidneys, liver, and gut,
because what they cherished most was the caloric density and nutrients
from the organs. In the summer, these same tribes would eat more roots
and berries, prickly pears, beans, pods, mustard seeds, cholla blossoms,
acorn squash, pumpkins, and a variety of gourds—a much higher
percentage of carbohydrates than in the winter, when consumption of
saturated fats reigned.
In his book Nutrition and Physical Degeneration, Weston A. Price
describes this Native American practice this way:
[Native Americans] cycled between the summer cultivation of starches
and fruits and far greater reliance on fats from animals (particularly
organ meats and marrow) during winter. . . . The successful nutrition
for nine months of the year was largely limited to wild game, chiefly
moose and caribou. During the summer months the Indians were able
to use growing plants. During the winter some use was made of bark
and buds of trees. I found the Indians putting great emphasis upon the
eating of the organs of the animals, including the wall of parts of the
digestive tract. . . . These Indians obtain their fat-soluble vitamins and
also most of their minerals from the organs of the animals. An
important part of the nutrition of the children consisted in various
--- END PAGE 1055 ---

--- PAGE 1056 ---
preparations of bone marrow, both as a substitute for milk and as a
special dietary ration.
How it works: Science has shown that periods of caloric restriction
and seasonal feast-famine dietary variations promoted health in
Indigenous cultures by forcing the body to use fat instead of glucose as a
primary fuel during the winter months. This also gave the digestive system
a rest and gave cells a chance to engage in the natural cell turnover known
as autophagy.
How to do it: Dr. Pompa’s 5-1-1 strategy, which combines seasonal
eating with cyclic ketosis, is a great place to start. For five days of the
week, follow a lower-carb, ketogenic diet (outlined in chapter 13) or,
especially if you are attempting to lose weight, a calorie-restricted diet,
primarily consisting of foods that are available locally and seasonally. One
day of the week, fast for twenty-four hours (from dinnertime to
dinnertime). The remaining day of the week, have a feast day, eating any of
your favorite healthy food—especially carbohydrates—ad libitum, until
you’re full.
The 5-1-1 rule can be modified based on body fat, schedule, and
physical activity levels. For some, a 4-2-1 or 2-2-3 approach works even
better. Bonus points if you eat seasonally as you implement this approach,
such as by eating more carbohydrates in the warmer months and more
proteins and fats in the colder months: fresh fruits and berries in the
spring, tubers and squash in the fall, heavier cuts of meat and fermented
foods in the winter, and so on.
FASTING-MIMICKING DIET
Fasting usually involves abstaining from everything but water and perhaps
black coffee and tea—no calories are consumed for the length of the fast.
However, another effective approach to fasting was developed by Valter
--- END PAGE 1056 ---

--- PAGE 1057 ---
Longo and is outlined in detail in his book The Longevity Diet: the fasting-
mimicking diet.
The fasting-mimicking diet (FMD) allows you to fast while consuming
a minimal number of calories, so you can supply your body with nutrients
while getting the benefits of fasting.
There are two ways you can implement an FMD:
• Alternate-day modified fasting, which is eating minimal calories every
other day for a twenty-four-hour period
• An extended FMD, which is the program Longo advocates in his book
and which involves consuming minimal calories for five consecutive
days
As a word of caution, like other forms of IF, an FMD may be harmful
for people who already have little body fat, the elderly, and children.
How it works: A typical alternate-day fast requires you to completely
fast for a full twenty-four hours, then eat to satiety for the following
twenty-four hours. It seems to be more effective than daily caloric
restriction for maintaining long-term weight loss and allows your body to
enter a powerful state of autophagy during the fasting stages. Fasting for
longer periods, from three to five days, can stimulate adaptive responses
such as autophagy, weight loss, and a long-term reduction of IGF-1,
glucose, and markers of inflammation and aging.
--- END PAGE 1057 ---

--- PAGE 1058 ---
An FMD produces many of the same physiological effects as these
kinds of fasts but still provides your body with optimal nourishment,
without activating the pro-aging pathways, including the growth hormone,
insulin, and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) pathways, which are
activated by normal diets. When you follow an FMD, your body does not
recognize that it is being fed and so believes that it is in a period of fasting.
This can strengthen the immune system by triggering it to replace old T
cells to combat particular invasive microbes; it can also improve insulin
sensitivity.
How to do it: An FMD is low in calories and particularly low in
protein. Longo’s formula is based on meals of about 360 calories each: 9
percent from protein, 44 percent from fat, and 47 percent from
carbohydrates. The diet is followed for five consecutive days; there are
three meals on the first day that amount to 1,090 calories and two meals
on each of the next four days, amounting to 725 calories each day.
However, you don’t have to follow this protocol for five consecutive days
—you can also alternate between normal eating days and low-calorie FMD
days.
Longo owns a company called L-Nutra that measures and packages
these meals as Prolon meal kits, which consist of vegan foods from natural
sources. Should you choose to follow Longo’s FMD diet, you can use these
kits for a five-day protocol once per quarter for impressive longevity
results.
However, I am not convinced that the minimalist meal kits Longo’s
company sells are necessary, and although they’re convenient and done-
for-you, they are also relatively low on the nutrient-density scale
compared to fresh, whole foods. But with wild plant intake and small
doses of superfoods such as spirulina, chlorella, bone broth, berries, seeds,
or nuts—along with a few biohacks such as essential amino acids and
--- END PAGE 1058 ---

--- PAGE 1059 ---
ketone esters—you can easily put together your own minimal-calorie
alternative to the packaged version.
One excellent example of a DIY approach can be found for free at
FMDrecipes.org, which contains a full list of recipes for an FMD diet,
based on Longo’s research. For example, the Eggplant Pâté with
Vegetables simply involves blending tahini, eggplant, oil, and lemon juice
in a food processor, then adding salt, cumin, and fresh garlic to taste, and
serving with a pile of vegetables. The Hearty Red Cabbage Slaw requires
chopping cabbage, carrots, cilantro, and an apple in a food processor, then
tossing the mixture with chopped nuts, pureed avocado, salt, pepper,
lemon, lime, and garlic. While these recipes are not affiliated with Dr.
Longo or his lab, they follow the macronutrient proportions laid out by his
research and can help you achieve your FMD goals.
Dr. John Douillard also has a five-day Ayurvedic cleansing approach to
an FMD, which is, in my opinion and based on my own trial with his
products, the best of both worlds: it combines a done-for-you diet that is
shipped to your house with a real-foods approach. This protocol, called a
“Kaya Kalpa” cleanse, includes daily consumption of the Ayurvedic
cleansing stew Kitchari, which Dr. Douillard ships in dried packets to your
home, along with a selection of ghee, herbs, and spices to maximize
lymphatic drainage during your fast. I’ve tried both the Prolon kit and the
Kaya Kalpa cleanse and have felt more clean energy and fewer appetite
cravings with the latter approach to an FMD.
2. Hormetic Stress
While chronic exposure or overexposure to stress can result in
inflammation and even life-threatening conditions, hormetic stressors are
acute stressors that stimulate a favorable and beneficial adaptive response
following brief exposure. These types of stressors range from the fasting
--- END PAGE 1059 ---

--- PAGE 1060 ---
protocols outlined above to exposure to cold, heat, or pathogens, to brief,
intense bouts of exercise.
Many scientists believe that if you do not expose yourself to different
hormetic stressors, your body may never develop an adequate adaptive
response to high levels of oxidative stress (remember that the free-radical
theory of aging posits that aging is the result of oxidative damage to our
cells). Here’s how it works: when you experience a hormetic stress, it
signals your body to enter a stress-resistant mode that tells your cells that
it is probably not a good time to grow old and die. For example, rats forced
to swim in freezing-cold water every day tend to live longer. Giving worms
electric shocks, restricting their calories, keeping them cold, and briefly
exposing them to heat makes them live longer—with these techniques,
researchers have made roundworms live up to ten times longer! On the
other hand, mice raised in a sterile environment free of pathogens do not
live nearly as long as mice that are exposed to bacteria and viruses in a
dirtier environment.
Some practical ways to experience hormetic stress each day include
lifting heavy stuff (refer to chapter 9), not stuffing yourself with
antibiotics (this can even mean not using antimicrobial or antiviral
essential oils every day), engaging in hot-cold contrast therapy (such as
alternating between hot and cold water when taking a shower—refer to
chapter 12), eating plants with a high polyphenol content (many of the
beneficial compounds found in plants are actually noxious and stimulate a
hormetic response), drinking wine for its polyphenols and similar
compounds, such as tannins and anthocyanins, calorie restriction (but not
too much!), exercise, and even consuming alcohol for its own sake (small
doses of ethanol may initiate a stress response). Below are a few of my
favorite forms of hormesis.
HYPERBARIC OXYGEN THERAPY (HBOT)
--- END PAGE 1060 ---

--- PAGE 1061 ---
HBOT delivers high-pressure air that is 100 percent oxygen, typically via a
full-body chamber or a face mask. These higher pressures enhance oxygen
delivery to every tissue in your body. HBOT is often used to treat
decompression sickness, infections, air bubbles in your blood, and wounds
that are not healing as well as they should due to diabetes or radiation
injuries.
How it works: Oxygen binds to the protein hemoglobin in your red
blood cells. HBOT results in a ten-to-twenty-fold increase in blood plasma
oxygen levels, including a significant increase in red blood cells. It also
promotes tissue repair, the formation of new blood vessels (angiogenesis),
wound healing, and the controlled release of reactive oxygen species in
damaged and infected tissues, which can stimulate a beneficial hormetic
response. HBOT may also have antifungal effects, caused by the reversal of
fungal growth and the restoration of a normal immune response. Finally,
the increase in free radicals and ROS from HBOT induces a
hyperoxygenation-induced hormetic response that can build cellular
resilience and can induce mitochondrial biogenesis and DNA repair.
How to do it: Although it doesn’t reach the high pressures you’ll find
in a hospital or medical clinic hardshell HBOT used for conditions such as
concussion and wound repair, I use a convenient at-home softshell HBOT
chamber made by HBOT USA. It’s perfect for naps, meditation, or reading,
and since HBOT works best with treatments of sixty to ninety minutes
multiple times per week, the benefits of owning a home unit add up
quickly. Dosing up with methylene blue and/or a nitric oxide precursor like
arginine or L-citrulline beforehand can assist with the production of nitric
oxide, which helps relax blood vessels and improve blood flow. This
enhanced circulation can optimize the delivery of oxygen to tissues during
HBOT sessions. If you don’t have access to an HBOT, you can achieve
similar benefits with EWOT (exercise with oxygen training) using a
LiveO2, IHT (intermittent hypoxic training) with a Cellgym, regularly
--- END PAGE 1061 ---

--- PAGE 1062 ---
scheduled breathwork sessions using an app like Othership or The Breath
Source, or the use of the same kind of static apnea table that freedivers
use. The advantage of using EWOT and IHT is that you get the added
hormetic benefit of hypoxia. Brief periods in a low-oxygen or altitude-
simulated state can trigger the expression of several inflammatory
mediators that signal tissue damage and initiate a survival hormetic
response.
WILD PLANTS
Humankind has foraged for food, medicine, and health-enhancing
compounds for thousands of years. In fact, it is entirely possible that there
are plants growing right in your own backyard that can be used to enhance
digestion, increase cognitive performance, and improve endurance. You
just have to know how to use them.
A wild plant is any noncultivated plant or herb that, when consumed,
lends some kind of benefit to your immune system, digestive system,
cardiovascular system, or nervous system, or even several of these systems
at once. Plants that grow wild are exposed to more environmental
stressors than much of the domesticated produce you find in the aisles of
the grocery store, and they can pass on their built-in stress-resilience
factors to your body when you consume them.
Take mint, for example. The dainty, mild taste of the small mint leaves
I can buy in a small plastic container from the grocery store absolutely
pales in comparison to the intense flavor and potency of the beat-up wild
mint that grows in the forest behind my house—and the latter confers far
more benefits.
How it works: Fruits and vegetables contain potent compounds that
improve your health in a variety of ways, including phenols, polyphenols,
phytochemicals, chlorophylls, and cytokines. The scientific term for this is
xenohormesis, which simply means that environmentally stressed plants
--- END PAGE 1062 ---

--- PAGE 1063 ---
can produce compounds that can confer stress resistance and survival
benefits to animals that consume them. These xenohormetic plant
compounds can, when ingested, improve longevity and fitness by
activating your stress response.
There are thousands of such plants that you can forage and consume.
Clover, cattail, chicory, greater burdock, amaranth, field pennycress,
plantain, kelp, fireweed, and even the lowly dandelion in your backyard are
just a few examples.
How to do it: A local wild-plant-foraging class or meetup is a good way
to get up to speed on what is growing wild in your area, and a trip to your
local farmers market for ugly, dirty, bitter, sour, and misshapen produce
can also leave you with a whole canvas bag or burlap sack chock-full of
xenohormetic goodies. The trick is to eat as wide a variety of wild plants
and herbs as you can by mixing them into teas, smoothies, stir-fries,
salads, and other dishes throughout the week. If you are on the go or don’t
have time to forage, one of my favorite resources for organic, heirloom
wild plant extracts and powders is Dr. Thomas Cowan’s Vegetable
Powders (you’ll find a link on BoundlessBook.com/19).
As a general rule, if you cannot clearly identify a plant or herb and are
not sure if it is poisonous, do not consume it. Stay away from plants that
have milky or discolored sap; spines, fine hairs, or thorns; beans, bulbs, or
seeds inside pods; a bitter or soapy taste; foliage that looks like dill,
carrots, parsnips, or parsley if you aren’t 100 percent certain of the
identification; almond scents in the woody parts and leaves; grain heads
with pink, purplish, or black spurs; and three-leaved growth patterns. A
few apps that can be helpful for identifying wild plants are FlowerChecker,
which gives you access to a team of live botanists, and PlantSnap,
LeafSnap, and PlantID, which use artificial intelligence for plant
identification.
HYDROGEN-RICH WATER
--- END PAGE 1063 ---

--- PAGE 1064 ---
Hydrogen-rich water is essentially purified water infused with molecular
hydrogen (H gas dissolved in the water). In chapter 12, I explained that I
2 use this form of hydrogen to improve my recovery and performance. I
drink hydrogen-rich water from an H -water-generating bottle and travel
2with hydrogen tablets (Quicksilver Scientific and Water & Wellness are
two good sources). Molecular hydrogen medicine capitalizes on the
therapeutic benefits of hydrogen, which has both antioxidant and
cytoprotective effects. It is nontoxic, even at high concentrations, and
diffuses rapidly among your cells.
How it works: Molecular hydrogen has been shown to produce a
profound improvement on stem cell availability, decrease the rate at which
telomeres shorten (which are one of the major biomarkers for aging), and
activate the same SIRT1 pathways targeted by sirtuin-rich foods such as
blueberries and green tea, which results in improved mitochondrial
function. It also increases the expression of antioxidative enzymes in the
Nrf2 pathway, indicating that the mild hormetic stress caused by H2
increases resilience in cells stressed with excess oxidation from sources
such as airline travel or heavy exercise. I’m convinced that very few
modern nutritional interventions rival the broad range of anti-
inflammatory and antioxidant benefits of hydrogen-rich water.
How to do it: Molecular hydrogen is usually consumed via tablets
dissolved for a few minutes in water, canned hydrogen-rich water, or
hydrogen-rich water generated by machines or bottles. There is no current
upper limit of toxicity for hydrogen-rich water, and the director of the
Molecular Hydrogen Foundation, Dr. Tyler Lebaron, recommended on my
podcast episode with him to consume hydrogen-rich water twice per day,
morning and evening. Because molecular hydrogen also inhibits NADPH
oxidase (NOX), an enzyme that can lower your levels of NAD (a molecule
explained in detail later in this chapter), you can compound the beneficial
effect by pairing hydrogen-rich water with other natural NOX inhibitors
--- END PAGE 1064 ---

--- PAGE 1065 ---
you’ll find in this chapter, particularly pomegranates, blueberries, grapes,
green tea, and berberine. Companies like Echo, HydroLite, and Python
make H water bottles, and I get my tablets from Water & Wellness.
2 For a potent combination of NOX inhibition and hydrogen, you can
consume fermented beet drinks or beet juice with hydrogen tablets
dissolved in the liquid. In most cases, you’d benefit from the performance-
enhancing benefits of beets by swishing them in your mouth so that your
mouth bacteria enhance the conversion to nitric oxide, but hydrogen
water accelerates this process for you, so no swishing is required. Thus,
fermented beets and hydrogen-rich water are a match made in heaven.
COLD THERMOGENESIS
Cold thermogenesis (CT) is the practice of intentionally exposing parts of
the body to cold to induce an adaptive, beneficial hormetic response. CT
practices include cold baths, cold showers, ice soaks, going outside on a
cold day, keeping your house cold, or spending time in a cryotherapy
chamber. Years of research have shown that cold exposure can cause
significant increases in metabolism and calorie-burning, increase insulin
sensitivity, reduce systemic inflammation, improve sleep and recovery,
and potentially fight certain types of cancer. In summary, cold
thermogenesis is a potent method to promote overall longevity and
health.
How it works: As I talked about in chapter 8, CT is most often
championed as a weight-loss strategy because it helps burn fat. Cold
exposure also shuts down inflammation caused by exercise and wounds
and activates the sympathetic, fight-or-flight nervous system, which
regulates the mobilization and metabolism of stored fat.
But CT also enhances longevity, as does any exposure to hot or cold
that mildly stresses the body. We can see this in many animal studies. For
example, in 1986, a researcher at Washington University immersed lab rats
--- END PAGE 1065 ---

--- PAGE 1066 ---
in cold water for four hours each day. The rats burned so many extra
calories that they ate twice as much as control rats, but they weighed less
and lived 10 percent longer. Two decades later, researchers at the Buck
Institute for Aging Research exposed lab worms to repeated heat shocks,
and these worms lived 10 to 20 percent longer, largely by generating a
surge of protective compounds called heat shock proteins.
Many other animal studies have also shown that animals live longer
when exposed to hormetic stresses such as starvation, toxins, radiation,
infections, heat, and cold. It seems to be a universal adaptation—for
instance, in general, when cold-blooded animals are exposed to cold, their
metabolisms slow and they live longer, but when warm-blooded animals
are exposed to cold, their metabolisms speed up to maintain body
temperature, and they also live longer. It appears that both responses are
part of an ancient genetic mechanism that senses temperature and slows
aging as a survival mechanism. The theory goes that when something in
the environment, such as a famine or cold snap or epidemic, is killing off
part of the population, the rest of the population responds by getting
tougher and living longer.
How to do it: Rather than spending the time and expense to hunt
down a cryotherapy chamber, I take a cold shower or jump into a cold
pool, lake, river, sea, or my home cold plunge setup for one to five minutes
once or twice a day. This type of cold-water immersion has repeatedly
been shown to be superior to cryotherapy for tapping into the many
benefits of cold. Many of my clients who are too busy to get wet wear a
Cool Fat Burner vest or a Cool Gut Buster belt for thirty to sixty minutes
per day while they are working.
Finally, once or twice per week, I recommend a longer ten-to-twenty-
minute cold soak or ice bath that brings you to a state of shivering, a series
of two or three rounds of two-to-three-minute cold baths interspersed
with two-to-three-minute sessions of Wim Hof or box breathing (see
--- END PAGE 1066 ---

--- PAGE 1067 ---
chapter 3), or, my personal Sunday favorite, five minutes of hot tub with
five minutes of cold plunge, followed by four minutes hot and four
minutes cold, laddering all the way down to one minute of each. These
longer, more intensive, and colder soaks or hot-cold contrast sessions can
significantly enhance the conversion of white fat to brown fat (a key part
of how CT helps burn fat—see chapter 8 for details) and can also be used
as a quick hangover cure, cognitive boost, or what I consider to be a “cup
of coffee for your entire body.” But this kind of extended exposure can be
overly stressful if done too often, so I recommend limiting it to one or two
sessions per week. Interestingly, the genes responsible for enhancing
lifespan in response to cold also seem to be activated by eating Japanese
horseradish (wasabi). So perhaps a post-CT visit to your local sushi joint
may be in order. Other supplements that can increase metabolically active
brown-fat tissue activation in response to cold exposure include bitter
melon, L-BAIBA, cayenne, forskolin, melatonin, and Grains of Paradise,
which I keep in my countertop pepper grinder as an alternative to regular
black pepper.
HYPERTHERMIA THERAPY
As the name implies, hyperthermia therapy involves exposure to high
temperatures and can include dry sauna, infrared sauna, heating mats, hot
tubs, hot springs, sauna suits, or exercise on a hot day. Traditionally,
hyperthermia therapy has principally been used to treat cancer, but the
heart health and cellular resilience processes that it triggers make it a
strategy for increased lifespan as well. While overheating and entering a
state of extreme hyperthermia, in which your body temperature rises too
high, is incredibly dangerous, controlled heat exposure is a powerful way
to improve your longevity and well-being.
How it works: A recent study on hyperthermia published in JAMA
Internal Medicine describes typical sauna use by Finnish adults—more
--- END PAGE 1067 ---

--- PAGE 1068 ---
specifically, the Finnish practice of frequent sessions in a dry, hot sauna
heated to between 170 and 176 degrees Fahrenheit.
In this groundbreaking study, over 2,300 middle-aged men from
Finland were divided into different groups based on how often they used a
sauna: once a week, two or three times a week, or four to seven times a
week. They were also sorted according to the duration of their typical
sauna session: fewer than eleven minutes, eleven to nineteen minutes, or
longer than nineteen minutes. After two decades, the researchers found
that the higher the frequency of sauna use, the lower the risk of sudden
cardiac death, fatal cardiovascular disease, and all-cause mortality.
Compared with short sauna sessions (less than eleven minutes), men who
spent between eleven and nineteen minutes in the sauna had a 7 percent
lower risk of sudden cardiac death. For those with even longer sessions—
nineteen minutes or more—the risk of sudden cardiac death was much
lower (52 percent lower risk).
Why does a sauna provide such powerful medical benefits? The
researchers pointed to previous studies that suggested the heart rate
increase triggered by heat exposure may mimic the cardiovascular stress
of exercise, and they also suggested that frequent sauna use could improve
lung capacity. But there’s also another factor involved.
Hyperthermic treatment of up to 120 degrees Fahrenheit for a wet
sauna and between 158 and 212 degrees Fahrenheit for a dry sauna has
been shown to cause a significant expression of heat shock proteins (HSP)
in muscle. HSP have been implicated in longevity and aging in many
species because they chaperone misfolded or newly synthesized proteins,
protect cells from protein misfolding, and strengthen the immune system.
The induction of HSP could potentially maintain protein homeostasis and
improve longevity by refolding damaged proteins, which accumulate
during aging and are toxic to cells. A decrease in HSP in aging is associated
with the disruption of cellular homeostasis, which causes cancer, cell
--- END PAGE 1068 ---

--- PAGE 1069 ---
senescence, and neurodegeneration. The triggering of HSP is also
correlated with 30 percent more muscle regrowth after a week of physical
immobilization. That means that if you can’t weight train, you have a
recovery day, or you are injured, you can still maintain muscle using heat
therapy. Sauna therapy can also increase oxygen consumption and red
blood cell production following exercise, improve stress resistance, and
aid in the detoxification of chemicals and heavy metals.
How to do it: At least twice per week (though you can do it every day),
try to get into a dry sauna (at 170 to 180 degrees Fahrenheit), wet sauna
(at 110 to 120 degrees Fahrenheit), or infrared sauna (at 130 to 160 degrees
Fahrenheit) for fifteen to forty minutes, or until you achieve a noticeable
rise in heart rate, sweat production, or both. If you opt for a wet sauna or
steam room, ensure that any water piped into that room is filtered for
elements such as chlorine and fluoride.
If you don’t have access to a sauna, consider saving harder workouts
for the hottest time of the day, perform your normal workout wearing
multiple layers of clothing, or even drive home from the gym with the
heater on full blast or the A/C turned off in your car. For a more relaxed
and passive form of hyperthermia, I wrap myself in an infrared sauna
blanket (HigherDose is a good brand) or take a nap on a Biomat, which I
increase to its maximum temperature for a combination of hyperthermia
and infrared exposure. Performing some of your hyperthermia in a state of
parasympathetic nervous system activation—instead of simply exercising
while hot—may enhance the detoxification effects.
Finally, keep in mind that the sauna culture in Finland is far different
from that in many other countries. For example, when I make my annual
foray to Finland and visit the Finnish Sauna Society (an experience I
highly recommend), they aren’t tapping on their phones, chatting,
watching a built-in sauna TV, or doing anything else. They’re simply sitting
silently, breathing and meditating, and then jumping into a cold river, lake,
--- END PAGE 1069 ---

--- PAGE 1070 ---
or ocean and socializing in the cold air outside the sauna. I suspect that
these regular moments of relaxation and fellowship and the addition of
cold exposure are significant contributors to the longevity-enhancing
effects of the sauna that have been demonstrated in Finnish men.
UVA AND UVB RADIATION
UVA and UVB radiation, along with UVC radiation, comprise the UV
radiation that is given off by the sun. As you no doubt know, sunblock is
designed to minimize exposure to these rays because they can cause
cellular damage and even lead to cancer. But when you expose yourself to
low, controlled levels of UVA and UVB radiation, you can actually trigger a
hormetic stress response. As with cold and heat exposure, it is about
finding and using the right amount of exposure.
How it works: One of the primary ways that UVB exposure enhances
health is by elevating levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D, the major circulating
form of vitamin D, in people with low baseline levels. Vitamin D is
essential for protein, bone, and calcium homeostasis, and a deficiency in
25-hydroxyvitamin D is associated with an increased risk of age-related
chronic diseases, including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, cognitive
impairment, and cancer, so UVB exposure has a wide range of health
--- END PAGE 1070 ---

--- PAGE 1071 ---
benefits. UVA exposure, on the other hand, generates nitric oxide, which
reduces blood pressure and can act as an antimicrobial.
The benefits of UV radiation don’t stop with UVA and UVB. It is well
known that inducing low or intermittent levels of repairable damage in
cells and tissues—such as occurs with UV exposure—is a good thing
because it triggers short-term bursts of more aggressive cellular
maintenance, and the end result is a net gain in the quality of the cellular
environment—meaning fewer damaged proteins. In one fascinating study
from the 1980s, researchers assessed the effects of radiation hormesis on
both young and old dogs. They reported a gain of remaining life
expectancy of 15 percent in older dogs and 50 percent in younger dogs.
Some of the short-lived bird species in Chernobyl have developed
enhanced anticancer mechanisms by producing higher levels of
antioxidants to protect their DNA, and one Taiwanese study even noted a
hormetic response in humans exposed to cobalt-60 radiation! While I
don’t think this means you need to go pitch a tent at the base of
Chernobyl, these studies, along with several others, do indicate that low-
intensity ionizing radiation is a hormetic stressor.
How to do it: They’re often vilified as cancer chambers, so you may be
surprised to learn that tanning beds, especially those outfitted with UVB
bulbs, can be a good way to get UV exposure. A lot of people sell used
tanning beds online, mostly because they consider tanning to be
unhealthy; a used bed, including the bulbs, will usually cost you between
$1,500 and $2,000. Higher-end tanning beds are a lot more expensive but
not necessarily better—most contain plenty of useless options, such as
Bluetooth and aromatherapy.
I recommend outfitting your tanning bed with a Wolff Dark Tan II Plus
lamp, which combines the highest UVB rating with the lowest UVA rating
(UVA rays may be more carcinogenic than UVBs), or another good lamp
called a Collatan Maxi Twist. Some high-end beds emit UVA, UVB, and red
--- END PAGE 1071 ---

--- PAGE 1072 ---
light, such as the Ergoline 1600 from Europe, but these cost well over
$30,000. There are online resources for more healthy UVB tanning bed
options, and on BoundlessBook.com/19, you’ll find links to these as well as
to links for good lamp and bulb options.
For a more convenient option, you can try a panel like the EMR-Tek
Krypton UV, designed to emulate the sun’s beneficial wavelengths,
particularly focusing on UVB radiation to facilitate natural vitamin D
synthesis in the skin. Equipped with narrow-band UVB tubes, it effectively
stimulates vitamin D production, offering a viable solution for people with
limited sun exposure. It also incorporates red and near-infrared LEDs to
provide a balanced light spectrum, promoting overall skin health and
mitigating potential UV-induced damage.
Should you decide to forgo the tanning bed or spendy light panel, the
most natural way to get low-level doses of UVA and UVB radiation is with
multiple ten-to-thirty-minute sessions of exposure to sunlight,
particularly between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. This can be as
simple as saving your daily phone calls or podcasts or audiobooks for a
walk in the sunshine or having lunch outside with as much skin exposed as
possible. If your skin burns, it is a telltale sign you have gone far past the
level of healthy hormesis.
Incidentally, there is some research on the benefits of exposing your
body to red and near-infrared light before and after UV ray exposure,
particularly with respect to skin protection and vitamin D production, so
getting evening sunlight (which has more red and near-infrared rays) and
using light-producing devices such as infrared panels in conjunction with
sun exposure can be a good biohack for limiting any potential sun damage.
A similar effect can be obtained by taking the supplement astaxanthin.
Unless you’re in the sun for long periods and risk a sunburn, you
should moderate your use of sunscreen, which Outside magazine has called
the “new margarine” because, although it was once considered convenient
--- END PAGE 1072 ---

--- PAGE 1073 ---
and safe, it is now associated with a growing number of issues, such as
vitamin D and nitric oxide deficiencies, increased risk of blood clots, and
high blood pressure. When I am in the sun for longer than an hour, I apply
a natural SPF oil such as coconut oil to the more sensitive skin on the
neck and face, or use a natural sunscreen (check EWG.org for the best
brands). Please also pay close attention to the discussion of lighting in
chapter 20, which has plenty more about how light can help or hurt your
health depending on how you use it.
3. Caloric-Restriction Mimetics
Earlier in this chapter, I talked about the health benefits of limiting the
number of calories you eat each day. Caloric-restriction mimetics (CRMs)
are drugs or other natural compounds that mimic the benefits of true
caloric restriction. You’ve already learned about ketones, which are one
powerful CRM. Another newer done-for-you option is the supplement
Mimeo. Based on years of clinical research at UC Davis studying the
underlying biology of fasting, Mimeo’s team discovered that four
bioactives (spermidine, nicotinamide, palmitoylethanolamide [PEA], and
oleoylethanolamide [OEA]) were uniquely elevated in the body during a
thirty-six-hour fast, and they then created a supplement that contains
these compounds. I’ve used it in the morning, and it is shockingly effective
at reducing appetite without the negative side effects of semaglutide
peptides like Ozempic or Wegovy, discussed in chapter 8. The following
are a few of the other most powerful CRMs.
RAPAMYCIN
Rapamycin, also known as sirolimus, is a medication traditionally used to
coat coronary stents, prevent organ transplant rejection, and treat a rare
and difficult-to-pronounce lung disease called lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
--- END PAGE 1073 ---

--- PAGE 1074 ---
It also inhibits excess activation of immune T cells and B cells by reducing
their sensitivity to interleukin-2, specifically by inhibiting the mTOR
signaling pathway, which is a master regulator of cell growth and
metabolism—this inhibiting effect is similar to the effects of caloric
restriction. Since mTOR inhibition is synonymous with longevity,
rapamycin is now being studied and utilized by many longevity enthusiasts
as an antiaging compound.
Rapamycin is produced by the bacterium Streptomyces hygroscopicus
and was isolated for the first time in 1972 by Canadian researchers from
samples of S. hygroscopicus found on Easter Island. It was given the name
rapamycin after the native name of the island: Rapa Nui.
How it works: Rapamycin is known as an antibiotic and
immunosuppressant. But in mammals, rapamycin also targets the mTOR
signaling pathway. As DNA or cells become damaged, stimulation of
growth pathways in those cells leads to aging and eventually cell death.
mTOR pathways, among others, drive this type of aging. By inhibiting
these pathways, rapamycin slows the aging process.
Downregulation of the mTOR pathway has been implicated in various
human diseases like cancer, diabetes, obesity, neurological diseases, and
genetic disorders, and because it inhibits mTOR, which also increases the
cleanup process of cellular autophagy, rapamycin has been shown to help
treat certain diseases.
How to do it: Rapamycin can be taken orally, as a tablet or in a
solution. The ideal dosage based on longevity research is 5 mg once per
week. I save thousands of dollars on prescription rapamycin by using a
generic version called Rapapro, or you can stock up on rapamycin sold
over-the-counter as Sirolimus in countries like India or Turkey if you ever
visit those locations. Because it is a powerful mTOR downregulator, try
not to take rapamycin on the same day you do a hard exercise session or
lift weights, because it will diminish the muscle-building response. For a
--- END PAGE 1074 ---

--- PAGE 1075 ---
detailed discussion on rapamycin, listen to my podcast with Ross Pelton at
BenGreenfieldLife.com.
A natural substance called spermidine has been shown to induce
similar cellular autophagy effects as rapamycin. Researchers gave animals
oral supplements of spermidine and found that they lived longer and were
less likely to have liver fibrosis and cancerous liver tumors, even when
genetically predisposed to those conditions.
Spermidine is found in high concentrations in wheat germ, dark leafy
greens, pears, whole grains, mushrooms, and smelly fermented cheeses,
and it can be purchased as a supplement.
METFORMIN
Metformin (Glucophage, Glumetza, Riomet, and Fortamet are some of its
brand names) is a modern pharmaceutical that is often advertised as being
able to extend life “for a nickel a pop.” It belongs to the biguanide
compound family, a chemical group that has been used to treat diabetes
since the 1950s. Metformin is synthesized from guanidine, which is found
in French lilac and was used in medicine as early as the Middle Ages. The
synthetic versions belong to a family of drugs known as biguanides, and
the star member is metformin. It was first approved as a drug in Europe in
1957, and 37,000 tons of metformin are now produced annually, mostly in
India.
Because it is an activator of the AMPk pathway and is particularly
effective at improving glycemic control with a low risk of inducing
hypoglycemia, metformin may seem like an ideal CRM to enhance your
chances of living a long life in good health. When I first learned about it, I
thought it might be a bit too good to be true, but it turns out that unless
you overdose with metformin, or have liver or kidney issues, or you are an
athlete for whom maximum oxygen utilization is important, it may be one
of the safer and more effective antiaging pharmaceuticals.
--- END PAGE 1075 ---

--- PAGE 1076 ---
How it works: Metformin improves glycemic control primarily by
inhibiting hepatic gluconeogenesis, which is the liver-based production of
glucose from noncarbohydrate sources like lactate, glycerol, and certain
amino acids. It also acts by opposing the action of glucagon. Glucagon is
secreted by the pancreas when blood levels of insulin and glucose fall too
low and stimulates the liver to convert glycogen stores into glucose, which
is then released into the bloodstream. By inhibiting this process,
metformin can improve insulin sensitivity and prevent hyperglycemia-
induced aging brought on by the inflammation and AGE damage caused by
elevated blood glucose.
Metformin can also reduce inflammation and cell death related to
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, and fibrosis, which is the thickening or
scarring of tissue, particularly connective tissue, because of disease or
physical stress. Finally, metformin inhibits oxygen consumption in the
mitochondria, which can lower metabolism—another potentially life-
extending mechanism, but one that I consider to be unfavorable for active
individuals and athletes.
How to do it: Metformin is a prescription drug. Like any prescription
drug, it can be ordered from online pharmacies, but this is risky, and my
advice is that if you want to find out more about using it, you should speak
to your doctor or healthcare provider.
An effective dose of metformin for reducing the effects of
hyperglycemia and acting as a caloric-restriction mimetic is 1,500 to 2,000
mg per day. Should you decide to forgo the pill, you may be interested in a
slightly less concentrated version in a goat’s rue supplement or French
lilac tea, both of which are full of many of the same active ingredients as
metformin.
Is There a Dark Side to Metformin?
--- END PAGE 1076 ---

--- PAGE 1077 ---
As Tim Ferriss reports in his book Tools of the Titans, metformin is widely
used among CEOs, Silicon Valley executives, billionaires, and world-class
performers for its antiaging properties. Among metformin’s fans are Robert
Hariri, CEO of cellular therapy company Celularity; Craig Venter, genetic
sequencing pioneer and cofounder of Human Longevity; Ray Kurzweil,
futurist and inventor; and Ned David, molecular biologist and cofounder of
Unity Biotechnology.
But many people are concerned about potential problems with this
supposed wonder drug. In recent years, evidence has accumulated that
metformin may not be all it’s cracked up to be.
For example, metformin falls into a category of biguanide molecules that
can increase the generation of lactate, which then enters the circulation and
produces lactic acidosis. Phenformin, another member of the biguanide
family, was a popular medication for diabetes but was withdrawn from
clinical use in the 1970s because it caused severe lactic acidosis. Although
phenformin is associated with a ten-to-twenty-fold greater incidence of
lactic acidosis than metformin, metformin’s effects are still significant.
Problem is, the 1940s study that linked metformin to lactic acidosis looked
at patients who were already in end-stage renal failure and also were obese
and diabetic. Several other studies have shown that lactic acidosis rarely
happens in normal patient population groups. While metformin is
contraindicated in those with renal impairment, the reported incidence of
lactic acidosis in clinical practice is very low (fewer than ten cases per
hundred thousand patients).
Although metformin has been the most commonly prescribed drug for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes for more than five decades, its bioenergetic
mechanisms remain largely unknown. This ignorance has triggered many
endeavors to uncover how exactly it works—but the results are often
contradictory. One study found that while metformin may play a big role in
managing cardiovascular risks, it doesn’t necessarily improve hyperglycemia
and, on average, has little effect on insulin requirements for diabetics. And
while there were two deaths in the placebo group, there were five among
the patients taking metformin.
Metformin may be beneficial for cardiovascular health when used on its own.
But one study found that combining metformin with sulphonylurea (another
common diabetes medication) may result in an increased risk of
--- END PAGE 1077 ---

--- PAGE 1078 ---
mitochondrial dysfunction, cardiovascular complications, and all-cause
mortality. However, this study looked at morbidly obese diabetics who were
using anywhere from 6 to 9 g of metformin per day—three to five times the
usual dose. Other studies show it’s actually the opposite: that metformin
may reverse mitochondrial dysfunction.
Many people are also concerned that metformin can cause vitamin B12
deficiency—at least one study has found that it stimulated vitamin B12
malabsorption. Decreased B12 concentrations can cause increased
homocysteine concentrations, which is (surprise!) an independent risk factor
for cardiovascular disease, particularly in individuals with type 2 diabetes.
During the fifty-two months of the study, B12 concentrations in the
metformin group got progressively lower over time, and this can result in
macrocytic anemia, neuropathy, and mental changes. The same can be said
for metformin’s effect on folate levels, especially in women. But, of course,
both B12 and folate are incredibly simple compounds to supplement with,
and they can easily be stacked with a metformin protocol to avoid
deficiencies.
Another study looked at the relationship between metformin, exercise, and
blood glucose levels and found that an earlier study had shown that
combining metformin and exercise had the same benefits for diabetes as
metformin alone or exercise alone. In fact, exercise and metformin may have
contradictory effects on diabetes. First, metformin reduces blood glucose
levels, but exercise tends to increase levels of glucagon, the hormone that
deals with low blood sugar by mobilizing the body’s stored carbohydrates.
When the two are combined, glucagon concentrations rise as the body tries
to compensate for the effect of metformin. Second, by increasing the heart
rate, metformin has the potential to elevate the rate of perceived exertion
even at lower exercise intensities, which means it could lead to the
prescription of lower exercise workloads than are commonly recommended.
There is also a study out of Taiwan showing that in diabetics, taking
metformin for long periods of time (twelve years or more) can nearly double
the risk of Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s—but, like the studies on lactic
acidosis, this study involved the heavy use of metformin for extended
periods of time.
And then there’s a concern about liver toxicity. In one person with
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, metformin was pegged as the cause of
jaundice, nausea, fatigue, and unintentional weight loss—the drug had
--- END PAGE 1078 ---

--- PAGE 1079 ---
caused abnormalities in liver enzymes. Another case involved a seventy-
three-year-old Japanese woman who experienced fatigue, jaundice, nausea,
vomiting, anorexia, and abdominal pain due to severe hepatotoxicity that
resulted from metformin. But once again, like the person with nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease, the patient already had a compromised liver.
Next comes metformin’s potential impact on exercise performance. One
study showed that metformin can decrease VO2 max (–2.7 percent), peak
heart rate (–2.0 percent), peak ventilation (–6.2 percent), peak resting
energy expenditure (–3.0 percent), and actual exercise duration (–4.1
percent). While these reductions are certainly slight and potentially
nonsignificant for the average exercise enthusiast, they do suggest that for a
professional athlete (especially a professional endurance athlete), the use of
metformin may spell the difference between a first-place finish and not even
making the podium. A more recent study highlighted that metformin has
also been shown to hamper endurance and limit mitochondrial proliferation
in response to an exercise protocol.
Finally, there’s the concern that metformin causes GI upset. But this seems
to happen only in people with bacterial imbalances in the gut (as discussed
in chapter 13) and may occur because metformin is working directly to alter
the microbiota. Research is now showing that metformin can actually alter
the gut composition in a favorable manner by increasing levels of several
different short-chain fatty acid bacteria. It may also decrease inflammation
in the gut in a manner that increases insulin sensitivity and lowers blood
glucose.
With all of this back-and-forth on metformin, I decided to get the opinion of
my friend Dallas Clouatre, a well-established author and consultant in
alternative and complementary medicine, and my guest on the podcast
episode “How Low-Fat Diets Make You Fat” (he also, incidentally, introduced
me to a very effective alternative to metformin: bitter melon extract). Here’s
what he had to say:
My thought on metformin is that it is interesting but overhyped. Keep in
mind that it works primarily on the liver (which contributes to 30 percent
of glucose clearance from meals) and not on the peripheral tissues (70
percent of glucose clearance). It likely does promote a longer “health span”
given that lowering insulin and IGF-1 along with mTOR, typical of caloric
restriction and of those who naturally live to extreme old age, is usually a
--- END PAGE 1079 ---

--- PAGE 1080 ---
good thing. Of course, any item that keeps insulin levels low along with
keeping blood glucose in the low-normal range will lower mTOR.
Downsides of metformin include reduced efficacy with advancing age,
reduced efficacy with prolonged use, and GI tract issues in some
individuals. Given that rehabilitation of the mitochondrial electron
transport complex [which is deleteriously affected by metformin] is a
normal function of a good night’s sleep, for me, it is difficult to suggest the
chronic intake of a drug that works by gumming up a natural process of the
body.
I’ll sum it up here: don’t use metformin if you have liver or kidney issues, and
definitely don’t overdose on metformin. If you get gut discomfort while
using metformin, consider waiting it out to see if your gut flora becomes
balanced and your symptoms subside, which typically takes eight to twelve
weeks. If you use metformin, supplement with vitamin B12, and if you’re a
woman, monitor your folate levels and consider supplementation with a
good multivitamin that contains a natural form of folate like
methyltetrahydrofolate (MTHF). Finally, if you’re a professional athlete or
aerobic performance is high on the totem pole for you, I’d avoid metformin.
My current habit of taking bitter melon extract is working just fine to control
my blood glucose levels, but because metformin appears to have several
beneficial side effects beyond blood glucose control, I may begin
supplementing with it in the future. However, I encourage you to look into
natural alternatives that can have similar blood-sugar-stabilizing and
longevity-enhancing effects. You’ll discover many such compounds in this
chapter.
--- END PAGE 1080 ---

--- PAGE 1081 ---
Interestingly, there might be more that could be combined with
metformin for a longevity-enhancing effect. In 2019, a study by a research
team at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) suggested that it
might be possible to slow and even reverse some of the physiological
processes associated with aging. The study involved nine healthy men
between the ages of fifty and sixty who consumed a cocktail of three
common drugs: human growth hormone (hGH), metformin, and
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) for a year. On average, these men lost
about 2.5 years from their biological ages, and their immune systems
showed significant signs of rejuvenation.
The original aim of the study was to combat immunosenescence, the
gradual deterioration of the immune system attributed to natural age
development. So the trial was named Thymus Regeneration,
Immunorestoration, and Insulin Mitigation (TRIIM). During TRIIM’s first
week, the researchers administered only hGH. They then added DHEA the
following week to observe the insulin suppression DHEA could cause, and
then added metformin for the third week.
However, the researchers caution that the anti-aging results are
preliminary, and more data needs to be conducted to draw safe, definitive
--- END PAGE 1081 ---

--- PAGE 1082 ---
conclusions. The trial was very small and consisted of only white men. It’s
also unclear what contributed most to the decline in biological age: the
cocktail of drugs or just one of them. The study should have included
control groups to address such factors.
Finally, it’s not known whether the epigenetic clock estimation used in
the study is entirely accurate. The clock’s primary barometer for
predicting epigenetic age is DNA methylation, the biological mechanism
responsible for regulating gene expression. However, as you’ve learned,
aging is considered to be a process with more mechanisms than DNA
methylation alone. Considering that colostrum can increase hGH
naturally, insulin sensitizers like curcumin or cold thermogenesis could
replace the DHEA, and blood glucose disposal agents like berberine or
bitter melon could replace metformin, it might be worth experimenting
with a less expensive and more natural approach.
KETONES
Ketones have been studied for faster weight loss and reduced hunger,
enhanced cognitive performance, blood glucose regulation, better mental
focus, lower risk for disease, and lower inflammation, and now there is a
growing body of research on their longevity benefits, too.
Ketone supplements are often referred to as “exogenous ketones.”
Endogenous ketones are ones your own body creates as you restrict
carbohydrates or calories and burn fat, but exogenous ketones are
consumed just like any other supplement—yet they have the same
benefits as endogenous ketones. The body produces three kinds of ketones
—acetoacetate, beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), and acetone—but the
ketones found in modern ketone products vary widely. Options include.•

MCT-C8 oil: 10 to 15 percent of MCT oil goes through the liver and
creates ketones, specifically in the form of D-beta-hydroxybutyrate.
The amount of MCT oil necessary to consume for ketosis can cause
--- END PAGE 1082 ---

--- PAGE 1083 ---
gastric upset, although the C8 version requires a lower dosage and
works for many people.•

Ketone salts (beta-hydroxybutyrate and D-beta-hydroxybutyrate):
These were the first exogenous ketones on the market, but they barely
raise your blood ketone levels. You could consume an entire serving of
ketone salts and get only a slight bump.•

Ketone ester: A ketone ester is D-beta-hydroxybutyrate bound to R
1,3-butanediol (also known as D 1,3-butanediol). This allows the ester
to enter your bloodstream intact. Once it’s in your bloodstream,
enzymes will separate the compounds, giving you a quick release of D-
beta-hydroxybutyrate, the same molecule that your body makes when
it burns large amounts of fat. The R 1,3-butanediol goes through the
liver, and 80 percent of that is also converted to ketones. So, when you
consume a ketone ester, you have a fast release and a slow release
effect.•

R 1,3-butanediol: This is basically half of the molecule of the ketone
ester. Technically, R 1,3-butanediol is an alcohol (but not ethanol), so it
can give you a buzz or mild “socially lubricating” effect similar to a
small glass of wine. One company, Hard Ketones, uses R 1,3-butanediol
as an alcohol alternative in the form of drinks like a Moscow mule or
gin and tonic. Upon consumption, the R 1,3-butanediol is converted to
a four-carbon version of acetaldehyde that is not as bioavailable, so the
body can’t use it as a toxin like it can the acetaldehyde from ethanol,
and then it is quickly converted to beta-hydroxybutyrate ketones.
How it works: Impaired mitochondrial function often results in
excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which is involved
in the development of many chronic diseases, including cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, neurodegenerative disorders, and cancer. Moderate
levels of mitochondrial ROS, however, have been shown to protect against
--- END PAGE 1083 ---

--- PAGE 1084 ---
chronic disease by upregulating mitochondrial capacity and endogenous
antioxidant defenses. This phenomenon is called mitohormesis, and it’s
induced through exercise or dietary modifications such as a ketogenic diet
—anything that increases reliance on mitochondrial respiration.
The consumption of ketones elevates BHB in a way that expands the
benefits of nutritional ketosis beyond what could normally be achieved
with carbohydrate or calorie restriction because it pushes levels of
available ketones higher than what you may be able to achieve naturally by
simply restricting carbohydrates. BHB enhances antioxidant activity by
inhibiting class I and IIA histone deacetylases, regulators that repress the
transcription of the FOXO3a gene, a key gene involved in cell autophagy
and inflammation. The metabolism of BHB salts also causes a negative
redox potential (a greater tendency to accept electrons) of the NADP
antioxidant system, which can scavenge free radicals. Adding BHB to
cultures of C. elegans worms has been shown to extend their lifespan, and
higher doses of ketone bodies may also extend human lifespans.
You get the same life-extending properties of caloric restriction and
fasting by being in a state of ketosis, so ketones—whether exogenous or
endogenous—qualify as a caloric-restriction mimetic. The drop in insulin
and insulin-like growth factor receptor signaling that happens when you’re
in ketosis increases the transcription of genes that encode antioxidant
enzymes, such as catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and superoxide
dismutase, as well as hundreds of other genes—which makes ketosis an
effective method for combating free-radical damage. Ketones also have the
ability to power mitochondria in aging individuals who have a more
limited ability to use glucose for energy, making them a powerful,
multimodal choice as a longevity-enhancing compound.
Additionally, in the presence of high glucose concentrations, ketones
can significantly increase the rate of muscle glycogen synthesis following
exercise. One study pointed out that consuming ketone body esters leads
--- END PAGE 1084 ---

--- PAGE 1085 ---
to a state of pure ketosis unaccompanied by an elevation of free fatty
acids, which could prove beneficial in treating certain neurodegenerative
diseases, such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s.
Ketones can also inhibit NF-kB, a proinflammatory transcription factor
that regulates the expression of over five hundred genes involved in
cellular transformation, survival, proliferation, angiogenesis,
inflammation, and more. Inhibiting the NF-kB signaling pathway has been
shown to reverse several aspects of aging, most notably cardiac
hypertrophy, a condition in which the heart muscle thickens due to
genetics, excess exercise, or chronically elevated blood pressure. NF-kB
can block the production of stem cells in older individuals, and since NF-
kB increases significantly with age, particularly in the hypothalamus, it is
regarded as a pro-aging compound. Downregulation of NF-kB has been
shown to significantly extend lifespan, memory, strength, skin quality, and
more.
How to do it: Ketone drinks are widely available in large bottles and
smaller single-serving shots. HVMN Ketone and KetoneAid KE4 are
readily available online and even in many grocery stores. You can drink
them in multiple doses during a typical day as a way to shift your body into
ketosis without fasting, and also use them before a fasted workout for a
boost of energy with negligible calories, or during a longer bout of more
intense fasting to keep appetite at bay. I usually have a serving of ketone
esters before my morning workout and sometimes another with lunch to
quell my appetite until dinner, and often have R 1,3-butanediol as an
alcohol alternative at night.
BLOOD-SUGAR-STABILIZING HERBS AND SPICES
Chapter 8 explained the importance of controlling glycemic variability and
why, especially if you want to enhance longevity, you should place a high
priority on lowering blood glucose levels and inflammation. In many
--- END PAGE 1085 ---

--- PAGE 1086 ---
respects, low, stable blood glucose can act similarly to caloric restriction,
which is why I consider most insulin- and blood-glucose-stabilizing
compounds—including bitter melon extract, Ceylon cinnamon, apple
cider vinegar, berberine, rosemary, curcumin, fenugreek, Gymnema
sylvestre, and capsaicin—to be caloric-restriction mimetics. Many of these
compounds also work as anti-inflammatory compounds, giving you a
double-whammy effect when you include them regularly in your diet, as is
a common practice in many of the Blue Zones.
How it works: The mechanisms vary depending on the herb or spice:
• Bitter melon contains a lectin that lowers blood glucose by acting on
surrounding tissues. It also suppresses appetite.
• Ceylon cinnamon lowers blood glucose and reduces inflammation,
which contributes to weight gain.
• Apple cider vinegar has been shown to reduce blood glucose levels in
diabetic rats, possibly because its acetic acid restricts the digestion of
starch.
• Berberine exerts a hypoglycemic effect, particularly in people with type
2 diabetes, and also regulates lipid metabolism.
• Rosemary has been shown to lower blood glucose, possibly by
increasing liver glycolysis.
• Curcumin, the active ingredient of turmeric, and ginger have both
been shown to reduce blood sugar levels in diabetic rats.
• Fenugreek seeds, which are common in South and Central Asia, reduce
fasting blood glucose levels and improve glucose tolerance.•

Gymnema sylvestre helps control blood sugar levels by blocking the
absorption of sugar molecules in the intestines.
• Capsaicin, the active ingredient in cayenne, reduces blood glucose by
increasing insulin.
--- END PAGE 1086 ---

--- PAGE 1087 ---
• Finally, vanadium and chromium are minerals that, taken together,
appear to have a blood-sugar-lowering and insulin-stabilizing effect
like metformin’s.
How to do it: It’s not rocket science: simply fill your pantry and
cupboards with a wide variety of the herbs and spices listed above. You
can also use blood-glucose-controlling and insulin-sensitizing
supplements such as Kion Lean, Gymnema sylvestre, or berberine before
high-carbohydrate or high-protein meals. I also recommend a shot of
apple cider vinegar in a couple beverages throughout the day (a splash or
two of cocktail bitters can also be highly effective), ample use of Ceylon
cinnamon in smoothies or shakes, and liberal use of rosemary, fenugreek
seeds, ginger, and cayenne when cooking.
4. Sirtuin-Activating Compounds (STACs)
STACs are chemical compounds that affect sirtuins, which are a group of
enzymes that use NAD+ to remove acetyl groups from proteins via a
process that can allow for proper genetic expression, less protein damage,
and extension of lifespan. Some of the better-researched foods and
supplements rich in STACs are blueberry extract, cacao flavonoids, green
tea extract, resveratrol, curcumin, black currants, and fish oil.
How it works: Sirtuins influence a wide range of cellular processes,
including circadian rhythms, mitochondrial biogenesis, aging,
transcription, apoptosis (cell self-destruction), inflammation, and stress
resistance, as well as energy efficiency and alertness during low-calorie
situations. STACs are also considered to be caloric-restriction mimetics,
and in studies, they have been shown to help prevent aging-related
diseases such as Alzheimer’s, type 2 diabetes, and obesity.
A new compound on the STAC scene is fisetin, a polyphenol that’s
found in many tannic drinks, such as tea, wine, and pomegranate juice,
--- END PAGE 1087 ---

--- PAGE 1088 ---
and fruits and vegetables, including apples, persimmons, onions,
cucumbers, and, in quite high concentrations, strawberries. Fisetin is a
potent senolytic, which means it plays a crucial role in reducing the
development of senescent cells, restoring tissue homeostasis, reducing a
variety of age-related pathologies, and extending both median and
maximum lifespan. Reducing the development of senescent cells has been
shown to lead to less inflammation, less molecular dysfunction within
cells, and better stem cell function. Quercetin, an antihistamine and anti-
inflammatory found in dark leafy vegetables, broccoli, red onions, peppers,
apples, grapes, black tea, green tea, red wine, and fruit, can also modulate
senescent cell development.
How to do it: Buy blueberry or strawberry powder or fresh, organic
blueberries and strawberries and use one serving per day in smoothies, on
salads, or in other dishes (look for the smaller, less sugary wild
blueberries, bilberries, or wild strawberries). Alternatively, you can use
black currants, although they may be harder to find. Dark cacao powder or
cacao nibs, curcumin powder, turmeric root, green tea extract powder,
high-quality fish oil, and organic green tea leaves are also good sources of
STACs.
Because most of these compounds are also antioxidant-rich foods,
which, when overconsumed, may excessively blunt or halt hormesis, I
recommend using them like condiments, in smaller amounts, and not as
staples. Furthermore, when it comes to managing blood sugar, a handful of
blueberries or strawberries is reasonable, but mowing through an entire
carton is not.
5. Stem Cells and Stem Cell–Supporting
Foods
--- END PAGE 1088 ---

--- PAGE 1089 ---
As you learned in chapter 12, stem cells can differentiate into more
specialized cells and then produce a continuous supply of cells that can
heal or build tissue in specific areas of the body. Chapter 12 explained how
stem cells are categorized according to how many types of cells they can
turn into and how stem cells can help with recovery; here, I’ll explore the
nitty-gritty details about the different sources of stem cells, including
adipose tissue, bone, placenta, and more, and how they can slow aging.
You can consider this section to be your quick reference guidebook on
interpreting the emerging and wonderful but oft-confusing world of stem
cell therapies.
Stem cells can be derived from various sources, including embryonic,
adult, induced, and perinatal. Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are pluripotent
and can differentiate into any cell type in the human body, but their use is
a subject of ethical debate because they require the destruction of
embryos. Adult stem cells are multipotent or unipotent and can
differentiate into a limited range of cell types specific to the tissue from
which they are derived. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are
generated by reprogramming adult cells to a pluripotent state, and
perinatal stem cells are obtained from tissues surrounding the time of
birth.
Stem cells also have the property of accumulating at a damaged site,
like an injured joint, via something called the “homing phenomenon.”
Damaged tissue releases cytokines and adhesion factors, which act as
signals to draw in stem cells to the areas where they are needed for tissue
renewal. So, when stem cells are injected into the blood, they naturally
accumulate at the various sites requiring their use and subsequently exert
a therapeutic effect. Dr. Todd Ovokaitys is an internal medicine specialist
who has developed a unique approach that takes advantage of this
concept: he uses light and sound to guide stem cells within the body,
drawing them somewhat like a magnet to an injured site, or even to a
--- END PAGE 1089 ---

--- PAGE 1090 ---
specific area of the body such as the testicles for enhanced testosterone
production or the thyroid for increased thyroid hormone production.
There is evidence that a loss of endogenous stem cells is linked to
aging and that the number of stem cells in your body may act as a
biological clock for aging, with fewer stem cells ultimately resulting in
overall aging. This makes sense because, as we age, a large number of the
stem cells in the bone marrow get mobilized for repair and recovery. This
means that everyone—and especially those whose bodies need more
repair and recovery, such as professional athletes, those struggling with
chronic disease, and those who have had a large number of injuries or
accidents—has fewer stem cells in their bone marrow as they age. The
stem cell theory of aging postulates that the aging process is the result of
the inability of various types of stem cells to replenish body tissues, so
tending to your stem cells is likely one of the more effective steps you can
take to enhancing longevity (especially when combined with the other
strategies in this chapter). Indeed, after my first intravenous stem cell
injection, my biological age based on telomere measurements dropped
from thirty-seven to twenty!
BONE STEM CELLS
The two primary kinds of stem cells found in bone marrow are
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
Both HSCs and MSCs are tissue-specific, meaning they differentiate only
into specified, genetically designated tissues. HSCs differentiate into
different types of blood cells, while MSCs differentiate into bone,
cartilage, fat, and connective tissue located in bone.
How it works: Blood cell turnover, which is extremely high in adult
humans, requires highly efficient homeostatic control mechanisms to
maintain proper blood quality and volume, and HSCs are the primary
agents of this homeostasis. HSCs were the first tissue-specific stem cells
--- END PAGE 1090 ---

--- PAGE 1091 ---
to be isolated and have been used in grafts to treat a number of blood cell
diseases, such as leukemias and autoimmune disorders.
MSCs have been shown to be able to sustain the growth, viability, and
multipotent status of HSCs in cell cultures. They can also heal injured and
diseased tissues and organs, reduce apoptosis, and modulate immune
responses, and the most recent research shows that when MSCs are given
to older people in an IV infusion, they increase quality of life and decrease
frailty.
Exosomes, as you may remember from chapter 12, carry messages
from cell to cell and are the “active ingredient” in stem cells, and they can
be targeted to a specific cell or cells to enhance particular biological
processes. Exosomes are particularly effective when combined with stem
cells from bone, which has a slightly lower MSC content than fat, because
they effectively upgrade these stem cells closer to the status of fat-derived
stem cells. I’ll include more details on exosomes later in this chapter.
How to do it: A multitude of stem cell clinics in the United States can
harvest stem cells from your bones with a long needle that’s placed into
the soft center of the bone marrow, often in the hip bones. However, very
few medical institutions in the United States currently offer any type of
exosome therapy. Dr. Adelson at Docere Clinics in Park City, Utah,
employs a large number of exosomes in his stem cell therapy, which can be
used in conjunction with any of the stem cell strategies in this section or
even by themselves as a potent tissue repair and regeneration aid.
Interestingly, recent research has shown that plants also produce
exosomes that, upon ingestion by a human, impart positive changes on the
gut microbiome and act as tiny cell-to-cell signaling molecules all on their
own. (When you step back, it’s quite profound how many of the expensive
or complicated methods for health or longevity can be replicated at least
in part by natural means: photobiomodulation panels and sunlight,
cryotherapy chambers and cold water, NAD supplements and pau d’arco
--- END PAGE 1091 ---

--- PAGE 1092 ---
tea, stem cells and fasting, and now, exosome injections and plants rich in
exosomes, such as watercress, rosemary, dandelion, nettle, and mint.)
As you learned in chapter 12, Docere Clinics concentrates bone
marrow stem cells into a bone marrow aspirate concentrate (BMAC). This
BMAC “soup” is then combined with exosomes and reinjected into any
joints that need treatment or, in the case of Docere Clinic’s full-body
stem-cell makeover, into every joint in the body. I underwent this
procedure in 2018 and again in 2022, and each time I began to notice a
profound improvement in recovery and overall joint mobility and comfort
within two months. I have also had stem cells extracted from the iliac
crest bone in my hip and stored with Forever Labs in Berkeley, California.
FAT STEM CELLS
MSCs appear to be very similar whether they are taken from bone marrow,
adipose tissue, umbilical cord blood, or any other birth tissue, such as the
placenta. The main difference between fat and bone as sources of stem
cells is the number of MSCs that each contains. According to Dr. Kristin
Comella of the US Stem Cell Clinic, adipose tissue contains about five
hundred times more MSCs than bone marrow. Bone marrow also contains
high amounts of white blood cells compared to adipose tissue, so it may be
more pro-inflammatory. Adipose tissue–derived stem cells (ASCs) may
also have a higher immunomodulatory capacity than their bone marrow–
derived counterparts, which could enhance the potential antiaging effect
of ASCs.
How it works: ASCs are considered ideal for treatments and
regenerative therapies. The main benefit of using ASCs instead of bone
marrow–derived stem cells is that ASCs are more readily available
(partially due to a worldwide increase in obesity) and can be harvested
with minimally invasive, low-risk techniques. ASCs—particularly those
derived from brown fat—can be used to support the new growth of bone
--- END PAGE 1092 ---

--- PAGE 1093 ---
cells, liver cells, neurons, vascular endothelial cells, heart cells, and, of
course, more fat cells.
How to do it: If you are lean, you may have difficulty getting enough
stem cells from your fat without a significantly uncomfortable session
with a long liposuction needle (which is exactly what happened to me).
The US Stem Cell Clinic in Florida is a clinic that does liposuction
extraction of fat stem cells, and both my wife and I have visited them for
this procedure. We pay the US Stem Cell Clinic a yearly fee to store our
stem cells, and for a nominal fee, they can ship them to any medical clinic
for either intravenous or intra-articular ( joint) injections by a medical
professional.
AMNIOTIC, UMBILICAL, AND PLACENTAL STEM
CELLS
Amniotic fluid is the protective fluid that surrounds an unborn baby.
During cesarean section deliveries, this fluid can be saved and the stem
cells it contains can be harvested, resulting in about a liter of amniotic
fluid containing MSCs. As explained in chapter 12, stem cells from
umbilical cord blood are not as potent as others, like bone marrow and
adipose stem cells, and can develop only into a limited number of cell
types. Wharton’s jelly is a tissue that surrounds blood vessels in the
umbilical cord and contains relatively high concentrations of precursor
MSCs that have increased proliferation and differentiation capabilities,
especially compared with adult sources of stem cells. Placentas also
contain a significant number of MSCs. Due to research on aborted fetuses
and the potential for oncogenicity (cancer risk), I’m not a fan of
embryonic stem cells, which have the potential to cause cancer due to
their inherent ability to divide indefinitely. However, MSCs cannot
transform into tumors or send signals that would cause tumors to form. In
--- END PAGE 1093 ---

--- PAGE 1094 ---
fact, evidence suggests that MSCs can induce apoptosis of cancer cells. So
MSCs may actually reduce the risk of cancer and actively help fight cancer.
How it works: Harvesting these types of stem cells is relatively
straightforward. The current procedure for harvesting amniotic fluid adds
about ninety seconds to a cesarean operation and is completely safe for
both mother and child. The cells can then be used to support the healthy
growth of skin, cartilage, cardiac, nervous, muscle, and bone tissues.
Umbilical cord blood can easily be harvested following the delivery of a
baby. The stem cells it contains have been used therapeutically to treat
bone marrow–related stem cell deficits. Placental stem cells are believed
to be even more potent than umbilical cord stem cells: research has
indicated that they proliferate and expand more easily than umbilical stem
cells and have a greater immunosuppressive capacity, resulting in reduced
levels of pro-inflammatory T cells. (Indeed, there are several international
clinics that offer placental stem cell therapies that contain a high number
of stem cells due to expansion, although it is not currently legal in the US
to modify stem cells in this manner.)
How to do it: Many US clinics offer amniotic, umbilical, and placental
stem cell treatments, but they’re likely to be far less effective and contain
a lower stem cell count than your own bone- or fat-derived stem cells,
especially if they’re not combined with exosomes. There are several
offshore stem cell centers that use living cells from birth tissue, based on
the idea that younger tissue is better. These locations often will also
culture-expand your own stem cells or non-autologous stem cells to
increase the MSC count. At Dr. Matt Cook’s office, BioReset Medical in
San Jose, I underwent a procedure called intraosseous needling, which
involves drilling small holes in the articulating surfaces of a joint and then
“patching” those holes with placental cells and bone marrow–derived
MSCs (much like aerating and fertilizing a lawn). This highly effective
procedure fixed an arthritic condition in my knee and saved me from a
--- END PAGE 1094 ---

--- PAGE 1095 ---
more invasive surgery, allowing me to go from not being able to walk
without pain to being able to run and play tennis and pickleball!
APSCS
In the regenerative medicine field, there’s an increasingly popular cell line
called adult pluripotent stem cells (APSCs). This umbrella category
includes very small embryonic-like stem cells (VSELs), multilineage-
differentiating stress-enduring cells (MUSEs), and marrow-isolated adult
multilineage inducible cells (MIAMIs), among others. Since their
discovery, APSCs have been widely studied because of their ability to
multiply freely and become any kind of cell in the human body. But unlike
embryonic stem cells, they do not have known cancer-causing properties
or other potential disease risks, and in clinical application, they can be
derived autologously—that is, they can be extracted from and reinjected
into your own body.
How it works: APSCs are formed in bone marrow, but rather than
being stored there like other bone stem cells, they are released into your
bloodstream, where they circulate inactive until your body faces extreme
stress, such as low oxygen, low body temperature, or significant injuries.
Once active, APSCs can home in with surprising accuracy on areas of
injury and degeneration to begin the repair and regeneration process. In
particular, they have been found to be effective for healing bone injuries
and rejuvenating organs, and they have antiaging properties. This is
almost like the blood transfusions therapy discussed later in this chapter,
but without the need for the blood of a young healthy donor—your own
blood goes through a process that makes it young again.
How to do it: I had this procedure performed at the offices of Dr.
Halland Chen in New York City (he combined this procedure with a
CoQ10 and NAD IV, as well as adding exosomes to the stem cells). After a
physician collects blood (Dr. Halland pulled four 60 cc tubes of it from my
--- END PAGE 1095 ---

--- PAGE 1096 ---
arm!) or bone marrow samples, APSCs are separated from other cells via
cell-processing technology. Once isolated, the APSCs are exposed to very
cold temperatures to simulate hypothermia, which activates them. Finally,
the physician combines the APSCs with growth factors harvested from
your own platelet cells in the same blood or bone marrow sample. The
active APSCs and growth factors can then be returned to your body
through an intravenous injection. Once in your bloodstream, the APSCs
go to work, seeking out areas of inflammation and injury.
At Dr. Halland’s clinic, this process is typically done over three
consecutive days. On day 1, a CoQ10 compound, which helps generate
energy in the form of ATP, is infused via IV, and you receive an
intramuscular injection of vitamins such as NAD to mobilize your body’s
stem cells into the bloodstream. On day 2, 210 mL of blood is drawn,
typically from a vein in your arm, for cell processing. On day 3, your own
APSCs are infused via IV, and a small portion is reserved for injection into
a specific musculoskeletal region where inflammation or injury is present.
I’ve received treatment from Dr. Adeel Khan at Eterna Health in Cabo,
who uses a different form of MSCs. He administered them to me
combined with peptides and exosomes via an intravenous infusion and as
an injection into a torn medial meniscus in my knee. Dr. Khan uses stem
cells derived from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC-derived MSCs, or
iMSCs), which have unique properties that significantly enhance their
regenerative capabilities. iPSCs are most frequently generated from
fibroblasts obtained from a small skin biopsy from a healthy donor rather
than from you. At Eterna, these stem cells have been engineered to
augment their regenerative potential and evade detection by the immune
system, thus improving their engraftment efficiency. Eterna also engineers
the stem cells with a fail-safe mechanism designed to prevent
uncontrolled cell proliferation, ensuring there is no risk of tumor growth,
then combines the cells with peptides that reduce the inflammatory
--- END PAGE 1096 ---

--- PAGE 1097 ---
response and speed the recovery process. When I did my stem cell
treatment at Eterna, I opted for the anti-aging package, which combines a
stem cell treatment with follistatin gene therapy (discussed later in this
chapter) and an NK-cell infusion (discussed in chapter 15). When treating
joints, Dr. Khan also uses a unique polymer hydrogel made of hyaluronic
acid, which acts as a biodegradable scaffold for the stem cells to resurface
an entire joint, which he used to essentially “grow me a new knee.” Now
Dr. Khan and other good practitioners like Dr. Matt Cook are implemented
the relatively new MUSE stem cells, which have the ability to repair
damaged tissues by spontaneously differentiating into tissue-specific cells,
possess potent anti-inflammatory effects, are resistant to immune
rejection, and even have the potential to treat diseases like stroke,
myocardial infarction, and spinal cord injuries without the need for
immunosuppressant therapy.
COLOSTRUM
In chapter 15, I explained why colostrum, otherwise known as first milk or
nature’s first food, can be used for repairing a leaky gut, reducing
inflammation, and building muscle. It’s also a powerful antiaging
supplement. It serves as a concentrated source of proteins, growth factors,
and antibodies that are essential for early development of newborns and
beneficial for adults, too. Colostrum’s properties have been revered for
thousands of years across many cultures. In ancient Chinese medicine, it
was regarded as a potent health tonic, and for the Maasai people of Kenya
and Tanzania, it has long been regarded as a crucial part of a warrior’s diet.
In Britain, dairy farmers refer to colostrum as “beestings,” and they used
any surplus colostrum to make an extra-creamy and very healthy pudding.
How it works: Colostrum is far richer in antimicrobial peptides,
immune-regulating compounds, and growth factors than normal milk. It
contains concentrated, low-volume forms of vital nutrients as well as
--- END PAGE 1097 ---

--- PAGE 1098 ---
lymphocytes and antibodies, and it helps to balance the gut microbiota
and enhances the growth and repair of several tissue types. It also
contains cytokines, which keep communication between immune cells
active, and growth factors, which assist with maintenance and growth of
certain body tissues, including muscle and the gastrointestinal lining. The
lactoferrin in colostrum assists with iron absorption and is a crucial part
of your immune defense system, and the growth hormone in colostrum
works individually and with the other growth factors in colostrum to aid in
the growth and function of gastrointestinal tissues, muscle, and more. The
immunoglobulins in colostrum are small proteins that your immune
system uses to seek out and destroy foreign antigens.
Finally, colostrum contains proline-rich polypeptides (PRPs—not to
be confused with platelet-rich plasma, the other PRP in this chapter),
important immune system regulators that encourage the growth of white
blood cells and may restore balance in cellular immune functions. PRPs
may defend against oxidative stress and support brain health. Studies have
now shown that colostrum is a rich source of mesenchymal stem cell–like
cells, and one fascinating study showed that, while colostrum alone had a
considerable effect on stem cell activity, it was a combination of
colostrum, yeast extract, skullcap, zizyphus (also known as jujube),
seaweed, and turmeric that had the most profound activity likely to
translate into therapeutic benefit.
How to do it: Because it contains few, if any, milk proteins, colostrum
is well tolerated even by people who cannot tolerate lactose and dairy. You
can use a colostrum powder in smoothies or shakes, or take colostrum
capsules. Most mornings, I make a smoothie with the creamy Kion vanilla
whey protein and add a couple scoops of colostrum to it for even more
creaminess and flavor. Because the salivary enzymes in your mouth help
activate the colostrum, you can also just scoop some of the powder into
your mouth and hold it for around 60 seconds before swallowing for
--- END PAGE 1098 ---

--- PAGE 1099 ---
maximum efficacy. If you have a bacterial overgrowth such as SIBO,
colostrum can cause a die-off reaction (a Herxheimer reaction), so it’s
important to start with a lower dose.
EXOSOMES
Exosomes are small extracellular vesicles that are produced by virtually all
types of cells in the body, including stem cells, which release these small
membrane-bound sacs that contain molecules critical to cell signaling and
repair. When I was a young student at University of Idaho, we were taught
that these sacs were somewhat useless metabolic waste by-products that
cells were essentially “pooping out.” But research has revealed that
exosomes play a crucial role in cell-to-cell communication, carrying
proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids (DNA, RNA) from one cell to another.
This ability to transfer molecular information is what makes exosomes a
promising tool in regenerative medicine and healing. They are involved in
various physiological processes, including tissue repair, immune
modulation, and angiogenesis (the development of new blood vessels),
which are essential for healing and regeneration. Unlike cells, exosomes
are less complex, have a lower risk of inducing a hyperactive immune
response, and can be stored and handled more easily, making them an
attractive option for therapeutic applications. Additionally, exosomes have
anti-inflammatory properties and may modulate the immune response,
making them a potential treatment for inflammatory and autoimmune
disorders.
How it works: The combination of exosomes with stem cells for
longevity and healing treatments is based on the synergistic potential of
these two components. Stem cells have the remarkable ability to
differentiate into various cell types, contributing directly to the
regeneration of damaged tissues. However, a significant part of their
therapeutic effects is attributed to the exosomes they produce, which can
--- END PAGE 1099 ---

--- PAGE 1100 ---
modulate the healing environment, reduce inflammation, and promote
tissue repair. By combining stem cells with exosomes, physicians aim to
enhance the regenerative capacity of treatments, leveraging the direct
regenerative effects of stem cells along with the signaling and modulatory
functions of exosomes. This approach can potentially lead to more
effective treatments for a range of degenerative diseases, injuries, and age-
related conditions, offering hope for improved healing and longevity. The
use of exosomes in conjunction with stem cells represents a cutting-edge
area of research in regenerative medicine, aiming to harness and amplify
the body’s natural healing mechanisms for more effective therapeutic
interventions and to make a stem cell treatment even more efficacious.
How to do it: Many practitioners who administer stem cells or PRP
also specialize in exosome therapy, usually via joint injection or
intravenous infusion. I’ve even nebulized exosomes and used them as a
nasal spray for their impressive lung- and brain-rejuvenating effects. It’s
important to ascertain the source of the exosomes you or a physician are
using, typically via a laboratory certificate of analysis, because a clean
product without contaminants such as peptides, proteins, cell free DNA,
and other cell debris is critical.
ALGAE
Algae and phytoplankton (more on phytoplankton below) are the
foundations of the marine food chain, and in order to hold that position,
they must be incredibly nutrient-dense. Pound for pound, algae is the
most nutritionally dense food on the face of the planet—a single gram of
algae contains the nutritional equivalent of 1,000 g of fruits and
vegetables! Spirulina is an extremely nutrient-dense algae that forms
tangled masses in warm alkaline lakes, primarily in Africa and Latin
America. Chlorella is a single-celled freshwater species of microalgae that
--- END PAGE 1100 ---

--- PAGE 1101 ---
contains the highest-density chlorophyll in nature and possesses a
nutrient density close to that of spirulina.
How it works: The chemical structure of chlorophyll is similar to
hemoglobin, allowing it to efficiently carry oxygen in the blood and
increase your red blood cell count. There is even some recent research
that indicates that a combination of chlorophyll in your bloodstream and
exposure to sunlight can allow you to produce ATP without consuming
any calories! By weight, dried chlorella is about 45 percent protein, 20
percent fat, 20 percent carbohydrates, 5 percent fiber, and 10 percent
vitamins and minerals. Algal amino acids are unstructured, which means
that your body can absorb them easily and rapidly. This type of nutrient-
dense substance can easily be incorporated into a calorie-restriction or
fasting protocol without compromising your overall caloric intake.
Perhaps most interesting with regard to longevity is chlorella’s ability
to mobilize stem cells. One study evaluated how an extract from the edible
cyanobacterium Aphanizomenon flos-aquae (AFA), a form of chlorella,
affected human stem cells in vitro and in vivo (in the lab and inside living
organisms). A double-blind, randomized crossover study involving twelve
healthy subjects found that chlorella helped stem cells travel to the tissues
where they were most needed.
Another study demonstrated that spirulina lowered levels of a key
neuroinflammatory cytokine in the hippocampus of aged rats, leading to
the reversal of age-related cognitive decline and increased neurogenesis.
Spirulina protected hippocampal neural progenitor cells from
inflammation caused by molecules called lipopolysaccharides—which,
interestingly, are often found in a high-fat, high-sugar diet. Spirulina also
promoted mitochondrial respiration and the proliferation of stem cells in
culture, supporting the hypothesis that a diet enriched with spirulina and
similar nutraceuticals may help protect stem cells from damage.
--- END PAGE 1101 ---

--- PAGE 1102 ---
How to do it: Not all chlorella or spirulina is created equal. Since algae
is a bioremediant that can detoxify the water it is grown in and retain the
toxins, you need to be careful with your sourcing. I use 100 percent
organic cracked-cell-wall algae from a company called ENERGYbits, which
is grown in pristine freshwater tanks, and live, freeze-dried spirulina
powder from Royal Spirulina.
MARINE PHYTOPLANKTON
Marine phytoplankton are photosynthesizing microalgae that grow in
oceans all over the world. In addition to comprising the foundation of the
entire oceanic food chain, its primary role in the ocean is to turn inorganic
raw materials, such as seaweed, minerals, sunlight, and carbon dioxide,
into hundreds of different nutrients, including vitamins, bioavailable
minerals, all amino acids, essential fatty acids, and carotenoids. In
addition, along with algae like chlorella, phytoplankton is responsible for
producing up to 90 percent of all oxygen on earth. There are about forty
thousand known strains of phytoplankton, and a few of these strains
(particularly those mentioned below) are extremely beneficial for humans.
How it works: The phytoplankton strains that possess a nutritional
profile compatible with human needs are dense in essential fatty acids
(primarily EPA and DHA), which fuel your brain and nervous system; all
--- END PAGE 1102 ---

--- PAGE 1103 ---
amino acids, for muscle, brain, and nervous system support; enzymes and
pigments that help eliminate oxidative stress and inflammation; and
carotenoids, which play a role in regulating gene expression and inducing
cell-to-cell communications.
A marine biologist named Luis Lubian, who was involved in an
extensive study of more than forty-three thousand types of marine
phytoplankton, discovered one strain of phytoplankton that is extremely
nutrient-dense and well absorbed. The scientific name of this strain of
marine phytoplankton is Nannochloropsis gaditana, or “nanno” for short. It
contains the right amount and balance of amino acids, enzymes, fatty
acids, minerals, and pigments, which are the building blocks our bodies
use to repair DNA, produce glutathione, and generate growth hormones
and stem cells. In other words, this one unique type of marine
phytoplankton gives the body practically all the raw materials it needs to
produce healthy new stem cells and neurochemicals.
In addition to nanno, another form of marine phytoplankton, referred
to as tetra (its genus name is Tetraselmis), has extremely high levels of
superoxide dismutase, an extremely powerful antioxidant. It is also high in
vitamin C (a strong electron donor and antioxidant) and has been shown
to promote deep sleep.
How to do it: Take one or two drops of marine phytoplankton per day.
I prefer Oceans Alive Raw Marine Phytoplankton, which are grown in a
photobioreactor with just salt water, carbon dioxide, and sunlight, and
then added to a trace mineral solution. The Oceans Alive brand contains
both the nanno and tetra forms of the phytoplankton.
ALOE VERA
Aloe plants, also known as burn plant, lily of the desert, and elephant’s
gall, grow naturally in dry, tropical climates in Africa, Asia, Europe, and the
southern and western parts of the United States. Aloe vera is a gelatinous
--- END PAGE 1103 ---

--- PAGE 1104 ---
substance derived from the fleshy leaves of the plant and has been
recognized for its healing properties for at least six thousand years. A
symbol of immortality, it was presented to Egyptian pharaohs as a funeral
gift, and over several millennia, humans have used aloe to treat wounds,
hair loss, hemorrhoids, and digestive issues.
How it works: Aloe vera contains several bioactive compounds,
including vitamins, minerals, amino acids, enzymes, lignins, saponins, and
salicylic acid. These, along with the other steroid-like compounds it
contains—steroids, carotenoids, terpenes, and phytosterols—allow aloe
vera to modulate various biological activities: it helps prevent cancer,
scavenges free radicals, and exhibits antimicrobial activity by rupturing
bacterial cell walls.
Aloe has been reported in several studies to improve glucose tolerance
and overall glucose metabolism. For example, oral intake of aloe
significantly reduced blood glucose in diabetic mice within just five days.
Consumption of aloe vera juice and glibenclamide, a diabetes medication,
significantly reduced fasting blood glucose within two weeks in diabetic
human patients, but similar results were reported with the use of aloe vera
juice alone. This is likely because the development of diabetes is
accompanied by a decline in the number of circulating stem cells, and aloe
has been shown to assist with mobilization of stem cells, which can
migrate to the pancreas and differentiate into functional insulin-producing
cells. Increasing the number of circulating stem cells has been reported to
significantly improve the condition of diabetic mice and insulin-
dependent human patients. Aloe vera also improves the viability of dental
pulp stem cells, so it may have a significant positive effect on oral health.
How to do it: Aloe vera juice is easily consumed as a daily shot or
poured into smoothies or shakes. Look for a product that is organic and at
least 99 percent aloe. Often referred to on a product label as aloe vera
inner leaf juice, or inner fillet, aloe vera gel is also an option, although
--- END PAGE 1104 ---

--- PAGE 1105 ---
many gels use carrageenan, which has been linked to digestive problems—
a bit ironic, since aloe gel is often used to aid digestion. But when my
friend Shawn Stevenson was recovering from a spinal cord injury using a
host of the plant-based stem cell–support tactics in this chapter, he would
eat a 3-to-5-inch chunk of aloe vera leaf multiple times per day. If you
prefer to use the juice, Lily of the Desert and Nature’s Way are two good
brands.
COFFEEBERRY FRUIT EXTRACT
I first learned about this little-known nutrient when I interviewed Darin
Olien on my podcast. Nicknamed the “Indiana Jones of Superfoods,”
Olien is a widely recognized exotic superfoods hunter, supplement
formulator, and environmental activist who travels the planet discovering
new and underutilized medicinal plants. While hiking in Africa, he came
across coffeeberry fruit, which has none of the taste associated with
brewed coffee beans. It’s quite tart and contains three times the amount of
antioxidants of powerhouse foods such as green tea and blueberries. Darin
reported to me that it is one of the few plants that can increase levels of
totipotent stem cells, the ones that have the potential to develop into any
kind of cell in the human body (see chapter 12 for more on totipotent stem
cells).
How it works: In two clinical studies, coffeeberry fruit extract has
been shown to significantly stimulate brain-derived neurotrophic factor,
which is responsible for the development, differentiation, and protection
of neurons and is also strongly supportive of both cognitive and mental
health. In addition, coffeeberry fruit extract significantly upregulates
sirtuin enzymes in a manner that can offset the aging process triggered by
oxidative stress and support stem cell functions, particularly when the
body is under chronic or acute stress. One study observed the effects of
four weeks of coffeeberry supplementation in twenty college athletes and
--- END PAGE 1105 ---

--- PAGE 1106 ---
found that postworkout antioxidant capacity was significantly higher in
the group that took coffeeberry than in the placebo group. The study also
found that the coffeeberry group’s blood lactate levels were significantly
reduced ten minutes after exercise compared to the placebo group’s.
How to do it: You can buy 100 percent pure Hawaiian coffeeberry
extract in a powdered form, which you can then blend into smoothies or
shakes. For example, at BenGreenfieldLife.com/antiagingsmoothie, you
can see an example of one of my smoothie recipes that contains
coffeeberry and many of the other ingredients found in this chapter, all in
one mighty “shotgun” morning dose.
MORINGA EXTRACT
Darin also introduced me to moringa, a tree native to parts of Africa and
Asia. Its name is derived from murungaii, which is the Tamil word for
“drumstick.” While there are thirty different species of moringa, the most
widely cultivated is Moringa oleifera, which is native to the foothills of the
northwestern Indian Himalayas.
How it works: Moringa contains a number of antioxidants and natural
antibiotics, and the phytochemicals in moringa are hepatoprotective,
cardioprotective, antinociceptive (pain-reducing), DNA-protective, and
antiatherosclerotic.
Different parts of the plant contain different important minerals, as
well as protein, vitamins, beta-carotene, and various phenolics. In studies,
extracts from the flower of the plant have been shown to cause a
significant increase in the proliferation of MSCs, while the root can
increase cytotoxicity to cancer cell lines, effectively killing off cancerous
cells. Extracts from the leaves are known to combat high blood pressure,
reduce insulin resistance, reduce inflammation, and reduce the effects of
diabetes. Moringa is also one of the more powerful members of the
sulforaphane family (similar to broccoli sprouts) and can increase activity
--- END PAGE 1106 ---

--- PAGE 1107 ---
of the Nrf2 pathway in a manner that significantly increases cell
protection and reduces inflammation and oxidation.
How to do it: Like coffeeberry fruit extract, organic moringa leaf
powder can easily be purchased online and then added to teas (I’ve found
that it mixes quite well with green tea), smoothies, or shakes. It’s one of
the compounds that I add to my morning smoothie each day (the full list
of ingredients can be found on BoundlessBook.com/19). If you want to get
even more creative, simply take half a teaspoon of moringa powder, add a
teaspoon of raw honey, squeeze in a little bit of lemon, mix them together,
and add water.
The list above contains some of the top stem cell–supporting foods
but is by no means comprehensive; nutrition research is constantly
unveiling new compounds that enhance stem cell health and mobilization.
Other notable dietary additions that may benefit stem cells include dark
chocolate and other compounds rich in cacao extract, such as cacao tea;
black, green, and oolong teas; foods rich in zeaxanthin, such as mustard
greens, watercress, collard greens, Swiss chard, and fiddleheads; black
raspberries; and even squid ink (which is used in many popular
Mediterranean dishes, such as Spain’s black rice and Italy’s risotto al nero
di seppia and pasta al nero).
6. Injections
In addition to stem cells, other injectable compounds can also have a
potent antiaging effect. The following are a few of the more popular
injections used commonly by longevity enthusiasts, biohackers, and
antiaging medical clinics. Proceed at your own risk if you decide to inject
yourself intravenously, intramuscularly, or subcutaneously. Having grown
up in a family full of EMTs, I am quite comfortable whipping out needles
and administering most of my own injections, especially those that are
--- END PAGE 1107 ---

--- PAGE 1108 ---
subcutaneous or intramuscular ( just as a diabetic would administer
insulin daily), but if you aren’t comfortable with this, I recommend
making good friends with a nurse practitioner or other medical
professional who can assist you.
PEPTIDES
In basic terms, a peptide is simply a small protein consisting of amino
acids linked in a chain. To better understand the nature of peptides, it
helps to consider that proteins are made up of one or more polypeptide
molecules. The proteins that we obtain through food are split by gastric
enzymes into small peptides that have many different functions in the
bodily systems. When administered via injection (usually subcutaneously,
with the equivalent of an insulin syringe), certain peptides are particularly
efficacious for joint healing, mitochondrial support, focus, energy, deep
sleep, and longevity.
How it works: One of the notable properties of peptides is that they
regulate the activity of certain molecules, and because of this, they
influence body functions in several ways and can act like both
neurotransmitters and hormones. Each organ and body function has its
own unique peptide bioregulator. The characteristic of peptides that
allows them to slow aging is due to the fact that they’ve been shown to
shortcut the protein synthesis process. This means that when peptide
bioregulators are active, organs can build and tissues can develop easier
and faster.
In recent years, research has revealed that peptides play a significant
role in the regulation of multiple mechanisms of biological aging. This
branch of scientific research has led to the peptide theory of aging, which
posits that changes in gene expression result in reduced protein synthesis,
eventually leading to aging and the development of age-related diseases.
By stimulating the body’s own peptide production via peptide
--- END PAGE 1108 ---

--- PAGE 1109 ---
bioregulators, specific organs, systems or conditions in the body can be
targeted by using a specific short-chain peptide to initiate greater protein
synthesis.
For example, I’ve used peptides BPC-157 and TB-500 to enhance
healing and recovery. BPC-157 (body protection compound 157), which
protects and heals the gut, is found in trace amounts in gastric juices. But
it can also be synthesized in a lab. It can be taken in an oral supplement
for a systemic effect, or injected subcutaneously or intramuscularly into or
near injured or damaged tissues, where it has very powerful biological
healing effects. BPC-157 is also known as a stable gastric pentadecapeptide
(the name refers to the length of the peptide), primarily because it is
stable in human gastric juice; can cause an anabolic healing effect in both
the upper and lower GI tract; has an antiulcer effect; and produces a
therapeutic effect on inflammatory bowel disease—all surprisingly free of
side effects.
As demonstrated in multiple studies, BPC-157 also accelerates wound
healing, and, via interaction with the nitric oxide system, protects
endothelial tissue and builds blood vessels. This occurs even in severely
impaired conditions, such as advanced and poorly controlled irritable
bowel disease, in which it stimulates the expression of genes responsible
for cytokine and growth factor generation and also collagen formation,
along with intestinal anastomosis healing, reversal of short bowel
syndrome, and fistula healing—all of which can be extremely frustrating
issues in people who have gut pain, constipation, diarrhea, and bowel
inflammation. Conveniently, BPC-157 is one of the few peptides that can
be taken orally.
TB-500 (also known as thymosin beta-4) is also produced by the
human body as well as by various animals. Like BPC-157, it can be
synthesized in a lab and used to promote wound repair and healing,
particularly because it acts on actin and myosin fibers in tendons,
--- END PAGE 1109 ---

--- PAGE 1110 ---
ligaments, and muscles (which is likely why it, along with PEMF, is a very
popular healing and recovery strategy used in the horse-racing industry).
It also offers many of the same effects as growth hormone, including an
increase in muscle growth, improved endurance, reduced pain and
inflammation (both acute and chronic), increased flexibility, and increased
hair growth. Like BPC-157, TB-500 can be injected in or near any damaged
muscle site and sore or injured joint with surprising healing effects,
although, as I learned in my podcast with peptide researcher Jean-François
Tremblay, they can act systemically, not just locally, when injected just
about anywhere in the body.
Epitalon is another useful peptide for longevity. It is commonly
referred to as the primary antiaging peptide because it is one of the few
synthesized compounds that has been shown to directly activate the
telomerase enzyme in humans. Telomerase renews and elongates
telomeres, the caps on the ends of chromosomes that protect DNA from
damage and cancer-causing errors. A decreased rate of telomere
shortening can thus be equated with decelerated aging. By activating
telomerase, epitalon directly reduces the effects of time on your telomeres
(there’s more about herbs and plants that activate telomerase pathways
later in this chapter).
Here’s one way to understand epitalon’s antiaging effects: After fifty to
seventy divisions, cells can no longer divide, and worn out, damaged, or
diseased cells can’t be replaced. This is called the Hayflick limit, and
reaching the Hayflick limit coincides with the death of a living organism.
In sufficient doses, epitalon allows cells to exceed their Hayflick limit, thus
extending the lifespan of the organism.
One study of 266 people over age sixty demonstrated that treatment
with epithalamin, the pineal gland extract epitalon is based on, produced a
1.6-to-1.8-fold reduction in mortality during the following six years, a 2.5-
fold reduction in mortality when combined with thymulin (very similar to
--- END PAGE 1110 ---

--- PAGE 1111 ---
TB-500), and a 4.1-fold reduction in mortality when combined with
thymulin and administered annually instead of only once, at the study’s
onset. Another study examined seventy-nine coronary patients over the
course of twelve years and found that the group treated with epitalon
enjoyed improved physical endurance, circadian rhythms, and lipid and
carbohydrate metabolism compared to the control group after three years
of twice-yearly treatments. The treated group also enjoyed a 50 percent
lower rate of cardiovascular mortality, cardiovascular failure, and severe
respiratory diseases, as well as a 28 percent lower rate of overall mortality.
In addition to epitalon, I’ve injected myself subcutaneously, in my
abdomen, with two particularly intriguing antiaging peptides: humanin
and MOTS-c. The first, humanin, is naturally produced in small amounts
by the human body. Many centenarians produce unusually high levels of
this peptide, which is encoded in mitochondria and has been shown to
produce strong cytoprotective actions against a variety of stressors and
diseases, including oxidative stress, hypoxic damage to the brain, and
oxidized LDL cholesterol. It also aids in the repair of mitochondria. The
second peptide, MOTS-c, is a potent metabolic regulator that significantly
decreases the risk of age-related diseases and acts a bit like “exercise in a
bottle.” It activates the AMPK pathway and has an exercise-mimicking
effect on fat and muscle. It even induces weight loss in mice fed a high-fat
diet.
How to do it: When you order peptides, they are typically in a powder
form and must be reconstituted by adding sterile or bacteriostatic water,
which often comes with the vial of powder. (On BoundlessBook.com/19,
you’ll find a link to a helpful peptide calculator that will help you do the
math to know how much water to add.)
There are a number of ways you can take peptides. The most common
method is to inject them subcutaneously with an insulin syringe.
Injections are the fastest method and result in high bioavailability of each
--- END PAGE 1111 ---

--- PAGE 1112 ---
peptide, and although it’s not as deep (and therefore uncomfortable) as an
intramuscular injection, it still gets the peptide where it needs to go if
you’re close to the site of pain or area that needs enhanced recovery. If
you’re looking for a systemic antiaging effect, a subcutaneous injection
near the abdomen typically suffices. Be sure to use an alcohol wipe to
clean the injection site. Do not reuse the needles or mix different peptides
in the same syringe.
You can also apply peptides topically to several locations on the body,
including the inside of the rectum and the vagina. If you choose to apply
peptides topically, you may not absorb all the molecules, but you will still
get most of the benefits. For topical application, most people mix the
peptides with a cream or gel, or use a ready-made topical peptide.
Taking peptides orally often means consuming a lozenge or troche or
spraying the inside of your mouth, although supplement companies such
as Dr. Seeds and LVLUP Health are now selling oral versions of some
peptides, including BPC-157.
Here is a sample peptide protocol for longevity:•

Epitalon: I recommend the Khavinson protocol, named after Vladimir
Khavinson, perhaps the most distinguished medical gerontology
researcher in Russia. Professor Khavinson believes the limit of animal
and human lifespan is approximately 30 to 40 percent longer than the
current mean lifespan, and that the limit of the human lifespan is 110
to 120 years. The Khavinson protocol is 10 mg epitalon administered
three times a week for three weeks, and that exact dosage was studied
in a fifteen-year longevity study in humans that produced impressive
results for controlling telomere shortening. The protocol only needs to
be done once a year.•

Delta sleep inducing peptide (DSIP): This one needs to be used
conservatively to avoid tachyphylaxis (diminishing response to
successive doses of a drug, rendering it less effective). You can inject
--- END PAGE 1112 ---

--- PAGE 1113 ---
150 mcg three times a week, one to three hours before bed, and deep
sleep levels can increase by 30 to 40 percent. This can be continued for
as long as it’s needed, as long as it isn’t used every day, since you get
used to DSIP pretty quickly with repeated daily administration.•

TB-500/BPC-157: You can take TB-500 at 1.5 mg (0.5 mL) twice weekly
for full-body repair. This can be continued as long as desired. For BPC-
157, use more frequent injections of 250 to 500 mcg.•

MOTS-c: For mitochondrial support, you can inject 10 mg once
weekly. You can time this just prior to exercise for added
mitochondrial benefit, and repeat for up to ten weeks in a row every
year.•

FOX04-DRI: FOX04 can sabotage the survival efforts of lingering
senescent cells in old tissues, causing them to self-destruct. It has been
studied in aged mice and has been shown to cause destruction of
senescent cells without the unpleasant side effects of other drugs that
do the same thing, while also producing a wide array of benefits that
control age-related decline. Take 3 mg every other day for six days, and
repeat this one to three times per year.•

Semax: I talked in detail about this peptide in chapter 5. It’s used
mostly in Russia and Ukraine for a broad range of conditions but
predominantly for its studied nootropic, neuroprotective, and
neurogenic/neurorestorative properties. It can be administered via
nasal spray, at one spray (750 mcg) one to three times daily, or
whenever cognitive enhancement is desired. You can combine this
with the cognition-enhancing peptide Dihexa.
Be sure that when you order peptides, you choose a high-quality
source. On the resources page for this chapter, I’ll link to the page I
maintain at BenGreenfieldLife.com that lists my favorite peptide sources
--- END PAGE 1113 ---

--- PAGE 1114 ---
and stacks. Since peptides tend to fluctuate widely in terms of legality and
availability, I update that page constantly.
PEPTIDE BIOREGULATORS
Finally, no discussion of peptides for longevity would be complete without
addressing the emerging field of peptide bioregulators, a groundbreaking
category within the realm of peptide science. Peptide bioregulators
present a fascinating divergence from traditional peptides in their
mechanism of action and therapeutic applications. Unlike conventional
peptides, which are short chains of amino acids that mimic or influence
natural physiological processes, peptide bioregulators are derived from or
are identical to naturally occurring protein fragments in the body. These
bioregulators are unique because they specifically target and modulate the
function of certain tissues or organs, essentially acting as a “tuning”
mechanism to restore or optimize biological processes. This approach
allows for the potential normalization of functions in specific tissues
where the bioregulators are targeted without the broad systemic effects
seen with some other peptides.
How it works: Peptide bioregulators were discovered decades ago
during the Cold War. At that time, Russian military troops displayed
evidence of premature aging, and the Russian government wanted to find a
solution to maintain the soldiers’ health and prevent premature aging.
Professor Vladimir Khavinson was commissioned to tackle this problem,
and based on his knowledge of peptides, he began to experiment with
bioregulatory peptides to regenerate tissue and restore the functions of
organs impaired by aging. He discovered a biological reserve of peptides in
each human organ and observed that the level of peptide bioregulators in
each individual’s organs was 42 percent when all human physical abilities
were at optimum performance. In one experiment that Khavinson and his
team conducted on rats and mice, the animals on bioregulators were
--- END PAGE 1114 ---

--- PAGE 1115 ---
observed to live 30 to 40 percent longer than their expected lifespan! In
human subjects, seniors within the age range of sixty to seventy-four who
were given bioregulators had a mortality rate 22 percent lower than that of
the control group. Those within the seventy-five-to-eighty-nine age group
demonstrated a 33 percent decrease in mortality rate over a control group!
Based on a multitude of Khavinson’s findings, it is fair to say that
peptide bioregulators are safe for humans and can improve physiological
function, prevent age-related diseases, and boost longevity. They can
enhance protein synthesis in cells, support the repair and regeneration of
damaged tissues, modulate the immune system, and optimize the function
of specific organs.
Among the most notable and popular peptide bioregulators are those
targeting the thymus, pineal gland, and pancreas. The thymus
bioregulator, for example, named Vladonix (yes, they all have pretty odd
Russian-derived names) is known to support the immune system, which is
crucial for health and longevity. The pineal gland bioregulator (Endoluten)
can help regulate the body’s circadian rhythms and improve sleep quality,
which are vital for overall well-being and longevity. Meanwhile, the
pancreas bioregulator (Pancramin) can aid in optimizing digestion and
glucose metabolism, key factors in maintaining energy levels and
preventing metabolic disorders.
How to do it: Peptide bioregulator protocols can be a bit complex. For
maintenance/prevention, it is recommended to choose which organs you
want to target and then take two bioregulators for that organ per day for
ten days, repeating every three months. Obviously, if you choose to target
eight different organs, that’s sixteen capsules a day, so many people spread
out their protocol over a calendar year. Furthermore, many people,
including myself, “load” for thirty days instead of ten when doing the first
round of a biogregulator protocol. Some physicians, like Dr. Matt Cook at
BioReset Medical, can “package up” bioregulators into convenient syringes
--- END PAGE 1115 ---

--- PAGE 1116 ---
so that you can take more all at once via subcutaneous injection. To
purchase oral bioregulators, check out Qi Supplements, CosmicNootropic,
or Anti Aging Systems.
THYMUS
The thymus is a small, irregular-shaped, fat-enshrouded gland situated at
the front of the chest, between the heart and the sternum. Thymus from
veal, lamb, beef, or pork is often breaded, fried, and sold in restaurants as
sweetbreads. The thymus gland’s primary function is to produce a type of
vital white blood cell called T cells. It accomplishes this by producing cells
called thymocytes, which are necessary precursors to T cells. T cells, or T
lymphocytes, are critical in the maintenance of a healthy immune system.
For example, regulatory T cells maintain immune homeostasis by
preventing or limiting T cell activation. Toward the end of an immune
reaction, they suppress levels of other types of T cells, including effector T
cells, helper T cells, and cytotoxic (killer) T cells, which are all involved in
the immune system response. Memory T cells include central memory T
cells, effector memory T cells, tissue-resident T cells, and virtual memory
T cells. As their names imply, these memory T cells, which are found in
lymph nodes and the surrounding tissues, are responsible for
remembering previously encountered pathogens and developing long-
term immunity and tolerance to pathogens throughout your life.
How it works: Once thymocytes are produced by the thymus, they
migrate to peripheral tissues, where they act as the precursors to mature T
cells. Since your body cannot properly produce T cells without sufficient
precursors, supporting your thymus gland can be crucial for longevity and
your ability to combat infection as you experience age-related immune
system deterioration.
Indeed, research has indicated that thymus deterioration is closely
associated with immunosenescence, the degeneration of the immune
--- END PAGE 1116 ---

--- PAGE 1117 ---
system primarily due to alterations in T cell composition. The intriguing
fact about the thymus gland is that its size and activity closely parallel the
growth and aging processes of the body: it reaches its maximum size and
activity during puberty and then slowly atrophies over time, so that after
the age of sixty, it is nearly undetectable from the surrounding fatty
tissues. As the thymus shrinks, your immune system deteriorates, and
your body begins to lose its defenses against age-related diseases.
Interestingly, Vladimir Anisimov, a Russian gerontologist who
discovered many of the anti-aging benefits of melatonin and metformin,
also discovered the peptide epitalon and found that it was able to suppress
cancer and extend the lives of rats and mice in a series of experiments
over several decades. Even more notably, when aging humans are given
epitalon, their mortality rates drop in half. Its mechanism of action seems
to be via both activation of telomerase and the regeneration of the
thymus. Since the thymus shrinks gradually over the latter decades of life,
any compound that slows the decay of thymic tissue could induce a
profound antiaging response.
How to do it: Thymus treatments are usually made from thymic
extracts from cows or sheep, and they’re taken orally or via intramuscular
injections. Should you decide to forgo the relatively expensive
intramuscular injections or “glandular” supplements that usually contain
a decent dose of thymus and instead take a more ancestral route, you can
make it a point to occasionally eat sweetbreads, which can be purchased
online from companies such as US Wellness Meats (their beef sweetbread
is pretty tasty when dredged in egg and flour and fried up in butter). In
addition, the injectable peptide thymosin-alpha can produce similar T-
cell-enhancing effects, and the top of the totem pole would be an actual
NK-cell infusion like that discussed in chapter 15.
PLATELET-RICH PLASMA (PRP)
--- END PAGE 1117 ---

--- PAGE 1118 ---
Your blood consists of several components, but one of the primary
components is plasma, a clear, extracellular fluid. Plasma contains a high
concentration of platelets, which are small cells generated by bone
marrow that play a crucial role in managing vascular integrity and
regulating hemostasis (stopping a flow of blood) and can also aid in
wound healing.
Platelets can be administered to a site of pain or injury to supply stem
cells, protein, and other growth factors that help speed up recovery,
injected into any tissue that could benefit from more blood flow
(including the genitals, making PRP a popular sexual enhancement
procedure), and, like stem cells, they can be used as a preventive protocol
or age-reversal strategy. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is exactly what it
sounds like, plasma that’s rich in platelets, usually derived from your own
blood (although corporations like the Young Blood Institute in Silicon
Valley are now offering plasma from young donors).
Blood platelet levels remain fairly stable throughout middle age
(twenty-five to sixty years), but past the age of sixty, levels fall and
continue to decline, and the responsiveness of the platelets themselves
also deteriorates. Injections of PRP could, therefore, have antiaging effects
such as supporting vascular health in older people, reducing age-related
joint pain, and preventing normal age-related degradation of the skin and
sexual organs.
How it works: PRP is almost always taken from your own blood.
Usually, the amount of blood needed is about the same as what is normally
drawn for a standard blood test—one or two small tubes. The blood is
placed in a centrifuge to separate the platelets, stem cells, and growth
factors from the red and white blood cells. What remains after the red and
white blood cells are removed is a concentrate that gets injected into the
targeted area.
--- END PAGE 1118 ---

--- PAGE 1119 ---
I have had PRP injected into my penis to give me stronger erections
and improve sexual performance (a process known as the P-shot), but the
potential benefits go far beyond the bedroom.
The growth factors released after the platelets break down via a
process called platelet degranulation can aid in the treatment of tendon,
ligament, muscle, and cartilage injuries, as well as early osteoarthritis.
Given that tissues like tendons, ligaments, cartilage, and bone heal much
slower after injuries than muscle does, PRP injections can be an effective
tactic for joint support, especially as the musculoskeletal system
deteriorates with age. For example, I’ve had PRP injected into my knees
(in conjunction with stem cells, exosomes, and ozone) for a powerful
joint-repairing protocol.
But PRP is best known for its role in the vampire facial (you may
remember a certain Kardashian touting her vampire facial on Instagram a
few years back). These PRP treatments on the face are used to treat
sagging skin, fine lines, wrinkles, and scarring by promoting collagen
growth underneath skin.
In addition, a clinic in Athens, Greece, treated 180 women by injecting
PRP into the uterus or ovaries to stimulate repair of the female
reproductive system. They claim to have treated twenty-seven menopausal
women, of whom twelve returned to ovulation!
How to do it: Back in 2007, my business partner, sports medicine
physician P. Z. Pearce, partnered up with me to invest in a big, fancy PRP
centrifuge. Athletes would visit our facility, where we would extract their
blood and then spin it in the centrifuge to concentrate the growth factors
for reinjection. Just like most PRP research studies, we found that
although joint comfort seemed to improve significantly after just one
injection, a series of four to six injections seemed to work even better.
Since that time, Dr. Charles Runels has brought PRP to the attention of
the antiaging world by developing the vampire procedures, which involve
--- END PAGE 1119 ---

--- PAGE 1120 ---
multiple injections of PRP into wrinkled, hairless, or aging areas such as
the face, the top of head, or the breasts. These treatments are often
combined with PRP injections into the joints. Most antiaging and beauty
medical clinics now offer this procedure, and both my wife and I have had
our hairlines and faces injected with a soup of BMAC stem cells, PRP, and
exosomes, with a noticeable increase in complexion quality and decrease
in signs of wrinkling afterward. To stave off facial wrinkling that occurs
with age, my wife, Jessa, has done follow-up treatments of facial PRP
combined with stem cells and exosomes from Dr. Amy Killen at the
Docere Clinics in Park City, Utah, and I’ve done a similar protocol with Dr.
Cameron Chesnut at Clinic5C in Spokane, Washington.
As a word of caution, PRP therapy is not for everyone, and the research
surrounding it is inconsistent and inconclusive. In older populations, PRP
increases the risk of thrombosis and blood clots. Since platelets play a
central role in the coagulation of blood, if you have a history or family
history of thrombosis or blood clots, it may be better to avoid PRP
therapy, unless you are looking into a plasma exchange therapy offered by
clinics like NextHealth, which can actually decrease blood clotting risk
and “clean out” old blood by filtering the blood and replacing the plasma
with that of a healthy donor (however, this protocol is very expensive). I
recorded an entire podcast with Dr. Darshan Shah about this type of
therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) while undergoing the procedure
myself, and you can listen to the show by accessing the online resources
page for this chapter.
GENE EDITING
In 2024, I traveled to Cabo, Mexico, to the Eterna clinic operated by Dr.
Adeel Khan. After I sat in a waiting room for ten minutes, a nurse came in
and asked me, “Are you ready to be superhuman?”, then proceeded to do a
quick intramuscular injection into each of my shoulders. I had officially
--- END PAGE 1120 ---

--- PAGE 1121 ---
been gene-edited (in this case, for my follistatin gene), and after walking
out of the facility, I felt unstoppable during my next several months of
workouts. The effects persist to the very day that I am writing this chapter
five months later.
Gene editing—which you may be familiar with if you’ve ever heard of
CRISPR-Cas9—is a precise process of intentionally altering the DNA
sequence of an organism’s genome using engineered nucleases. It involves
cutting DNA at specific locations and introducing new genetic material to
the cut site, either by repairing the cut using the cell’s natural repair
mechanisms or by inserting new genetic material. Gene editing can help
add, delete, or replace particular genes or gene sequences in an organism’s
genome. It has the potential to offer new treatments for genetic diseases
by correcting or modifying the genetic mutations that cause them.
How it works: Follistatin is a naturally occurring protein in the human
body that plays a vital role in regulating various cellular processes,
particularly in muscle growth and development. Recent studies involving
mice have demonstrated that follistatin gene therapy has remarkable
potential without any known or anticipated cancer risk. This safety profile
can be attributed to the precise and highly specific mechanisms through
which follistatin operates at the cellular level.
At the core of follistatin’s cellular action lies its ability to modulate the
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) superfamily, a group of proteins
that control essential cellular functions. Follistatin achieves this by
binding to specific members of the TGF-β superfamily, particularly
myostatin, a protein that negatively regulates muscle growth. When
follistatin binds to myostatin, it neutralizes its inhibitory effects on
muscle development, leading to enhanced muscle protein synthesis and
reduced muscle protein degradation, resulting in increased muscle mass
and strength.
--- END PAGE 1121 ---

--- PAGE 1122 ---
Follistatin’s action is highly tissue-specific, meaning it predominantly
affects muscle cells without causing uncontrolled proliferation or growth
in other tissues. This specificity is crucial for the safety of gene therapy
since it ensures that the biological effects are confined to the intended
target, minimizing the risk of unintended consequences such as cancer
development. Furthermore, due to the significant decrease in cellular
inflammation and intrinsic biological age reduction, follistatin gene
therapy may ultimately reduce the risk of cancer and other chronic
diseases.
Another form of gene therapy that is currently undergoing the
approval process is targeted at Klotho, a gene that inhibits at least four
pathways that have been linked to aging, including TGF-β, insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1), nuclear factor κB, (NF-κB), and Wnt/β-catenin. I
plan to get Klotho gene therapy as soon as it becomes available, because it
may also have a significant impact on NAD bioavailability and testosterone
levels.
How to do it: Minicircle is a research and development company that
has developed a reversible human genetic therapy platform, using DNA
plasmids to add genes to the human body without altering your pre-
existing genome. Their technology is, in my opinion, the safest. Eterna
Health is a good clinic to contact for this therapy, and they are currently
expanding beyond their Cabo location to Cairo and Dubai. Warning: You
can expect this therapy to set you back around $25K if you decide to do it!
7. Blood Transfusions
This may sound like it is taken straight from a science fiction novel, but
today, older people are injecting the donated blood of younger generations
into their own bloodstreams. One company, Ambrosia, based near San
Francisco, had a client base of about six hundred people near to or over
--- END PAGE 1122 ---

--- PAGE 1123 ---
the age of sixty until they were shut down by the FDA. The company was
collecting screened blood from local blood banks and then selling
injections to antiaging enthusiasts who were willing to pay the $8,000 fee.
The Young Blood Institute in Silicon Valley has a different approach,
which they call therapeutic plasma exchange and advertise as a preventive
therapy for age-associated diseases. In this procedure, a patient’s plasma,
which constitutes about 55 percent of total blood volume, is completely
replaced by the plasma of a donor over multiple treatments. During my
groundbreaking podcast interview with the founder of the institute, Mark
Urdahl, you can hear about the fascinating clinical research currently
being done on this form of plasma exchange and discover how this
treatment is now being shown to reverse a staggering number of aging-
related medical conditions (most notably Alzheimer’s)—the podcast is
linked to on BoundlessBook.com/19.
How it works: While the whole procedure may seem slightly vampiric,
there are animal studies that suggest that injecting the blood of eighteen-
year-olds into your own bloodstream could be beneficial. A group of
researchers surgically introduced a demyelinating injury in the spinal cord
of an old mouse and then exposed the cells in the area to the blood from a
young mouse. The result? Some of the immune cells from the young blood
helped the old mouse’s own stem cells restore the damaged neurons’
myelin sheaths. The study concluded that age-related impairment to the
nervous system could be reversed by cells in young blood that stimulate
greater regeneration signals. Another mouse study found that younger
blood, when injected into older mice, introduces growth factors that are
believed to have antiaging effects on heart, muscle, and brain tissue.
As for plasma exchange, a host of studies show its potential for
removing circulating substances that cause disease or contribute to
disease states, removing pro-inflammatory factors (like fibrinogen, IL-6,
and TNF-alpha), and even increasing activity in dormant stem cells.
--- END PAGE 1123 ---

--- PAGE 1124 ---
How to do it: Pick up the phone and call the good folks at the Young
Blood Institute in Silicon Valley. Admittedly, at the time of this writing, I
have not yet spent over $40,000 on young blood transfusions, nor have I
committed to having all the plasma in my entire body replaced with that
of some healthy college kid in Florida. Nonetheless, I am intrigued by both
procedures, and I highly suspect they will become increasingly affordable
and popular with time.
In the meantime, it appears that GDF11, one of the antiaging proteins
activated with an infusion of young blood, is also increased by the
hormone oxytocin, which is activated during childbirth, breastfeeding, and
sex. It can even be purchased as a nasal spray. This promises to be an
affordable alternative to a blood infusion.
In addition, several medical practitioners, including Dr. Matt Cook in
San Jose, California, are now offering ozone dialysis at their practice,
which is a quick and relatively inexpensive treatment that may mimic
many of the blood-renewal effects of a full plasma transfusion. Or you can
opt for a therapeutic plasma exchange at a clinic like NextHealth, which
may offer similar benefits.
8. Bioidentical Hormone Replacement
Therapy
Today, many women live one-third of their lives in a state of sex-hormone
deficiency. This is especially important because estrogen, which can
upregulate telomerase and improve mitochondrial health, is one of the
factors in the longevity advantage women have in telomere length and the
cellular resilience of female aging biology. And men are not exempt from
hormone deficiency: though men are subject to age-related testosterone
decline and andropause, these are frequently underdiagnosed and
undertreated.
--- END PAGE 1124 ---

--- PAGE 1125 ---
Bioidentical hormone replacement therapy (BHT) is a fast track to
restoring levels of hormones that naturally decline with age: the sex
hormones estrone, estradiol, progesterone, testosterone, DHEA, and
estriol, as well as growth hormone and insulin growth factor-1. Far
different from the synthetic hormones that became vilified in the nineties
for causing breast cancer in postmenopausal women, BHT involves the
use of hormones that are molecularly identical to the hormones that your
body naturally produces.
How it works: For women, BHT—especially when combined with
peptides—appears to be far safer than synthetic hormone replacement
with compounds such as progestin, which is derived from the urine of
pregnant horses and has been linked to breast cancer. BHT can be
combined with pharmacy compounding, which involves matching
injections and pharmaceuticals to each particular patient’s needs.
For men who are interested in testosterone optimization, hormone
replacement therapy doesn’t necessarily need to be “bioidentical” per se,
since the synthetic form of testosterone is functionally identical to the
natural forms produced by the body.
How to do it: Although in-depth assessments of hormone needs,
ongoing hormone testing, and precise follow-up plans should be standard
practice, the fact is that many antiaging clinics simply hand over
injections, creams, nasal sprays, patches, and other hormone delivery
mechanisms with very little systematization. For this reason, it is crucial
to work with a practitioner who is willing to take the time to assess your
specific needs—and you want to work with someone who uses
bioidentical hormones rather than potentially dangerous synthetic
chemicals such as progestin.
The best place to start is with a good functional medicine practitioner;
you can find a directory at the website for the Institute of Functional
Medicine (ifm.org). If your practitioner isn’t well versed in hormone
--- END PAGE 1125 ---

--- PAGE 1126 ---
replacement therapy, they can direct you to someone who is. Hormones
can be administered in a variety of ways, including injections, topical and
vaginal creams and gels, oral pills, vaginal rings and tablets, and
transdermal patches. In an ideal scenario, these are custom compounded
to your specific needs, and your hormone levels are regularly tested and
tracked.
One of the more effective treatments for women is the Wiley protocol,
a version of compounded BHT that syncs hormones to the natural
endocrine cycles of women (there’s also a protocol for men). In addition,
you’ll find a discussion of testosterone optimization in chapter 18.
9. Mitochondrial Support
When mitochondria are stressed by inflammation or free radicals, they can
kill the cell they live in via apoptosis (programmed cell death).
Mitochondrial damage is a problem seen in many conditions related to
aging, including cardiovascular disease, liver disease, Alzheimer’s,
osteoporosis, and hair loss.
Many of the strategies you have already discovered in this chapter
support mitochondrial health. Here I’ll explain which nutrients and
supplements are known to protect against mitochondrial degradation,
mitochondrial aging, and the excessive formation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which can damage mitochondria.
NICOTINAMIDE ADENINE DINUCLEOTIDE (NAD)
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) is a coenzyme that is produced
by all living cells. NAD’s most basic function is to receive and donate
electrons during metabolic processes within your mitochondria, making it
crucial for normal cellular metabolism.
--- END PAGE 1126 ---

--- PAGE 1127 ---
How it works: NAD is involved in what are known as redox reactions,
which are processes vital in all parts of cell metabolism. When glucose and
fatty acids are oxidized, they release energy. NAD+, the oxidized form of
NAD, picks up this energy and is then reduced to NADH during beta-
oxidation, glycolysis, and the citric acid cycle. The NADH is transferred
into mitochondria, where it is oxidized by the electron transport chain,
which is responsible for shuttling protons across membranes and
generates ATP, the energy that drives your body.
NAD+ levels markedly decline with age, creating an energy deficit that
decreases the body’s ability to maintain normal metabolic activity. Some
of the effects of the decline in NAD+ include more chemical stress,
inflammation, DNA damage, and failing mitochondria. By age fifty, most
people have only half the NAD+ they did in younger years. By age eighty,
NAD+ levels drop to only 1 to 10 percent of their original value. This
deficiency of NAD+ predisposes the body to accelerated aging and
impedes the ability to benefit from other helpful compounds, such as
resveratrol and pterostilbene. NAD+ also promotes longevity by providing
the same cellular benefits associated with caloric restriction and exercise,
so the loss of NAD+ means the loss of these benefits. Elevated NAD levels
in general are also useful if you’ve been training hard, traveling frequently,
or are jet-lagged or sleep-deprived.
How to do it: The gold standard for NAD supplementation is to have a
large dose (typically 750 to 1,000 mg) administered via IV in a medical
clinic, which can take one to six hours, and then to maintain NAD levels
with repeat IVs, an NAD suppository or transdermal patch, or daily use of
oral NR (nicotinamide riboside), NMN (nicotinamide mononucleotide),
niacinamide, or NAD supplements. The only issue with using oral
supplements is lower bioavailability, particularly for neural effects,
because oral supplementation does not allow any of these molecules to
--- END PAGE 1127 ---

--- PAGE 1128 ---
cross the blood-brain barrier or act on the hypothalamus to induce any
positive cognitive effects.
Alternatively, NAD can be administered at home (often with the help
of a nurse practitioner) via a drip IV. Masochists or the ultra-daring can
even give themselves NAD through their own push IV—for a while, I did
this once every two weeks from the comfort of my own home, and it took
ten to fifteen minutes per session. Why do I describe this as masochistic?
Frankly, mainlining this particular molecule into your bloodstream is
incredibly uncomfortable, which is one reason it is usually administered
over several hours—so if you opt for the quicker push IV option, prepare
to feel as though your entire body is on fire while, at the same time,
someone is repeatedly punching you in the gut and chest. I literally had a
trash can next to me during the entire push IV for what I felt could be an
inevitable puke.
You can find NAD patches from IonLayer, NAD suppositories from
MitoZen, and oral NAD from a variety of sources. These days I like NAD3
in the NAD Regen product from Biostack labs, which contains three
compounds (wasabi, theacrine, and cuprous niacin) that keep the 125 mg
of niacinamide from degrading quickly, allowing for higher bioavailability
of the NAD.
Interestingly, the peptide 5-amino-1MQ is an orally available
supplement that blocks the activity of an enzyme called nicotinamide N-
methyltransferase (NNMT). By blocking NNMT, 5-amino-1MQ stimulates
an increase in nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) while
simultaneously activating a gene called sirtuin-1 (SIRT1). SIRT1 is also
known as “the longevity gene” because of its role in reducing the risk of
diabetes, obesity, metabolic syndrome, atherosclerosis, and other forms of
cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, liver disease, neurodegeneration,
and cancer. I get 5-amino-1MQ from Limitless Life Nootropics and cycle it
--- END PAGE 1128 ---

--- PAGE 1129 ---
weekly as five days on and two days off. Its effects on workout
performance are impressive.
NICOTINAMIDE RIBOSIDE (NR)
Nicotinamide riboside (NR), a form of vitamin B3, is a precursor to NAD.
In fact, your mitochondria prefer NR as an NAD precursor in particular.
When taken orally, NR is highly bioavailable and aids in mitochondrial
energy production. It exists in high levels in cow’s milk.
There is growing evidence that supplementing with NR can promote
longevity in life forms ranging from simple worms to mammals like mice.
One study showed an average 5 percent increase in the lifespan of old
mice, even though NR supplementation did not begin until the mice were
nearing the end of their natural lifespan (twenty-four months). In people,
that would be the equivalent of gaining nearly an additional four years of
life, based on today’s average life expectancy of about seventy-eight years.
How it works: Nicotinamide riboside has been shown not only to
restore NAD+ levels in tissues but also to provide more NAD+ activity
than can be obtained from diet alone. NR supplementation is very well
tolerated in middle-aged and older adults and can slow cellular aging and
improve many age-related metabolic problems, including diabetes and
neurodegenerative conditions. In addition, NR has the potential to reduce
the declining heart function, high blood pressure, and arterial stiffness
that can accompany aging, and it even has beneficial effects on
cardiovascular fitness. NR also stimulates a caloric-restriction-mimicking
state, which means that it can promote weight loss.
How to do it: Most absorbable, supplemental forms of NR appear
under the name ChromaDex. Three good NR supplements are Tru Niagen,
Elysium Basis, and Thorne ResveraCel, which combines NR with another
antiaging compound: resveratrol.
--- END PAGE 1129 ---

--- PAGE 1130 ---
According to the physician who discovered NR, Dr. Charles Brenner,
the best way to consume an NR supplement is with one dose in the
morning and one in the afternoon, which allows the dosing of the NR to
match your body’s natural circadian rhythm pulsing of NR. NMN and NAD
oral supplements may work similarly, and although research is ongoing
regarding the pros and cons of each supplement option, you can think of it
this way: at the top of the totem pole in terms of NAD bioavailability and
cellular delivery are any mechanisms that bypass digestion or liver
metabolism, most notably NAD IVs or patches, or sublingual NMN. The
next best option—slightly less potent but more convenient or affordable
for many people—is oral NR. Warning: Recent concerns about heart
disease with excess use of niacin, NR, or NMN indicate that your dosage
should be capped at 250 mg per day for long-term use (months or longer).
ASTAXANTHIN
Astaxanthin is a carotenoid that’s produced by single-celled freshwater
algae. When their environment becomes stressful due to excessively salty
water, low nitrogen levels, or high temperatures, the algae produce
astaxanthin in lipid droplets, which turn the algal cells bright red and
allow them to survive the harsh conditions. In humans, astaxanthin
performs similar protective functions by promoting cellular survival.
How it works: Astaxanthin protects your mitochondria by acting as
both an antioxidant and a free-radical scavenger. As your mitochondria
perform normal respiratory functions, they produce free radicals like
superoxide radicals, which interact with proteins, fats, and DNA and cause
damage to your cells, ultimately contributing to the aging process.
Astaxanthin inserts itself into your cell membranes and mitochondrial
membranes, where it inhibits free-radical production and helps eliminate
the free radicals that are produced. Astaxanthin’s antioxidant activity is
fourteen times greater than that of vitamin E, fifty-four times greater than
--- END PAGE 1130 ---

--- PAGE 1131 ---
beta-carotene, and sixty-five times greater than vitamin C, making it one
of the most potent antioxidants.
Astaxanthin also boosts immune system function by promoting anti-
inflammatory activity and increasing the activity of natural killer cells.
One study examined the effects of astaxanthin on the production of the
inflammatory compounds IL-6 and NF-kB following the introduction of
lipopolysaccharides, or LPS (remember from chapter 4 that LPS
contribute to age-related chronic diseases). The researchers found that
astaxanthin suppressed the production of both IL-6 and NF-kB. In another
study, researchers found that astaxanthin increased natural killer cell
activity and even increased total levels of T and B cells, which both play a
role in fighting infection.
How to do it: While an effective dose of astaxanthin is 12 mg per day,
daily doses of up to 40 mg—preferably consumed with fats to improve
absorption—can be taken without any negative side effects. If you want to
get your astaxanthin more naturally, you can find it in salmon (in fact, it’s
the compound responsible for the red color in fish and crustaceans). In a
kilogram of salmon, you’ll get between 26 and 38 mg of astaxanthin.
Astaxanthin is also a good protective treatment for skin radiation from
UVA and UVB sunlight rays (almost like edible sunscreen), and I used to
dose with 40 mg prior to and after my Ironman triathlons in Hawaii. After
these races, I’d experience minimal burning, even with very small amounts
of low SPF sunscreen used during the event. Another strategy is the use of
polypodium leucotomos, an extract from a South American fern that acts
similarly as an internal sunscreen, with good data behind it for skin health
in response to UVA radiation. Summer Ready is a good brand.
--- END PAGE 1131 ---

--- PAGE 1132 ---
PAU D’ARCO TEA
Derived from the bark of a tropical evergreen tree in the Amazon
rainforest, pau d’arco has long been used by people indigenous to Latin
America. Dr. Joe Mercola first alerted me to the fact that pau d’arco tea is a
simple, highly affordable but little-known way to treat wounds, aches,
pains, malaria and other tropical diseases, and inflammation. It also boosts
NAD.
How it works: Pau d’arco contains a compound called beta-lapachone,
which acts as a catalyst for NAD. NAD is also a necessary precursor of the
sirtuin enzymes discussed earlier in this chapter, which regulate your
body’s antiaging switches (such as the genes that promote inflammation
and control blood sugar management). So by promoting NAD activity, pau
d’arco not only promotes mitochondrial health but also helps regulate
genetic antiaging processes.
How to do it: You can order pau d’arco tea in bulk online and keep a
giant batch of it in the refrigerator for teas, cold drinks, and smoothie
bases. Absorption and delivery of the beta-lapochenes in it can be
enhanced by blending the prepared tea with a fat source such as coconut
oil, coconut milk, sunflower lecithin, fish oil, or any other source of
healthy fats. Pau d’arco supplements in capsule form are also available
online, but I personally prefer the tea, which has a pleasant nutty flavor.
--- END PAGE 1132 ---

--- PAGE 1133 ---
CURCUMIN
Curcumin is a compound produced by some plants, most notably turmeric
(Curcuma longa), a member of the ginger family. Technically, curcumin is
considered a diarylheptanoid and belongs to the group of curcuminoids,
which are natural phenols responsible for turmeric’s yellow color.
How it works: Curcumin is a potent antioxidant and free-radical
scavenger that protects cellular function from reactive oxygen species
such as superoxide radicals, singlet oxygen, nitric oxide, and hydrogen
peroxide. It also enhances your body’s natural antioxidant capacity by
improving the production of antioxidant enzymes like superoxide
dismutase, glutathione, and catalase. As a result, curcumin reduces
chronic inflammation throughout your body to protect against age-related
chronic diseases.
But the effects of curcumin go further. Chronic inflammation is
associated with a condition called epigenetic drift. Within your DNA are
compounds collectively known as the epigenome, which is responsible for
maintaining your DNA’s expression and your cells’ identity and function.
Over time, your ability to keep your epigenome healthy and functioning
declines, so as you age, genes that used to be inactive may be expressed,
and genes that used to be expressed may go dormant. This drift may cause
stem cell production to decline and increase your risk of cancer and
cardiovascular diseases. By reducing the inflammatory pathways involved
with this downregulation of DNA expression, curcumin can help to
prevent epigenetic drift.
How to do it: Curcumin constitutes only 3 to 5 percent of the turmeric
root, so it’s more efficient to supplement with curcumin than to eat
turmeric. Curcumin also has naturally low bioavailability, but it can be
increased by combining turmeric with black pepper or piperine (a black
pepper extract), exposing it to low heat (such as cooking fish, vegetables,
eggs, or curries with turmeric), combining it with a high-quality fat source,
--- END PAGE 1133 ---

--- PAGE 1134 ---
such as butter, ghee, olive oil, coconut oil, or avocado oil, or consuming a
supplement like Kion Flex that has isolated, highly bioavailable
turmerosaccharides. An effective dose of curcumin is 1,000 mg, but doses
as high as 1,500 mg can be taken without any negative side effects.
CARNOSINE
Carnosine is a molecule composed of two peptides: beta-alanine and
histidine. It is found in high amounts in skeletal muscle, where it can
eliminate excess lactic acid and prevent muscular fatigue during exercise
—hence its popularity as a performance supplement. But, as you’re about
to discover, it’s also been shown to have potent antiaging effects.
How it works: Carnosine promotes mitochondrial and cellular
function by acting as an antioxidant and free-radical scavenger. Not only
does it act on its own to inhibit ROS activity, but it has also been observed
in rats to promote the endogenous production of antioxidants like
glutathione and superoxide dismutase. One in vitro study also showed
that carnosine can reduce the rate at which telomeres shorten, which
slows aging. It also inhibits the production of advanced glycation end
products (AGEs), which contribute to the development of diabetes and
other age-related diseases.
How to do it: A standard effective dose is between 500 and 1,000 mg
per day. You can purchase carnosine over the counter or online from
companies like Life Extension or Thorne. It’s important to note that
carnosine’s effectiveness is cumulative, meaning that its effects become
greater the longer you take it and let it accumulate in your body, so be sure
to allow ten to twelve weeks to get the full benefits.
ALPHA LIPOIC ACID (ALA)
Alpha lipoic acid (not to be confused with alpha linolenic acid, the other
ALA) is a compound derived from sulfur that’s involved in mitochondrial
--- END PAGE 1134 ---

--- PAGE 1135 ---
aerobic respiration. While the human body can produce very small
amounts of ALA, it is obtained primarily from animal dietary sources—
particularly cow’s liver, although you can also find it in plant sources like
spinach, Brussels sprouts, yams, and broccoli.
How it works: ALA acts as an antioxidant within mitochondria, has
free-radical scavenging capabilities, and upregulates your own antioxidant-
producing abilities by recycling “used-up” antioxidants like vitamin C and
glutathione. Because of this, ALA is often called the “universal
antioxidant.” It’s both water- and fat-soluble, so it moves through cell
membranes and the blood-brain barrier much more easily than most other
antioxidants. ALA also helps maintain DNA integrity as you get older by
protecting the epigenome, and it also activates telomerase, the enzyme
that lengthens your telomeres.
How to do it: In addition to consuming ALA-dense foods, you can
supplement with ALA. The recommended dose ranges from 200 to 600
mg per day, but doses up to 2,400 mg per day have been taken with no
observed negative effects. It’s important to note that ALA supplements
should not be taken with food, which can limit absorption. The best time
to take ALA supplements is thirty minutes before or two hours after a
meal.
APIGENIN
Apigenin is a flavone found in foods such as parsley, onions, and oregano,
but it is best known as the primary active compound in chamomile tea,
which has been consumed since the time of the ancient Egyptians and has
traditionally been used to treat burns, gastrointestinal disorders,
infections, and a myriad of other conditions. It also has antiaging effects.
How it works: Apigenin promotes mitochondrial function by
inhibiting the breakdown of NAD, a necessary cofactor in mitochondrial
redox reactions, which are crucial in the generation of ATP. So apigenin
--- END PAGE 1135 ---

--- PAGE 1136 ---
helps maintain mitochondrial energy production, which can decline with
age. In addition, apigenin is another epigenome-protecting molecule that
preserves DNA integrity.
How to do it: There’s sparse research about the ideal dose of apigenin,
but the dose in a few cups of chamomile tea or a few servings of fruits and
vegetables per day seems to be effective. Supplemental forms usually
come in doses of 20 to 50 mg, and higher doses (3 to 10 mg per kg of body
weight) are used to treat anxiety.
SULFORAPHANE
As its name suggests, sulforaphane is a sulfur-based molecule found
naturally in cruciferous vegetables like broccoli and Brussels sprouts. In
the early 1990s, it was discovered that sulforaphane had strong anticancer
properties, and since then, intensive studies have been conducted to
discover other potential health effects.
How it works: While researchers are unsure about sulforaphane’s
ability to act as a free-radical scavenger, research does suggest that it is
more effective at activating your body’s antioxidant-producing processes
than similar compounds such as curcumin and resveratrol, making
sulforaphane a strong protector of mitochondrial and cellular health.
It’s also an epigenetic modifier that protects the epigenome and
prevents DNA deterioration. In addition, sulforaphane induces autophagy
(cell death and recycling) and stimulates the production of more
mitochondria to enhance the energy output of each individual cell. Finally,
one in vitro study showed that a concentrated oral dose of sulforaphane
promoted greater stem cell proliferation and protected stem cells from
aging.
How to do it: Broccoli sprouts are my favorite natural source of
sulforaphane and contain up to one hundred times more than broccoli.
You can also supplement via brands such as Thorne MediClear or Life
--- END PAGE 1136 ---

--- PAGE 1137 ---
Extension Triple Action Cruciferous Vegetable Extract. An effective dose
of sulforaphane is about 10 to 35 mg per day for a 150-pound person, 15 to
45 mg for a 200-pound person, and 20 to 60 mg for a 250-pound person.
QUERCETIN
Quercetin is a plant-pigment flavonoid found naturally in red wine, white
wine (white wine actually contains more than red wine), ginkgo biloba,
apples, green tea, St. John’s wort, and other plants associated with
longevity. It occurs in particularly high concentrations in capers, yellow
chili peppers, and onions.
How it works: Quercetin is a powerful antioxidant, and some research
indicates it may be one of the most potent flavonoids for combating free
radicals in the body. As a word of warning, though low concentrations in
the body are highly beneficial, high concentrations can cause quercetin to
become an ROS itself. Currently it’s unknown what these concentrations
equate to in the human body, but for now, just know that more does not
equal better when it comes to quercetin.
Quercetin also enhances your own antioxidant-producing abilities,
improving the production of glutathione, superoxide dismutase, catalase,
and more. It acts as an anti-inflammatory by inhibiting the release of mast
cells and histamines, and it may even inhibit the metabolism of
resveratrol, making quercetin and resveratrol a potent one-two combo.
How to do it: The typical Western diet provides about 15 to 40 mg per
day of quercetin, but recommended doses range from 250 to 1,500 mg,
with the average recommended dose falling around 1 g per day. I use
quercetin in powder form in a longevity and autophagy tea introduced to
me by Dr. Mercola—you’ll find the ingredients on here.
This particular blend upregulates both NAD and autophagy pathways
and can easily be added to smoothies or consumed in hot or cold water.
--- END PAGE 1137 ---

--- PAGE 1138 ---
EPIGALLOCATECHIN GALLATE (EGCG)
Green tea has been consumed for thousands of years in Asia to promote
longevity and improve health. But the primary active compound in green
tea, the ester EGCG, can be delivered in higher doses in supplement form.
How it works: Green tea is a strong antioxidant, and EGCG is the
primary molecule responsible for this effect. EGCG also acts as a free-
radical scavenger and activates endogenous antioxidant production. In
fact, research indicates it is more potent than vitamin E and vitamin C,
and it does not blunt the hormetic response to exercise as vitamins E and
C do.
EGCG is also an epigenetic modifier that protects the epigenome from
deterioration. While the exact mechanism of action is unknown, we do
know that the epigenetic effects of EGCG improve skin cancer outcomes.
EGCG also promotes cellular autophagy, particularly in the liver and in
macrophage and endothelial cells, although it may reduce autophagy in
certain eye cells.
EGCG is also known to improve weight loss by increasing fat oxidation
(the caffeine in green tea likely enhances this effect). Finally, EGCG easily
crosses the blood-brain barrier and is highly neuroprotective, reducing
inflammation in the brain. Thus, it helps reduce the likelihood of
developing age-related neurodegenerative diseases.
How to do it: The ideal dose ranges from 400 to 500 mg per day, and
since the average cup of green tea contains up to 90 mg, it may be more
strategic to take an EGCG supplement. Higher doses may cause side
effects like nausea and heartburn in many individuals.
FENUGREEK
One of the first, most successful, and longest-lasting human civilizations
of all time, ancient Egypt, invented many antiaging tricks. One common
antiaging food they consumed was fenugreek, an herb found in the
--- END PAGE 1138 ---

--- PAGE 1139 ---
Mediterranean region and parts of China and India. The Egyptians
processed fenugreek in a lengthy and complicated ritual that involved
drying, threshing, winnowing, and boiling to produce an oil that was then
applied to the skin to keep it looking soft, bright, and youthful. The
famous Egyptian queen Cleopatra smeared this oil on her face regularly.
How it works: Fenugreek, a semiarid plant most common in South
and Central Asia, helps regulate blood sugar levels and prevents the onset
of diabetes, or, if you already have diabetes, helps you manage it. But
fenugreek’s benefits extend far beyond that and deep into your gut,
hormone levels, and mitochondria. A powerful antioxidant, fenugreek can
mitigate oxidative damage and abate inflammation. Fenugreek has been
shown to possess anti-inflammatory capacities that help ease the
symptoms of ulcerative colitis, an inflammatory bowel disease. The water-
soluble fiber it contains can help relieve constipation. One study
concluded that a fenugreek petroleum ether extract containing naturally
occurring linolenic and linoleic acids can shut down systemic
inflammation and improve arthritis.
Another study found that, in a group of sixty men aged twenty-five to
fifty-two with no history of erectile dysfunction, fenugreek significantly
increased sexual arousal, energy, and stamina and helped maintain normal
testosterone levels. Given the importance of sex in maintaining biological
viability, this could be a potent tool for men. Another study has also
shown that the active compound of fenugreek, 4-OH-lle, promotes the
production of new mitochondria in diabetic patients, who often suffer
from low mitochondrial numbers and function. Given the mitochondrial
theory of aging, this makes fenugreek a good compound to include in any
longevity protocol.
How to do it: Rather than a fenugreek supplement, I prefer organic
fenugreek seeds, which are quite tasty and have a delicate maple flavor.
You can keep them in a pepper grinder or glass mason jar in your kitchen.
--- END PAGE 1139 ---

--- PAGE 1140 ---
Sprinkle or grind them into stir-fries, meat dishes, salads, soups, or
anything else for which you desire both the digestion-enhancing and
antiaging support of fenugreek seeds. I often combine them with fennel
and black pepper for a meat and stir-fry seasoning.
FISH OIL
You’ll recall from chapters 4 and 14 that fish oil, whether from
supplements or fatty cold-water fish, helps you get the cognitive and
physical benefits of the anti-inflammatory omega-3 fatty acids DHA and
EPA. It’s also important for getting the optimal ratio of omega-6 to omega-
3. The anti-inflammatory properties of fish oil make it effective for fighting
the signs of aging.
How it works: Both EPA and DHA are precursors of various
eicosanoids that are responsible for reducing inflammation. In middle-
aged rats, fish oil is known to increase the activities of the antioxidants
superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase, and catalase, as well as
total antioxidant capacity. It has also been shown to downregulate forty-
one genes that are involved in aging and decrease the rate at which
telomeres shorten. And because it inhibits inflammatory eicosanoids and
cytokines, fish oil has even been shown to be a beneficial replacement for
NSAIDs in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
New clinical research studies are now proving fish oil’s efficacy for
staving off the cardiovascular and metabolic issues, such as diabetes, that
can occur with aging, and pharmaceutical companies such as Amarin are
developing drugs based entirely on fish oil. Micronutrients in fish oil, such
as omega-3 fatty acids and, most notably, vitamin D, have also been shown
to impact telomere length. Supplemental fish oil at doses of 2.5 g per day
has been shown to induce a 32 percent reduction in telomere shortening
and significantly reduce oxidation in blood cells.
--- END PAGE 1140 ---

--- PAGE 1141 ---
How to do it: For my recommended fish oil supplement brands as well
as dosages, see chapter 12. Be sure to choose a triglyceride form, which
provides up to 70 percent more absorption than other forms of fish oil.
You’ll also find information on food sources of DHA and EPA in chapter 4.
COENZYME Q10 (COQ10)
Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) is a naturally occurring compound found in most
aerobic animals, ranging from bacteria to mammals. CoQ10 itself is a
powerful tool to have in your antiaging arsenal. Also known as ubiquinone,
ubiquinone-Q10, ubidecarenone, vitamin Q10, or coenzyme Q, it is an
essential component of the mitochondrial electron transport chain and an
antioxidant found in plasma membranes and lipoproteins throughout the
body.
Since CoQ10 synthesis can decline as you age, supplementing with it
may be extremely beneficial as you get older.
How it works: One study observed the effects of a high CoQ10 intake
on old mice with age-related neurodegeneration and found that CoQ10
improves spatial learning and reduces oxidative damage. But these results
were not observed in younger mice; they only affected preexisting age-
related cognitive decline. It is also known that CoQ10 scavenges free
radicals that promote mesenchymal stem cell aging, keeping stem cells
younger. Studies have also shown that the antioxidant effect of CoQ10
supplements alleviates cardiovascular disease and inflammation.
How to do it: CoQ10 is found in oily fish like salmon and tuna as well
as in organ meats. As a supplement, it’s available as capsules, tablets, and
oral spray. The ideal dosage ranges from 30 to 90 mg per day divided into
several doses, though you can safely take as much as 200 mg per day. As a
fat-soluble compound, it is best consumed with a healthy source of fats
such as coconut oil or extra-virgin olive oil. CoQ10 comes in two forms:
ubiquinone (an oxidized, activated form) and ubiquinol (a reduced form).
--- END PAGE 1141 ---

--- PAGE 1142 ---
Ubiquinol is better as an antioxidant because it can donate two spare
electrons to free radicals, leaving the rest of your cells untouched. CoQ10
(ubiquinone) is better for energy metabolism, such as pre-workout, due to
its oxidized state.
Companies such as Cymbiotika and Almsbio produce blends that
contain CoQ10, PQQ, and glutathione, discussed below. You’ll find links
and discount codes on BoundlessBook.com/19. When I interviewed Dr.
Barrie Tan about geranylgeraniol (GG), an extract from the annatto plant,
he explained that GG is the building block for the biosynthesis of CoQ10
(as you learned in chapter 14, GG is also beneficial for elevating vitamin K
bioavailability and skeletal muscle maintenance), so you can also elevate
CoQ10 levels by supplementing with GG from Designs For Health.
PYRROLOQUINOLINE QUINONE (PQQ)
Pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) is an antioxidant that’s involved in redox
reactions, which change the oxidation states of atoms, in living organisms
ranging from bacteria to human beings. More than 175 published studies
have shown that it has wide-ranging benefits for memory, general
cognition, mood, and mental processing power, making it a popular
ingredient in many nootropics. PQQ’s benefits also include increased
mitochondrial density, defense against oxidative stress, improved learning
and memory ability, and reduced inflammation.
How it works: In humans, PQQ interacts with cell signaling pathways
and mitochondrial functions. It’s an ROS scavenger, which protects
mitochondria from the damage of oxidative stress. One study even
demonstrated that in mice, the antioxidant and DNA-damage-reducing
capacities of PQQ played a role in combating osteoporosis. Another study
demonstrated that PQQ contributes to the upregulation of certain
compounds involved in repairing the microglia and neurons of the
--- END PAGE 1142 ---

--- PAGE 1143 ---
cerebral cortex and parts of the hippocampus following traumatic brain
injury.
How to do it: PQQ is found naturally in kiwi, celery, papaya, sweet
potatoes, green tea, fermented bean products like natto, parsley, and even
human breast milk. I don’t necessarily recommend that you ask your
friends if you can borrow some breast milk from them, but you can
certainly consume the other foods or take PQQ in a supplemental form.
Using PQQ in combination with CoQ10 seems to synergistically
increase their potency, so I recommend including both in a mitochondrial
optimization regimen. No matter what PQQ source you use, look for a
form called BioPQQ. There are countless forms of PQQ on the market
today, but BioPQQ is formulated from natural bacterial fermentation,
while other varieties contain mostly synthetic forms of PQQ.
GLUTATHIONE
Glutathione is an antioxidant that occurs naturally in your body and
primarily consists of the amino acids glutamine, glycine, and cysteine.
Glutathione is a true electron trap, placing it high on the list of
antioxidants. In fact, it is one of the few antioxidants that is actually
produced by your body, rather than being obtained only through food. It is
also known to support whole-body detoxification, including most phases
of the liver’s detoxification pathways, and to help cells grow, multiply, and
repair themselves.
Because of its wide range of antioxidant activity, glutathione plays a
multifactorial role in aging. Overall, glutathione levels decrease as we age,
and this seems to affect the onset of a large number of diseases.
How it works: The depletion of the reduced form of glutathione
(often simply referred to as GSH, it’s the stable, nonoxidized form of
glutathione) has been implicated in many chronic degenerative diseases,
including cystic fibrosis, cataracts, macular degeneration, glaucoma,
--- END PAGE 1143 ---

--- PAGE 1144 ---
hypertension, asthma, acute respiratory distress syndrome, Alzheimer’s,
Parkinson’s, Huntington’s, myocardial infarction, autoimmune conditions,
and even the aging process itself. Indeed, GSH levels have been found to
parallel the activity of telomerase, the enzyme responsible for maintaining
long, strong telomeres. The depletion of GSH has also been found to
induce the loss of mitochondrial function due to the accumulation of
damage to mitochondrial DNA. Once transferred into the mitochondrial
matrix, GSH plays a key role in the defense against ROS and in the
detoxification of lipid hydroperoxides (damaged lipids in cell membranes)
and electrophiles (which are similar to free radicals). GSH also critically
regulates the release of proteins from the intermembrane space of
mitochondria; once released, these proteins engage the machinery of cell
death, meaning that GSH is a critical nutrient for the support of
mitochondrial health as well as overall cellular activity and health.
How to do it: While we do produce glutathione every day, it is also
highly available in supplemental forms as well as in whole-food sources. It
is true that some ingested glutathione is broken down and oxidized before
being absorbed by your cells, but contrary to popular belief, some does, in
fact, get taken up into your mitochondria. Research has indicated that
glutathione can cross human intestinal cells intact, and you can take
glutathione supplements in forms that protect it from being oxidized
before it reaches your bloodstream. Sublingual supplements, for example,
are better absorbed than oral glutathione. Glutathione can also be bound
within tiny fat droplets called liposomes, which protect the glutathione
until the liposomes are taken up by your cells, where they are broken
down and the glutathione is released.
Recommended oral glutathione doses range between 250 and 1,000 mg
daily, preferably from a liposomal source such as Cymbiotika, Quicksilver
Scientific, or Jarrow Formulas. Pork loin, chicken liver, steak, asparagus,
broccoli, potatoes, avocados, zucchini, tomatoes, spinach, parsley, and
--- END PAGE 1144 ---

--- PAGE 1145 ---
okra are all excellent food sources of glutathione, so a diet to support your
mitochondrial health should include these foods.
Here are more ways you can increase your glutathione:
• Consume plenty of vitamin C, which helps maintain your body’s
supply of glutathione.
• Consume selenium-rich foods like beef, chicken, fish, cottage cheese
(if you tolerate dairy well), and brown rice, as selenium is a
glutathione cofactor.
• If you don’t have allergies or sensitivities, supplement your diet with
whey protein, which provides a complete amino acid profile.
Glutathione synthesis requires the amino acids glutamine, cysteine,
and glycine.
• Consume turmeric: the curcumin it contains can help restore
glutathione levels and improve the activity of glutathione enzymes.
MITOQUINONE MESYLATE (MITOQ)
MitoQ is an antioxidant that, unlike many other antioxidants, can
accumulate in high concentrations in mitochondria because it has been
engineered to be smaller and contain a positive charge, so it passes
through the mitochondrial membrane better than CoQ10. It has been
shown to increase mitochondria’s ability to produce ATP and
simultaneously quench free-radical damage more powerfully than CoQ10.
If you use it, it can replace CoQ10 or ubiquinol supplementation.
How it works: Most of the oxidative stress that mitochondria
experience occurs on the matrix side of the inner mitochondrial matrix,
which is the space within the inner membrane that contains each
mitochondria’s DNA, ribosomes, soluble enzymes, and other molecules.
MitoQ is believed to reduce the effects of this oxidative stress by
supporting a catalase enzyme that removes free radicals from
--- END PAGE 1145 ---

--- PAGE 1146 ---
mitochondria. In studies, this can increase rodent lifespan by 10 percent.
It also protects intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) from stress-related
damage by attenuating intestinal hyperpermeability, inflammatory
response, epithelial apoptosis, and tight junction damage.
MitoQ has also been shown to increase lifespan and reduce telomere
shortening in human cells that have undergone oxidative stress and has
extended the lifespan of transgenic worms with Alzheimer’s genes (though
it did not do so in normal worms).
However, one study demonstrated that MitoQ causes mitochondrial
swelling in the cells of kidney proximal tubules, which could lead to renal
complications, so you may not want to use it if you have kidney issues.
Finally, MitoQ is so potent at lowering ROS that it may interfere with the
normal cellular signaling mechanisms that rely on adequate levels of ROS,
so it’s definitely not one to take in conjunction with exercise.
How to do it: The recommended daily dose of MitoQ is 10 mg. MitoQ
is water-soluble, so it doesn’t need to be taken with food or oils to assist
with absorption. MitoQ.com is a good source.
PTEROSTILBENE
Pterostilbene, one of the bioactive components of blueberries, is a
derivative of the antioxidant phenol resveratrol and is structurally similar,
but it appears to be better absorbed than resveratrol and may actually be a
more potent antioxidant and anticancer molecule. This is especially useful
to know when you consider the recent research published in the Journal of
Food Chemistry that profiled twenty-one commercial grape seed extract
resveratrol products and found that nine of them contained peanut skin
extract. The combination of antinutrients, lectins, pesticide
contamination, and the prevalence of peanut allergies makes peanut skins
a poor source of resveratrol, so proceed with caution when taking
resveratrol supplements. Pterostilbene may be a better bet.
--- END PAGE 1146 ---

--- PAGE 1147 ---
How it works: Doses of pterostilbene as low as 10 mg and as high as
500 mg seem to have significant benefit for reducing cholesterol and
glucose in animals. But little is known about exactly how pterostilbene
works. Some studies report that it has apoptotic and autophagic effects—
in other words, it helps eliminate old and damaged cells, which aids in
combating various types of cancer. One study has also shown that
pterostilbene exhibits strong anti-inflammatory capacities. In plants,
pterostilbene plays a cellular defense role, and it may have the same role
in humans.
Pterostilbene has been noted to inhibit LPS-induced autoimmune
responses and may also inhibit the inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)
activity that can cause inflammation. As an NADPH oxidase inhibitor, it
may also increase levels of NAD.
How to do it: Low doses of up to 10 mg seem to aid in cognition.
Higher doses of pterostilbene, ranging from 250 to 500 mg, aid in reducing
cholesterol and glucose levels and improve insulin sensitivity in research
animals. Generally, the estimated oral dose range for improving your
glucose and lipid metabolism is 20 to 40 mg per kilogram of body weight.
Thorne’s PolyResveratrol is a good source.
C60
C60, also known as buckminsterfullerene or buckyball, belongs to a
unique family of molecules called fullerenes. It is a cage-like fused-ring
structure that looks roughly like a soccer ball, contains sixty carbon atoms,
and was named after the famous author, designer, inventor, architect, and
systems theorist Buckminster “Bucky” Fuller.
How it works: C60 and other fullerenes are produced by passing an
electric discharge across the gap between two carbon electrodes in a
helium atmosphere. The intriguing fact about C60 is that, because it is not
found naturally in living organisms, there is no reason to think that would
--- END PAGE 1147 ---

--- PAGE 1148 ---
provide any kind of benefit. However, in 2012, a French laboratory
announced that feeding C60 dissolved in olive oil to rats nearly doubled
their lifespans! The addition of olive oil is critical to the bioactive effects
of the buckyballs because pure C60 molecules clump together, clog up
cellular metabolism, and appear to be slightly toxic. But when dissolved in
olive oil (a process that takes weeks of mixing), the buckyballs provide a
host of cellular and mitochondrial benefits.
C60 is a powerful antioxidant that scavenges superoxide, a by-product
of mitochondrial energy production that can accumulate and contribute to
the development of many age-related chronic diseases. One group of
researchers has proposed that C60 has the ability to acquire an overall
positive charge by absorbing protons and can thereby penetrate the
mitochondria to decrease free-radical production. A carboxyl form of C60
has been proven to prevent nerve cells from dying by dehydration or
Alzheimer’s-related compounds and allowed mice to live 7 percent longer.
How to do it: C60 is best dissolved in oil—in fact, as noted above, it
needs to be dissolved in oil to eliminate toxicity—and this is usually done
in a lab with a centrifuge. Most C60 supplements combine C60 with olive
oil (although different oils can have different effects—for example,
caprylic acid and MCT oil allow C60 to have more activity on brain cells),
or you can purchase pure C60 and mix it with extra-virgin olive oil in a
blender yourself, although this may be difficult because it can take a lot of
blending to get the buckyballs and olive oil to mix. Always make sure that
the buckyballs are dissolved before consuming the concoction. On
BoundlessBook.com/19 you’ll find links to several helpful C60 dosing and
mixing calculators, DIY oil-dissolving recipes, podcasts, and other
resources, including the “purple power” C60 gummies I like to chop up
and drop into my morning smoothie.
MELATONIN
--- END PAGE 1148 ---

--- PAGE 1149 ---
Melatonin is best known as the sleep hormone. It is produced by the
pineal gland toward the end of each day to stimulate the sense of being
tired so that you will want to go to bed. But melatonin also acts as an
antioxidant and mitochondrial protectant.
As you age, melatonin production and deployment can decline,
resulting in age-related sleep disorders. Many elderly people—and many
health enthusiasts, including myself—take small doses of melatonin to
help them sleep. But building evidence suggests that melatonin
supplements, especially in larger doses up to 80 mg, can also delay the
development of cancers, boost the immune system, and slow the aging
process, as well as improve mitochondrial function.
How it works: The interesting thing about mitochondria is that their
activity and dynamics exhibit an oscillatory pattern that matches the
circadian rhythm–based secretion of melatonin. In fact, melatonin is an
antioxidant hormone that is selectively and purposely taken up by
mitochondria, where it accumulates in high concentrations. It also acts as
a regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis and dynamics, improving the
healthy homeostasis of your mitochondria.
In both in vivo and in vitro studies, melatonin has been shown to be
effective in preventing the oxidation-induced mitochondrial dysfunction
seen in Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, and Huntington’s. It is also known to
maintain respiratory activity and ATP production in mitochondria.
How to do it: Melatonin levels remain stable until around age forty,
then decline as you continue to age. In people who are over ninety years
old, melatonin levels are less than 20 percent of young adult levels. So for
anyone over forty, I recommend small amounts (1 to 3 mg) for regular use,
and if you are traveling across multiple time zones and experiencing jet lag
and circadian rhythm disruptions, the larger “sledgehammer” dosing
strategy that I discussed in chapter 7: up to 300 mg. MitoZen has higher-
--- END PAGE 1149 ---

--- PAGE 1150 ---
dose oral and suppository delivery forms, and for lower doses, Thorne is a
good brand.
SKQS
MitoQ and C60 are SkQs’ antiaging cousins. Primarily researched in
Russia, SkQs are newly discovered antioxidant compounds that
specifically target mitochondria, and they have been studied quite a bit
recently to determine whether they can slow down the processes
associated with aging.
When started late in life, supplementation with SkQs not only
prevents age-related decline but also significantly reverses it, acting on
pathways for hair loss, low body temperature, weight loss, and heart,
kidney, and liver pathologies, along with stroke, Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s,
and pancreatic cancer. In doing so, it has been shown to improve longevity
in mice by about 15 percent. Notably, when researchers started giving
SkQs to mice in the middle or the end of their lives, it worked to improve
quality and quantity of life even at that point, which means it may be an
effective antiaging hack for people who have spent many decades making
poor decisions about their health and lifestyle and then decide to shape up
later in life.
In fungi, crustaceans, fruit flies, and mice, SkQs significantly prolong
lifespan and appear to be especially effective in the early and middle stages
of aging. In mammals, SkQs inhibit the development of age-related
diseases such as cataracts, retinopathy, glaucoma, balding, osteoporosis,
thymus gland degradation, hypothermia, the oxidative damage of lipids
and proteins, and a host of other conditions. But that’s not all. When
eighty-nine animals (dogs, cats, and horses) that had become blind
because of retinopathy were given eye drops containing SkQs (now sold
under the brand name Visomitin), vision was restored in 75 percent of the
--- END PAGE 1150 ---

--- PAGE 1151 ---
animals. The same drops prevented the loss of sight in rabbits and
restored vision to animals that had already become blind.
So this tiny molecule looks incredibly promising as a therapeutic drug
for prolonging youth.
How it works: MitoQ and SkQs both deliver chemical foot soldiers to
mitochondria to fight ROS. MitoQ delivers CoQ10, and SkQs deliver
plastoquinone. C60 then allows your mitochondria to absorb these
compounds via osmosis. So these three molecules—MitoQ, SkQ, and C60
—are a mitochondrial stack made in heaven!
SkQs were designed to accumulate inside cells to target free radicals
where they do most of their damage: inside mitochondria. Mitochondria
pull in SkQs because they are negatively charged and SkQ molecules are
positively charged. In research studies, SkQs have been shown to prevent
the oxidation of mitochondrial cardiolipin, a crucial component of the
inner mitochondrial membrane. Even in very low concentrations, SkQs
appear to be capable of stopping cellular apoptosis that occurs due to DNA
damage. At higher concentrations, SkQs prevent the tissue death initiated
by ROS.
How to do it: Aside from the relatively inexpensive Visomitin eye
drops, SkQs are currently a bit hard to get—and to get the right oral
dosage from the eye drops, you’d need to drink nearly an entire bottle at
once. As far as dosage is concerned, the approximate midpoint of the
range in most mice research, at 5 nm per kg of body weight daily,
translates to about 22.4 mcg per kg of body weight in humans, which, for a
70 kg or 154 lb human, would be 1.6 mg per day.
One website selling the raw ingredient used in Visomitin sells 10 mg of
SkQs for $225, making it a relatively expensive antiaging supplement for
the time being, although several companies are now working on affordable
oral solutions. For example, Mitotech SA, a pharmaceutical company
founded by Russian researcher Dr. Vladimir Skulachev, is developing SkQ
--- END PAGE 1151 ---

--- PAGE 1152 ---
products and drugs that are currently being taken through the FDA’s
regulatory process.
If you want to dive deeper into SkQ science, read the numerous papers
that Dr. Skulachev and his colleagues have published, which are well
translated into English. Most of these papers are published in their
entirety and are free on the internet; you’ll find links to them on
BoundlessBook.com/19.
UROLITHIN A
Urolithin A is produced by the body after you ingest compounds found in
particularly high concentration in pomegranates (particularly the bitter
components such as the skin and seeds) and can help recycle defective
mitochondria. Since it is a metabolite that results from the transformation
of the tannins in pomegranate by gut bacteria, it can be classified as a
postbiotic.
Some of the earliest research on urolithin A was performed on C.
elegans worms, which experienced a 45 percent longer lifespan than worms
not given the compound. Rodents given urolithin A experienced markedly
improved muscular function and clearance of damaged mitochondria.
Compared to a control group, these rodents showed a 57 to 65 percent
increase in exercise capacity, 42 percent increase in running endurance,
and a 9 percent increase in grip strength—all markers that correlate with
longevity.
In addition, researchers have exposed colon cancer stem cells to a
mixture containing urolithin A and found it to be effective at inhibiting the
number and size of colon cancer stem cells and also in inhibiting the
activity of aldehyde dehydrogenase, a marker of resistance to
chemotherapy. Urolithin A can also cross the blood-brain barrier to
protect against neurotoxicity and amyloid plaque accumulation.
--- END PAGE 1152 ---

--- PAGE 1153 ---
How it works: As you age, ATP production begins to put strain on
your mitochondria, and eventually, energy output falls. But when exposed
to urolithin A, these failing mitochondria are broken down and eliminated
(similar to taking out the trash!) to make room for new, properly
functioning mitochondria to grow.
Ellagitannins and punicalagins are two natural polyphenols found in
pomegranates. They have been shown to have anti-inflammatory and
anticancer effects, but once metabolized by gut bacteria, they also produce
urolithin A in the digestive tract. So supplementation with pomegranate
extract, along with specific bacterial species (probiotics) that can help the
pomegranate compounds to produce urolithin A, can be an effective
approach to maintaining healthy mitochondria.
How to do it: Eating pomegranates, particularly whole pomegranates
with skins, seeds, and flesh, can be the first strategy to increase urolithin
A. However, concentrated pomegranate extract, particularly when
combined with bacterial species called Gordonibacter urolithinfaciens and
Gordonibacter pamelaeae, can allow for significantly higher amounts of
urolithin A and the growth of urolithin-producing bacterial strains within
the digestive tract.
Very few probiotic formulas contain both pomegranate as a prebiotic
and the specific bacterial species that have been shown to produce
urolithin A, but one company called SEED produces a formula that
contains both. They offer probiotic formulas for adults and children, and
you’ll find links to both on BoundlessBook.com/19. Finally, the most
popular urolithin supplement on the market, available in soft gel and
powdered forms, is Timeline Nutrition; I’ll link to a fascinating deep-dive
podcast I recorded on urolithin A on the resources page for this chapter.
SELECTIVE ANDROGEN RECEPTOR MODULATORS
(SARMS)
--- END PAGE 1153 ---

--- PAGE 1154 ---
SARMs are therapeutic compounds that mimic anabolic steroids. The US
Anti-Doping Agency points out that the difference between the two is that
SARMs have fewer androgenic properties, which permits them to target
tissues much more directly and reduces the host of known negative side
effects experienced with steroids. Quite simply, SARMs provide the benefit
of steroids without many of their dangerous and annoying mental and
physical effects. But what many people don’t know is that SARMs, in
addition to increasing libido, building muscle, and enhancing energy, can
stimulate specific pathways that improve mitochondrial health.
How it works: SARMs contain androgen-like compounds that interact
with cellular androgen receptors. The androgen receptor then creates a
signal that leads to a magnified expression of particular genes, such as
those for muscle growth or fat loss. SARMs are a selective receptor
modulator, which means that they can either block or activate hormone
receptors depending on conditions, so they have the ability—like
adaptogenic herbs—to replicate the effects of hormones in one tissue and
at the same time reduce the adverse effects of synthetic steroids or
hormones in other tissues.
Several SARMs show a ratio of anabolic to androgenic effects of greater
than 3:1 and up to as much as 10:1 (for comparison, testosterone has a
ratio of 1:1). This means that SARMs produce anabolic to androgenic
effects of up to ten times that of testosterone but without the sex drive
fluctuations, gastrointestinal disturbances, stroke, blood clots, and other
health issues associated with anabolic steroids.
One popular and relatively well-researched SARM is Cardarine, or
GW501516 (often called “exercise in a bottle”). Technically, it binds to a
PPAR (peroxisome proliferator activator receptor), not an androgen
receptor as a SARM normally would, but despite this difference, Cardarine
offers impressive results because it activates AMPK, which is responsible
for stimulating glucose uptake into skeletal muscle tissue and oxidizing
--- END PAGE 1154 ---

--- PAGE 1155 ---
fatty acids. In addition to burning fat by stimulating fatty acid oxidation,
Cardarine can increase HDL cholesterol by an average of 79 percent while
simultaneously decreasing LDL cholesterol. Molecular analyses have
revealed that PPAR is involved in exercise-induced reprogramming of
muscle fibers and skeletal muscle metabolism by regulating the expression
of genes associated with mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration, and
since SARMs upregulate PPAR activity, they can be categorized as
mitochondrial support.
Cardarine was developed in the 1990s as a way to prevent and cure
breast, prostate, and colon cancer. By the early 2000s, it was discovered
that it can also help treat metabolic disorders, including diabetes and
obesity. When the fitness community caught wind of these benefits, they
quickly discovered that it is also a potent endurance-increasing
supplement, and indeed, it has been used by athletes for over twenty years
with no reported harmful side effects. Cardarine has also been used in
research studies in obese, prediabetic men with metabolic syndrome;
these studies showed that it reverses metabolic abnormalities and helps
control obesity. In laboratory studies on rats and monkeys, it has been
shown to burn fat and build muscle, while also eliminating type 2 diabetes,
increasing HDL cholesterol, and lowering VLDL cholesterol.
While some early-1990s studies showed that Cardarine can cause
cancer and tumor development with long-term, high-dose use, more-
recent studies showed that not only is it harmless under normal use, but it
also offers many positive health benefits. As a matter of fact, a study
published in 2004 by the American Association of Cancer Research stated
that PPAR agonists such as Cardarine have been “shown to have no effect
on the proliferation of colorectal cancer cells” and that “under normal
culture conditions, PPAR activation has no effect on cell growth.”
Furthermore, in 2008, Cardarine was studied for treatment of breast
--- END PAGE 1155 ---

--- PAGE 1156 ---
cancer and colon cancer. These studies concluded that it can inhibit the
growth of cancer cells.
Cardarine has also been shown to cause increased endurance,
decreased body fat, and decreased recovery time, and it can also protect
the brain, benefit the heart, protect the kidneys, protect against liver
damage, strengthen the immune system, and heal skin disorders.
Sedentary mice treated with it were able to run on a treadmill for 270
minutes before tiring, compared to untreated active mice, which could
only run for 160 minutes! So, like MOTS-c, you can consider this to be
very much like exercise in a bottle.
How to do it: SARMs can be taken orally rather than via inconvenient
injections. The maximum recommended dose of a SARM like Cardarine is
20 mg per day. If your goal is to increase endurance, you’ll want to start
with about 10 mg per day. If you’re looking for greater gains, particularly
for fat loss, go with 20 mg per day and, for best results, take it an hour
before exercise.
Cardarine has a half-life of sixteen to twenty-four hours, so you can
take 10 mg once per day or, if you are taking 20 mg per day, split your dose
into two, taking one dose every ten to twelve hours (most SARMs come in
liquid bottles, and one dropperful is typically 10 mg).
Of course, Cardarine is just one example of a SARM. On
BoundlessBook.com/19, you’ll find links to two articles in which I discuss
the SARMs LGD-4033 and SR-9009, both of which stack well with
Cardarine for even more accelerated fat loss or muscle gain. Because I am
convinced that peptides like tesamorelin and ipamorelin are safer with
fewer side effects than SARMs, I opt for the fat loss and muscle gain
peptide stacks described on here instead of SARMs.
10. Photobiomodulation
--- END PAGE 1156 ---

--- PAGE 1157 ---
I’ve talked about using photobiomodulation (PBM)—exposing your body
and brain to specific red-light wavelengths—in chapter 6 (for cognitive
enhancement) and chapter 12 (for improving physical recovery). Turns
out, because PBM works on each of these pathways and also targets the
mitochondria, it’s an antiaging tool with broad systemic effects.
How it works: Within your mitochondria is an enzyme called
cytochrome c-oxidase (CCO), which catalyzes the reduction of oxygen for
energy metabolism and ATP production. PBM can increase activity of
CCO and also disassociate nitric oxide from CCO, which restores electron
transport ATP production by increasing the electrical potential across the
mitochondrial membrane. This increased membrane potential is also
believed to produce ROS. ROS can exert a mild hormetic effect (similar to
heat exposure, cold exposure, or wild plant intake), leading to increased
cellular repair, healing, and gene transcription. The low-level oxidative
stress that results from these ROS may also cause stem cells to grow and
proliferate, and the ROS themselves serve as signaling mechanisms for
cell-to-cell conversation.
In addition, stem cell proliferation can occur when light-based
stimulation of the mitochondria leads to a switch from anaerobic sugar-
burning glycolysis to highly efficient oxidative phosphorylation. This
switch increases the amount of oxygen required by the mitochondria,
including those in stem cells, and when these stem cells sense this need
for more oxygen, they migrate to tissues with low levels of oxygen that
may need enhanced repair.
How to do it: Aside from regular, moderate doses of sun exposure, the
PBM methods I recommend most often are the Vielight for intracranial
and intranasal administration of red light, the Joovv for full-body at-home
treatments, smaller wraparound devices like the LumaFlex and Kineon for
joint treatments, red-light helmets such as those made by MitoRed for hair
--- END PAGE 1157 ---

--- PAGE 1158 ---
growth and neural stimulation, and larger, high-quality red-light beds like
NovaThor or Ammortal for the ultimate high-end red-light experience.
But as a word of caution, when it comes to PBM, more is not better:
the light frequencies produce ROS, and excessive ROS can cause oxidative
damage. The recommended treatment time for most PBM devices is no
more than twenty-five minutes per day. (You’ll learn even more about
photobiomodulation in the next chapter.)
11. Sulfur Support
One of the most important antiaging pathways in the body is that of the
Nrf2 transcription factor, and one of the best ways to support Nrf2 is to
eat foods rich in sulfur. I’ll get to why in a moment.
Nrf2 is responsible for unzipping and exposing genes that encode for
the expression of antioxidant proteins that protect against oxidative
damage. Activating Nrf2 switches on a host of antioxidant pathways,
increases glutathione production, and can even trigger the expression of
an antiaging phenotype. A phenotype is an observable characteristic that
results from the interaction of the surrounding environment (including
food) with an organism’s genes. So the stimulation of an antiaging
phenotype results in an increase in the expression of genetic factors that
help to combat the effects of aging, such as enhanced detoxification
pathways.
Glutathione acts as a powerful antioxidant within the mitochondrial
matrix, and other antioxidants that result from Nrf2-induced transcription
also benefit mitochondria in a similar manner.
How it works: If you are familiar with sulfur (hydrogen sulfide, or
H₂S), you may know it only as a poisonous gas that smells of rotten eggs
and flatulence. But H₂S is also a signaling molecule. Brace yourself: we’re
about to wade through some thick scientific terminology.
--- END PAGE 1158 ---

--- PAGE 1159 ---
H₂S causes the formation of a disulfide bond between two cysteine
residues: cys-226 and cys-613. The resulting compound deactivates what
are called keap1 ubiquitin ligase substrate adaptors. When these adaptors
are activated, they cause a chain of events that suppresses Nrf2. So by
deactivating these adaptors, H₂S creates an environment in which Nrf2
can act freely and promote the transcription of powerful antioxidant
genes.
How to do it: One of the best ways to increase the activation of Nrf2
factors is to consume a lot of sulfur. So fill your diet with plenty of sulfur-
containing foods from the Brassica family, which includes bok choy,
broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, horseradish, kale, kohlrabi, mustard leaves,
radishes, turnips, and watercress. (Added bonus: each of these is also high
in isothiocyanates, a potent cancer-fighting agent.) These foods, along
with sulfurous and stinky eggs, onions, and garlic, contain sulforaphane,
an H₂S-containing compound.
Broccoli sprouts, which can be kept in your freezer and added to
smoothies, are a quite potent sulforaphane-containing superfood.
According to my friend Dr. Rhonda Patrick, freezing and blending broccoli
sprouts appears to be an excellent way to increase sulforaphane’s
bioavailability by up to three-and-a-half times!
Another Nrf2 activator is curcumin, which is found in turmeric, the
primary spice in Indian curries—I talked about curcumin as a
mitochondria-supporting compound earlier in this chapter. Finally,
hydrogen-rich water, also discussed earlier in this chapter, is also a good
way to activate NrF2 pathways.
12. The Aspirin, Magnesium, and Vitamin D
Stack
--- END PAGE 1159 ---

--- PAGE 1160 ---
Aspirin is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) most commonly
used as a pain reliever, to treat fever, and to reduce inflammation. While I
am highly skeptical of using NSAIDs to treat pain or inflammation (in
chapter 12, I explained the dangers of using NSAIDs), aspirin is one of the
most popular and has even been used to decrease the risk of death
following a heart attack, as well as to decrease the risk of certain types of
cancer. Magnesium, which you have encountered throughout this book, is
a mineral with several important physiological properties. Vitamin D,
which should also be familiar to you by now, is one of the primary fat-
soluble vitamins that the body requires for many important physiological
functions.
How it works: An article on the website of the antiaging guru Josh
Mitteldorf, who wrote the book Cracking the Aging Code, alerted me to two
Science magazine articles that featured simple and inexpensive basic
measures that reduce risks of all major diseases associated with old age.
Two strategies were taking baby aspirin daily and increasing your blood
levels of vitamin D.
It turns out that daily baby aspirin is associated with a lower risk of
heart disease, stroke, dementia, and several kinds of cancer (although, in
my opinion, fish oil can work similarly, with fewer potential side effects).
High blood levels of vitamin D are associated with a lower incidence of
most cancers, heart disease, and dementia; protection against low bone
density and autoimmune disease; and a lower incidence of colds, the flu,
asthma, diabetes, stroke, multiple sclerosis, and cognitive decline.
Vitamin D’s anti-inflammatory properties likely delay telomere
shortening. Two different studies on twins have shown that individuals
with the lowest levels of vitamin D had shorter telomeres that indicated an
additional five years of biological aging compared to their twin. Another
randomized controlled trial found that vitamin D supplementation at
2,000 IU per day increased telomerase activity by over 19 percent in the
--- END PAGE 1160 ---

--- PAGE 1161 ---
blood cells of people who were deficient in vitamin D. In another study,
children whose daily milk was fortified with vitamin D caught half as many
colds as children without supplementation, so vitamin D likely has a
positive impact on the immune system degradation that can occur with
age.
Finally, as you have already learned, glycemic variability and insulin
sensitivity are two very important longevity parameters to control. A
multitude of studies have documented that higher intake of magnesium
helps control blood sugar and retain insulin sensitivity with age.
How to do it: In addition to eating a wide variety of foods rich in
vitamin D, fish oils, and magnesium (including fatty fish like tuna, herring,
sardines, and salmon for fish oil; cheese, beef liver, egg yolks, and
mushrooms for vitamin D; and avocados, almonds, and Brazil nuts for
magnesium), take a daily dose of baby aspirin or fish oil with a dose of
vitamin D with your first meal of the day. Dosages range from 1 to 20 g for
fish oil and 2,000 to 6,000 IU for vitamin D, depending on your activity
levels and size. Ideally, combine vitamin D with 50 to 150 mcg of vitamin
K to increase its absorption. Then, before bed, take 400 to 600 mg of
2 magnesium. Just remember that more magnesium is not better and can
cause loose stools.
13. Rhodiola
Because how it works is not fully understood, rhodiola is in a category of
its own. This perennial flowering plant has a rich and almost mythical
history of use dating back to at least AD 77, when the Greek physician
Dioscorides described it in his medical text De materia medica. Vikings
consumed it to enhance their strength and endurance, and Central Asians
used a tea brewed from it to treat colds and flus. Known as the golden
--- END PAGE 1161 ---

--- PAGE 1162 ---
root, the root extract of Rhodiola rosea has been shown to be particularly
effective in preventing age-related decline.
How it works: A group of geneticists from UC Irvine found that
feeding rhodiola root to fruit flies allowed the flies to live 20 percent
longer. In another experiment, mice were exposed to a lethal dose of
gamma radiation, and 90 percent of the mice given rhodiola thirty minutes
before radiation survived just fine, in contrast to a 100 percent death rate
in mice not treated at all.
Normally, gamma radiation wreaks havoc in cells and randomly breaks
apart a host of molecules. Although scientists aren’t sure of the exact
mechanism of action, it appears that the body has its own built-in
chemical machinery for repairing the damage and that rhodiola
upregulates this machinery. There is also some speculation that rhodiola
may increase stress resilience in a xenohormetic manner, similar to the
extracts from wild plants. (In fact, many of the strategies in this chapter
that extend lifespan also increase stress resilience in some manner as well,
making the phrase “harder to kill” an achievable objective for many people
if they simply knew what to do.)
One study found that rhodiola consumption is associated with the
regulation of the expression of 1,062 different genes, including 72
cardiovascular genes, 63 metabolic genes, 163 gastrointestinal genes, 95
neurological genes, 60 endocrine genes, 50 behavioral genes, and 62 genes
associated with psychological disorders, making it a potent supplement
for overall longevity and resilience, particularly if you’ve been exposed to
radiation (as most of us living in a postindustrial era of flying on airplanes
have!).
How to do it: Rhodiola is also a key component of TianChi, one of my
favorite Chinese adaptogenic herb blends. Other good brands are Thorne,
Life Extension, and Gaia Herbs. Rhodiola doses as low as 50 mg are
effective in preventing fatigue, and acute doses of 300 to 650 mg are
--- END PAGE 1162 ---

--- PAGE 1163 ---
helpful in combating fatigue and stress (doses higher than that don’t
appear to give any additional benefit).
14. Deprenyl
Like rhodiola, deprenyl is in an antiaging category all its own. Also known
as selegiline, it was developed to treat Parkinson’s disease and
Alzheimer’s, but as early as the 1980s and 1990s, studies in Europe showed
impressive increases in the lifespans of animals treated with the drug.
Deprenyl helps prevent the breakdown of dopamine, which naturally
increases with age. It’s most often used with L-dopa to treat Parkinson’s
disease, but it may also help prevent the onset of neurodegenerative
diseases.
How it works: Production rates and levels of the neurotransmitter
dopamine remain fairly stable until about age forty-five. After that, brain
levels of dopamine decrease by about 13 percent each decade. When the
number of dopamine-producing neurons in the brain deteriorate by about
30 percent, Parkinson’s can develop.
Monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) is the enzyme responsible for
breaking down dopamine, among other neurotransmitters, and MAO-B
levels increase as you age. Deprenyl is a selective inhibitor of MAO-B.
Many rat studies have shown that deprenyl can help prevent the onset of
degenerative brain diseases and even treat early stages of Parkinson’s.
How to do it: Twice-weekly doses of 5 mg can help you maintain
dopamine levels and high amounts of what I can best describe as positive
energy. You can buy deprenyl, also known as selegiline, in the United
States with a doctor’s prescription. It’s available as a capsule, tablet, or
disintegrating tablet, and comes in 5 mg strength. For a less powerful but
more affordable solution, many of the cognitive-enhancing peptides
--- END PAGE 1163 ---

--- PAGE 1164 ---
discussed in chapter 5 can give you a feeling of cognitive enhancement
similar to that of deprenyl.
15. Telomerase Activators
As you know by now, telomeres—the caps at the ends of chromosomes—
are some of the primary, if not the primary, biomarkers for biological age.
Your body already possesses the necessary machinery to rebuild telomeres
in the form of the telomerase enzyme. The problem is that in adults, the
gene responsible for the production of telomerase is almost always turned
off, so our cells produce very little of it for most of our lives. However,
there are supplements and foods you can consume that may switch on this
gene.
How it works: Telomerase is an enzyme that possesses its own RNA
molecule and appears especially significantly in stem cells and cancer
cells. It copies its RNA molecule and tacks it onto the ends of your
chromosomes, thereby elongating your telomeres and keeping them from
fraying or becoming excessively shortened.
How to do it: Unfortunately, we can’t eat telomerase or administer it
intravenously. The molecule doesn’t survive digestion and won’t migrate
from the blood into the cell nucleus, where it performs its work. So the
best way to maximize the longevity-enhancing effects of telomerase is to
switch on the gene responsible for producing telomerase. There are
several supplements and foods you can take that may do this, along with a
few choice lifestyle strategies, all covered below.
--- END PAGE 1164 ---

--- PAGE 1165 ---
PHARMACEUTICALS
Many pharmaceutical companies are working on preventing aging via
telomerase. While some have attempted to create supplements that will
deliver telomerase in a form that will reach the cell nuclei, most focus on
signaling the cells themselves to turn on the telomerase gene. That way,
telomerase will appear right in the cell nucleus where it is needed.
Sierra Sciences, a private drug company based in Reno, Nevada, has
screened over 250,000 small-molecule compounds that it believes could
lead to an increase in the expression of telomerase. They claim they have
found a compound three times more potent than anything previously
discovered at increasing the expression of telomerase in cells, and they
market it as telomerase activation molecule 818 (TAM-818). When I
interviewed Dr. Bill Andrews, the chief scientist of Sierra Sciences and one
of the world’s leading experts on telomeres, he told me that he personally
uses TAM-818, TA-65 (an astragalus extract), a supplement called
IsaGenesis, a vitamin D/K blend, vitamin C, fish oil, and flaxseed oil to
maximize telomerase activity. (Warning: Aging Care Capsules, the main
supplement that contains TAM-818, and TA-65 are several hundred dollars
per bottle!)
The peptide epitalon is also an effective telomerase activator—for
more on that, see here.
ASTRAGALUS
--- END PAGE 1165 ---

--- PAGE 1166 ---
Astragalus is an herb that comes from the root of a perennial plant in the
northern and eastern parts of China. It may be able to activate telomerase,
but it takes a very large amount of astragalus plant to extract an effective
dose.
The pharmaceutical company T.A. Sciences has begun to produce an
astragalus extract that has been reported to have telomere-lengthening
benefits. Their product—quite popular and hotly debated in antiaging
circles—is called TA-65. The primary constituent of TA-65 is
cycloastragenol, a purified extract of astragalus root. While initial research
indicates that cycloastragenol works to activate telomerase, it is still fairly
weak: an effective human dosage would be about 1,500 mg per day, but the
capsules that are sold currently contain only about 5 to 20 mg and cost
several dollars per dose.
Because TA-65 is so expensive and possibly too weak, it may be simpler
to use astragalus itself in high doses or use a product such as the
adaptogenic herb complex TianChi, which contains high amounts of
astragalus in a pure, concentrated extraction. Astragalus has long been
used in traditional Chinese medicine—it’s considered one of the greatest
chi tonics in Chinese herbology—and is often used as an adaptogenic
substitute for ginseng. It is said to build upright chi, meaning that when
the lungs are strong and the breath is deep, astragalus promotes good
posture and holds the organs in place. Traditionally, it is also said to
maintain the protective chi that circulates over your skin to ward off
seasonal illness.
Even if you don’t believe in concepts like protective chi, there is still a
lot of research that supports the use of astragalus to enhance your health
and longevity. Some, such as my friends at the supplement research
website Examine.com, say that astragalus can provide several health
benefits but may not actually extend your life. They say that, like
resveratrol, astragalus adds life to your years rather than years to your life.
--- END PAGE 1166 ---

--- PAGE 1167 ---
But while there are no studies that show an increase in lifespan, astragalus
has been shown to reduce age-related metabolic and physical decline, and
it is known particularly for its cardioprotective and anti-inflammatory
effects.
One of astragalus’s primary effects is protecting mitochondria.
Oxidation can damage the lipids that make up mitochondrial membranes,
and astragalus inhibits this oxidation. It also has been shown to prevent
calcium- and oxidant-induced permeation of mitochondrial membranes.
Heart mitochondria in particular are protected following astragalus
supplementation, which also exerts antioxidant and antitoxin effects on
cardiac tissue as well as blood vessels, so the herb can also improve and
preserve cardiovascular health.
Because astragalus naturally has poor bioavailability, in traditional
Chinese medicine, it is often paired with Angelicae sinensis (also known as
dong quai or female ginseng) to increase the absorption of both. The
traditional preparation is a 5:1 ratio—30 g of astragalus and 6 g of Angelicae
sinensis. Online you can also find supplemental forms of astragaloside IV,
the active ingredient of astragalus. The standard dose for astragaloside IV
is 5 to 10 mg.
The TianChi Chinese Adaptogenic Herb Complex and the Inner Peace
Herb Complex made by Chinese herbalist Roger Drummer both contain
astragalus alongside a host of other similar supportive adaptogenic
compounds, including rhodiola, reishi mushrooms, green tea, and acerola
cherry. Links to both can be found on BoundlessBook.com/19.
OTHER TELOMERE STRATEGIES
In addition to astragalus, herbs that can increase telomerase production
include ashwagandha, bacopa, boswellia, green tea, horny goat weed, and
milk thistle. Other supplements that may stimulate the body to express
--- END PAGE 1167 ---

--- PAGE 1168 ---
telomerase include the amino acid carnosine, omega-3 fatty acids from fish
oil, curcumin, and resveratrol (found in red wine and grape skin extract).
Several varieties of mushrooms have been studied for their ability to
increase telomerase activity, particularly in cancerous cells. These include
reishi, cordyceps, oyster, shiitake, and wood ear (often listed on
mushroom powder and supplement labels as auricularia or auricula).
Green tea, oolong tea, coffee, and even being breastfed as a child can all
also increase telomere length and telomerase activity!
Stress management and even meditation have also been shown to
measurably increase telomerase activity. And, as you may remember from
chapter 9, lifting weights is known to profoundly improve telomere length.
16. Fecal Transplants
Fecal transplantation, also known as fecal bacteriotherapy, is the
transplantation of a donor’s fecal matter into your colon, either through
the rectum or through the mouth (cleverly disguised as a poop pill). The
idea behind this fairly extreme longevity tactic is to transplant the healthy
gut bacteria in a healthy donor’s fecal matter. Extreme measures like this
may well be worth the gross-out factor: from 1999 to 2007, deaths from
gastrointestinal infections grew from seven thousand to seventeen
thousand a year, with 83 percent of these deaths occurring among patients
over the age of sixty-five, two-thirds of whom died from Clostridium difficile
infections.
How it works: Think back to chapter 13’s explanation of the brain-gut
connection. Your brain can often end up downstream of the good and bad
events that occur in your gut, and vice versa. That means that if something
goes wrong in your intestines and colon, you could suffer major
complications in your nervous system, immune system, and endocrine
system.
--- END PAGE 1168 ---

--- PAGE 1169 ---
Older people, particularly those in hospitals and nursing homes, often
take antibiotics designed to eliminate infections. C. difficile tends to plague
this population, especially once other gut bacteria, whether good or bad,
have been destroyed. Once settled into your gut, C. difficile churns out
toxins that can damage the lining of the intestines, leading to symptoms
that include diarrhea and potentially severe, life-threatening inflammation
of the colon. Fecal transplants have been shown to be effective in shoving
C. difficile bacteria out of your gut and replacing them with the beneficial
bacteria that belong there. Fecal transplants have also been shown to be
effective in treating some cases of ulcerative colitis, an autoimmune
condition characterized by abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, ulcers on the
colon, and fatigue.
But the effects of a fecal transplant may go beyond simply fixing issues
with C. difficile. For example, in one study that reminded me quite a bit of
the young blood transfusion experiments described earlier in this chapter,
transplanting gut bacteria from young fish to old fish extended the mean
lifespan by 41 percent and maximum lifespan by 30 percent in the old fish.
This was due not just to the elimination of C. difficile but to a complete
overhaul of the entire fish microbiome—or at least that of the colon. This
makes sense because one of the primary differences between centenarians
and shorter-lived people is that the gut microbiomes of centenarians have
specific bacteria that seem to be associated with longevity. So, in addition
to eating a diet rich in fermented foods, getting dirty by engaging in
frequent practices such as being outside, and avoiding antibiotics—all
strategies that strengthen the gut microbiome—rebooting our intestinal
flora may have a host of benefits.
How to do it: Fecal transplants are usually administered by
professional medical practitioners in a medical clinic (Dr. Glenn Taylor of
the Taymount Clinic is one of the more respected poop-pill practitioners),
but they can be performed in your own home using the type of DIY
--- END PAGE 1169 ---

--- PAGE 1170 ---
instructions that pop up everywhere from Reddit to Quora. The treatment
consists of placing saline-diluted fecal matter into your colon via a
nasoduodenal catheter or enema, or consuming encapsulated versions. On
BoundlessBook.com/19, you’ll find links to websites where you can find
clinics that will administer fecal transplants. You may also want to check
out OpenBiome.com, where you can connect with healthy donors for the
DIY version. ThaenaBiotic has developed an oral supplement that uses
fermented by-products generated from healthy donors’ gut ecosystems
and harvested from stool. It contains prebiotics, thousands of heat-killed
probiotics, and hundreds of distinct postbiotics, but you must apply on
their website as a healthcare provider to be able to order it (or you can ask
your doctor if they can apply and order for you).
Should you decide to eschew the fecal transplant, you may be
interested in a far easier and more affordable alternative: sunlight
exposure. The most recent research seems to indicate that frequent,
healthy doses of sun exposure can positively influence the colon’s
microbiome, if perhaps not as dramatically as a fecal transplant.
Other Strategies
Is what you just read an exhaustive list? By no means! As a matter of fact, I
spend plenty of time these days at antiaging conferences, speaking with
physicians, poring over studies on PubMed, and reading just about every
book I can get my hands on that looks at longevity and life quality. While I
tend to slightly favor more natural, ancestral strategies over technological
ones, here are just a few of the interesting fields to keep an eye on if you’re
passionate about antiaging:•

Blood filtration: I recently traveled to Tijuana, Mexico, where I spent
five hours a day for two days lying in a hospital bed while all the blood
was pulled out of my body (from my neck!) and passed through a new
--- END PAGE 1170 ---

--- PAGE 1171 ---
advanced blood filter called the Seraph100. The Seraph100 is a device
designed to rapidly remove pathogens, including spike proteins,
bacteria, viruses, and fungi, directly from the bloodstream. Utilizing
heparin-coated polymer beads, the filter mimics the endothelial
glycocalyx coating of blood vessels, allowing it to bind and eliminate
harmful microorganisms and endotoxins efficiently. If made more
affordable and accessible, this and other similar filters like the Marker,
which removes forever chemicals, glyphosate, and microplastics, could
offer “full-body oil changes” for those wanting to maximize longevity
and minimize disease.•

Cellular reprogramming: Made popular by longevity researcher Dr.
David Sinclair, cellular reprogramming involves, theoretically at a
young age such as twenty-five, delivering a genetically engineered virus
into your cells. The virus includes Yamanaka factors, which can cause
cells to revert to a youthful, stem cell–like state. Then, when aging sets
in later in life, an antibiotic is administered that activates the virus,
sparking tissue rejuvenation, organ restoration, chronic disease
reversal, and even fading of wrinkles and gray hair. Like many new
antiaging protocols, the procedure is in research infancy and may carry
risks such as cancer and immune system dysfunction, but it’s definitely
a protocol I plan on paying attention to. Check out Sinclair’s book
Lifespan to learn more.•

Senolytic medicines: Senolytics are a class of drugs that selectively
induce death of senescent or aging cells, which are thought to be the
root cause and driver of many age-related diseases. The company
Unity is one that’s developing senolytics. So-called senotherapeutic
drugs include a class called genoprotectors, which target causes of
aging such as damage to the DNA. One particularly intriguing strategy
for slowing senescence is combining the pharmaceutical dasatinib with
the nutraceutical quercetin, which in mice equivalent to eighty-year-
--- END PAGE 1171 ---

--- PAGE 1172 ---
old humans increased survival by 36 percent and in early human
clinical trials appears to act similarly for antiaging. Herbal senolytic
supplements such as Qualia’s Senolyte are a simpler, affordable done-
for-you option and are usually dosed on just a couple days each month.•

AI-based drug discovery: The goal of AI-based drug discovery is to
shorten the research, discovery, and preclinical stages from three to
four years to just a few months. This could save time and financial
resources in the development stage of antiaging drugs, as well as
provide stronger drug candidates for approval. The company Insilico
Medicine is working on an AI engine that covers the entire drug
discovery process, from hypothesis generation and target
identification to real-world evidence collection.•

mRNA: Messenger RNA (mRNA) transfers instructions stored in the
DNA to make the proteins required for cells. The company Moderna is
developing mRNA medicines that teach your own cells to produce
proteins that could prevent, treat, or cure diseases.•

Isotopically fortified organic compounds: Instead of preventing
oxidative stress, isotopically fortified molecules do not get damaged by
oxidative stress and can be consumed to replace the natural organic
compounds that do, making the body more resilient. The company
Retrotope has demonstrated the safety and efficacy of isotopically
fortified organic compounds for several pediatric diseases.•

Machine vision and sensing: Advances in AI now allow laser-like
accuracy in disease detection from easily accessible data like images.
For example, Google Brain has developed accurate predictors for
multiple diseases using basic retinal scans. Another company, Haut.AI,
uses machine vision to monitor skin health and personalize
interventions.
--- END PAGE 1172 ---

--- PAGE 1173 ---
•

Wnt pathways: One of the primary signaling pathways that regulate
the self-renewal and differentiation of adult stem cells are the Wnt
pathways, which play a role in the formation of new tissues as well as
repair and regeneration. The company Samumed has identified novel
biological targets and developed drugs that modulate Wnt activity.• 
New organs: 3-D bioprinting of tissues and organs presents a new way
to restore lost tissue structure and function. The company United
Therapeutics has developed a range of products to address
cardiovascular disease, infectious diseases, and cancer.
To stay up-to-date on these more advanced concepts, subscribe to my
free podcast at BenGreenfieldLife.com and also check out the book The
Kaufmann Protocol by Dr. Sandra Kaufmann, along with the antiaging
supplement database on her website, Kaufmannprotocol.com
(pterostilbene is currently the highest rated there); follow the work of
Peter Diamandis and his A360 organization; subscribe to the
Rapamycin.news antiaging drug forum; and check out the database of
aging-related drugs at Genomics.senescence.info (spermidine, aspirin, and
resveratrol are currently the highest rated there).
Antiaging Condensed
In case your head is spinning from all the information in this chapter, here’s
how you can systematize everything you have just read about:

• Don’t smoke.
• Minimize your intake of processed and packaged foods.
• Be able to clearly identify and succinctly state your life’s purpose.
• Set aside time for friends and family.
• Set aside time to attend to your spiritual disciplines, such as silence and
solitude, meditation, gratitude, fasting, or breathwork.
• Have sex regularly.
--- END PAGE 1173 ---

--- PAGE 1174 ---
• Incorporate low-level physical activity throughout your day, and take it
outdoors as much as possible.
• Follow a diet low in sugar and vegetable oils and rich in wild plants, dark
berries, tannic beverages, herbs, spices, sulfur-rich foods, organ meats,
healthy fats, and low-glycemic-index carbohydrates such as legumes and
tubers. If you carry genetic factors that predispose you to excess fat
storage, an inflammatory response to fats, or difficulty digesting fats,
continue to incorporate regular periods of fasting and manage your
blood glucose, but shift toward a more Mediterranean approach higher in
monounsaturated fats (see chapter 13 for more on this).
• Perform a twelve-to-sixteen-hour intermittent fast every day, a twenty-
four-hour dinner-to-dinner fast one to four times per month, and a
caloric-restricted or zero-calorie three-to-five-day water fast two to four
times a year.
• Drink pure, clean, filtered water and add liquid trace minerals, sea salt, or
Celtic salt to it. Also include hydrogen tablets or some other form of
hydrogen-rich water at least twice a day, in the morning and evening, if
your budget permits.
• Each day, expose your body to a variety of hormetic stressors, most
notably cold, heat, sunlight, wild plants, herbs, hyperoxia, and hypoxia.
Consider supplementing with ketones, particularly for long fasting
periods, before or after airline travel, or before or during long workouts.
• Prior to any carbohydrate-containing meal, consume insulin-stabilizing
compounds such as bitter melon extract, Ceylon cinnamon, apple cider
vinegar, berberine, rosemary, turmeric, ginger, fenugreek, Gymnema
sylvestre, or cayenne.
• If you are up for the task and like the flavor, consume a variety of shellfish
and organ meats, including sweetbreads, liver, heart, and kidneys, at least
four times a month. If you wind up leaving out the sweetbreads, consider
using the peptide epitalon, the peptide thymosin-alpha, or thymus
injections.
• If your budget permits, consume a morning or midday smoothie that
contains compounds like rhodiola, colostrum, chlorella, spirulina, marine
phytoplankton, aloe vera, coffeeberry fruit extract, frozen broccoli
sprouts, and moringa. You can also include other sirtuin-supporting foods
in the smoothie, such as blueberries, cacao powder or cacao nibs, black
--- END PAGE 1174 ---

--- PAGE 1175 ---
currant powder, turmeric, quercetin, chamomile, or green tea extract.
(See a sample smoothie at BenGreenfieldLife.com/antiagingsmoothie.)
• Increase telomerase activity by consuming one packet of TianChi on an
empty stomach at some point in the day, or by supplementing with
astragalus or TA-65 and TAM-818.
• If your budget permits, support mitochondrial optimization with
carnitine, alpha lipoic acid, CoQ10, PQQ, glutathione, pterostilbene,
MitoQ, astragalus, vitamin D, fish oil, C60, SkQs, and a good
multivitamin/mineral complex, and then supplement each evening with
magnesium and melatonin. Use a daily probiotic that contains
pomegranate seed and skin extract (such as the brand SEED) and/or
supplement with urolithin-A.
• Consider a once-per-week dosage of 5 mg of rapamycin.
• If your budget permits, drink Dr. Mercola’s autophagy tea in the evening.
• If your budget permits, utilize my full peptides protocol from the
peptides section of this chapter.
• If your budget permits, purchase and regularly use a red-light therapy
device and a low-EMF infrared sauna.
• If your budget permits, get an NAD IV once a month and sustain levels
with daily NR or NMN intake or NAD patches between IVs. Alternatively,
for an affordable solution, prepare and drink pau d’arco tea daily.
• Consider a stem cell IV infusion, preferably paired with exosomes.
• Consider an “oil change” for your body with an ozone infusion such as
ozone plasmapheresis, 10-pass ozone, or extracorporeal blood ozonation
and oxygenation (EBOO).
• If your budget permits, visit an antiaging or wellness clinic monthly or
quarterly for thymus and placental injections, along with a test of your
hormones so you can consider bioidentical hormone replacement
therapy if needed.
THE LAST WORD
--- END PAGE 1175 ---

--- PAGE 1176 ---
The world’s longevity all-stars live longer, but they live better too, with
strong connections to family and friends; active lifestyles; clean air, light,
and water; a distinct life purpose; an avoidance of smoking; an
overwhelmingly plant-based diet that includes fasting; moderate, daily
physical activity; and a sprinkling of the other natural practices outlined in
this chapter. When asked, centenarians also attribute their long lives to
mild amounts of good stress—meaning spartan conditions combined with
a life of manual labor, along with a strong sense of community.
In addition, modern biohackers and longevity gurus and scientists are
increasingly turning to a host of better-living-through-science tools,
technologies, and tactics, with a strong focus on mitochondrial and stem
cell support, caloric-restriction and fasting strategies, supplements, IVs,
and injections.
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
One prevailing characteristic of many Blue Zones residents is that their
diets include wild and often bitter plants. Our modern produce is fluffy,
beautiful, and sugary, far unlike wild nettles growing in the countryside or
root shavings collected from a forest floor. But from rosemary to
dandelion to clovers, it is not that difficult to either grow or find wild
plants and herbs just about anywhere. Your task this week is to use a field
guide or an app such as FlowerChecker or PlantSnap to identify one edible
wild plant that grows near you and figure out how to harvest it and include
it in a recipe. The bonus? More longevity-enhancing time in nature paired
with sunlight and grounding.
In addition, most of the longest-lived fit and happy people I know have
figured out how to hack their environment to allow them to engage in low-
--- END PAGE 1176 ---

--- PAGE 1177 ---
level physical activity all day long, rather than being sedentary and then
doing a brutal exercise session at the beginning or end of the day. From
keeping a pull-up bar or kettlebell in the office to taking daily walks or
using treadmill workstations, the sky’s the limit as to how this can be
accomplished. This week, choose one way that you can change your
environment to allow for more movement, such as only using a chair or a
sitting position when you’re eating or driving.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/19. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 1177 ---

--- PAGE 1178 ---
20
INVISIBLE
HIDDEN VARIABLES THAT MAKE OR
BREAK YOUR MIND, BODY, AND SPIRIT
I live in a stupid home. That’s right: my personal abode deep in the Inland
Northwest forest of Washington State is stripped of all Bluetooth and wireless
signals. There is no Wi-Fi, no microwaves, no fancy internet-connected
appliances, no remote-controlled security system, no Alexa, no Google Assistant,
no Philips Hue lighting system—just old-school, hard-wired appliances and low
EMF connectivity. With the icing on the cake of a giant Faraday-fabric signal-
blocking curtain that encloses my bed at night, I’m about as off-grid as a
blogger and podcaster can get.
--- END PAGE 1178 ---

--- PAGE 1179 ---
In addition, the air in my home is pure and clean. Inspired by the NASA
Clean Air Study, we have abundant air-filtering and toxin-removing plants
such as peace lilies, Boston ferns, English ivy, and areca palms, along with
the type of multistage space-age HEPA air filters I’ll talk more about in
this chapter. Essential oil diffusers throughout the house release relaxing
and healing scents like lavender, frankincense, and blue spruce, and
negative ion generators churn out the same type of ions released by waves
crashing into the shore at a beach or tall pines swaying in the wind in a
forest.
Then there’s the light. The windows, doors, and reflective surfaces are
placed to provide natural light throughout the house, and there are no
vision-disturbing LED backlit screens, artificial lighting, flickering, or
glare. Each room has either full-spectrum incandescent bulbs, which
generate very low amounts of dirty electricity while providing a spectrum
of light similar to that of sunlight, or a special form of LED (which you’ll
learn about later in this chapter) that can be customized for each room—
for example, the gym and office have large amounts of wakefulness-
enhancing blue and white light, while the bedrooms and bathrooms have
relaxing red light with a warm incandescent hue.
Finally, the water is clean, pristine, and thoroughly filtered. After all
contaminants and toxins have been filtered from the water, it passes
through a restructuring unit, which adds natural H O bonding to the
3 2 water, similar to the sunlight-kissed, energized water in nature found in
springs, tumbling streams, and rain.
So why do I place such an emphasis on these invisible, hidden, or
frequently ignored environmental factors?
Frankly, even though the modern health and fitness industry places
disproportionate value on traditional means of improving one’s body—
namely movement (exercise) and nutrition (diet)—the reality is that
electricity, air, light, and water affect the optimization of the mind, body,
--- END PAGE 1179 ---

--- PAGE 1180 ---
and spirit just as much as, if not more than, movement and nutrition.
Electricity, air, light, and water can enhance or destroy neural cell activity,
muscle recovery, and the strength of the body’s key meridians or chakras,
through which energy flows.
This chapter will give you all the tools you need to make your
environment as pure and health-optimizing as possible. I’ll share with you
every lifestyle solution and hack possible to make sure the air you breathe
is clean, including HEPA air filters, essential oil diffusers, mold testing
kits, mold remediation strategies, and more.
When it comes to electricity, I’ll teach you how to mitigate and
minimize the damage from wireless routers, how to introduce negative ion
generators and dirty-electricity filters into your home, and how to use
natural and safe forms of electricity, such as pulsed electromagnetic field
therapy (PEMF) and grounding, to heal your body. I’ll also explain the
most effective ways to make your home a low-EMF haven.
This chapter will also equip you with everything you need to know to
choose the perfect lighting for your environment and how to avoid
common light sources that can harm your health. You’ll get information
about safe lighting alternatives such as red bulbs for bedrooms and areas
of rest; blue bulbs for offices and gyms; blue-light-blocking glasses and
blue-light-producing ear and eye devices; software that can reduce screen
temperature, flicker, glare, and more; blue-light blockers for televisions;
and healing and health-enhancing forms of light such as near- and far-
infrared therapy and photobiomodulation.
And finally, this chapter will give you ideal solutions for optimizing
your water, including the best type of water filters, from reverse osmosis
to remineralization, and the best glass-bottled waters for travel and home.
It will also teach you how to use and create trace minerals and structured
water, the optimum way to filter shower and bath water, where to find
natural springs, and how to filter water when traveling.
--- END PAGE 1180 ---

--- PAGE 1181 ---
HIDDEN ENVIRONMENTAL
STRESSORS
Environmental stressors are ubiquitous in the modern world, whether
you’re at the gym, the grocery store, or the coffee shop down the street.
There’s often not much you can do about these toxins, unfortunately, but
it’s good to know what you may be encountering in public spaces—and it
reinforces why it’s so important to control these variables where you can,
in your own home.
For example, running on a treadmill at the gym can be incredibly
stressful to your lungs and hormones if the carpet or flooring in the gym is
constantly releasing volatile organic compounds, cleaning chemicals,
aldehydes, benzenes, molds, or other toxins. Recent studies have
demonstrated that, quite paradoxically, there are concerningly high levels
of carcinogens in the average health club, as well as significant amounts of
harmful bacteria on the surfaces of fitness equipment such as treadmills
and weight-training machines. As a matter of fact, the indoor air quality in
some fitness centers can be just as harmful to your health as the pollution
in a crowded urban environment (more on all of this later in this chapter).
That same health club, or a basement home gym, or your favorite
healthy coffee shop or natural grocery store, can also be chock-full of dirty
electricity, also known as electrical pollution or EMF, which is constantly
churned out by exercise equipment, appliances, phones, computers, self-
quantification devices, and more. Don’t get me wrong: I am not opposed
to the modern wonders of electricity. But safe, clean electricity has a
smooth sine wave that goes up and down sixty times a second, while dirty
electricity, a form of electromagnetic pollution that operates in the 4-to-
100-kilohertz range, can contaminate both the electrical supply and a
human cell’s electrically charged membranes. The books Zapped by Ann
Louise Gittleman, Dirty Electricity by Samuel Milham, and EMF’d by Joe
--- END PAGE 1181 ---

--- PAGE 1182 ---
Mercola all provide comprehensive treatises on this growing
postindustrial health assailant.
Or consider the lighting in a gym, the kitchen of a clean eater, or the
average spa or physician’s office. Light can have a significant impact on
your sleep and your health, and the hidden dangers of light-emitting diode
(LED) lighting include the risk of eye issues such as retinal damage and
age-related macular degeneration, mitochondrial dysfunction, metabolic
disorders, disrupted circadian biology, sleep disruption, increased risk of
cancer, and more.
We encounter LED light every day: it’s in car headlights, the back of
your computer monitor, billboards, traffic signals, camera flashes, mall and
airport lighting, and many other locations you encounter, even at night.
Large-area LED displays are used as stadium displays, dynamic decorative
displays, and dynamic billboards on freeways. Thin, lightweight message
displays are used at airports and railway stations and as destination
displays for trains, buses, trams, and ferries. LEDs are also used in exit
signs, emergency vehicle lighting, ships’ navigation lights, brake lights,
night vision devices, glow sticks, and more. Unfortunately, these artificial
light sources have a host of deleterious health effects in humans.
The average gym, hospital, or doctor’s office and, unfortunately, even
the average health enthusiast’s home are also void of clean, pure,
electrically charged water. Regular drinking water is often filled with toxic
levels of lead, fluoride, glyphosate, chemicals, endocrine disruptors,
pharmaceutical drugs, and other contaminants. If the water is filtered, it is
often filtered to such an extent that many of the beneficial minerals are
removed and the water’s natural electrical charge disappears. Between
industrial dumping, pesticide runoff, leaky storage tanks, and government
mandates, there is a growing issue with water contaminants that may be
pouring out of any faucet, including asbestos, chlorine, lead, mercury,
volatile organic compounds, arsenic, fluoride, nitrate, and perchlorate.
--- END PAGE 1182 ---

--- PAGE 1183 ---
Environmental stressors may be all around you, but that doesn’t mean
you’re powerless to protect yourself. This chapter will give you the tools to
defend your home from pollutants and toxins, and the knowledge to shield
yourself as much as possible in public.
ELECTRICITY
There’s a reason I keep the wireless router turned off in my home and opt
instead to hardwire in via the ethernet, rarely bring my cell phone near my
ear, don’t use or touch a microwave, and eschew doing any kind of
workout with my phone in anything but airplane mode.
It all comes down to a concept called bioelectromagnetics, the
interaction between living organisms and electric and magnetic fields,
both those produced by organisms and those from other sources. Areas of
study in bioelectromagnetics include cell membrane potential and the
electric currents that flow in nerves and muscles; the physiological effects
of man-made sources of electromagnetic fields such as mobile phones; the
ability of living cells, tissues, and organisms to produce electrical fields;
and how cells respond to electromagnetic fields.
In the late eighteenth century, the Italian physician and physicist Luigi
Galvani was the first to record the phenomenon of bioelectromagnetism
while dissecting a frog at the same table where he had been conducting
experiments with static electricity. Galvani coined the term animal
electricity to describe the phenomenon of the frog’s muscles twitching. He
hypothesized that muscle activation resulted from an electrical fluid or
substance in the nerves. It turned out that he was on the right track: short
electrical signals called action potentials occur in several types of animal
cells, collectively called excitable cells, including neurons, muscle cells,
and endocrine cells. These action potentials are crucial to facilitate
cellular communication and activate intracellular processes, but they are
--- END PAGE 1183 ---

--- PAGE 1184 ---
possible only because of voltage-gated ion channels on the cell, which
allow the electrical potential on both sides of a cell membrane to engage
in proper signaling.
Bioelectromagnetism is rampant in nature. For example, sharks have
bioelectric sensors in their snout that allow them to detect electrical fields
produced by other fish, and migratory birds navigate in part by the Earth’s
magnetic field. Another example is the electric eel, which generates a large
electric field outside its body for hunting and self-defense.
Like these animals, humans are also big, living batteries—and this is
exactly why many of the helpful biohacking devices in this book, such as
PEMF, and modern medical imaging such as MRIs actually work. If we
were just big skin-covered bags of non-electrically-charged meat, we
wouldn’t respond to electric or magnetic signals at all. Of course, this also
means that our tissues respond to other sources of electromagnetic
radiation, including cell phones, cell towers, microwaves, appliances,
Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and beyond.
A number of studies have been conducted on magnetic fields and
electric fields to investigate their effects on cell metabolism, cell turnover,
cell death, and tumor growth. One of the better summaries of some of the
shocking discoveries made in these studies is the book The Non-Tinfoil
Guide to EMFs: How to Fix Our Stupid Use of Technology by Nicolas Pineault,
while two of the best books about the voltage potential of the body and
the fact that we are all basically giant batteries are Healing Is Voltage by
Jerry Tennant and The Body Electric by Robert Becker.
EMF Is Everywhere
Now that you have a basic understanding of bioelectromagnetism, here’s
why you should be concerned: the United States alone is wired with half a
million miles of high-voltage power lines, and for wireless communication,
--- END PAGE 1184 ---

--- PAGE 1185 ---
we depend on over half a million microwave links. We also have tens of
millions of broadcasting transmitters flooding our airwaves, use over
thirty-five million electromagnetic devices (and that number is increasing
at an exponential rate), and plant ourselves in front of hundreds of
millions of video and television screens.
Electromagnetic frequency (EMF) radiation is the by-product of this
explosion of electronic technology. It’s a form of environmental pollution
that’s emitted by millions of domestic appliances, military installations,
industrial machines, computers, broadcast and communications
transmitters, and all other electrically powered devices. EMF radiation can
cause headaches, vision problems, anxiety, irritability, depression, nausea,
fatigue, disturbed sleep, poor physical performance, and loss of
motivation.
Even worse, all metallic objects—including electrical circuits,
telephone wiring, water and gas pipes, and even the metal objects we carry
on our bodies, such as keys, watches, and jewelry—can act as antennae
that collect and magnify these energy waves, creating a compounding
effect that significantly alters the natural balance of our body’s
biochemical energy patterns. When you’re constantly bombarded in this
manner by EMF waves, it can not only distort your internal cellular
communications but also entrain your body.
Entrainment, also known as “sympathetic resonance,” is the tendency
of an object to vibrate at the same frequency as an external stimulus. It’s
why grounding (which I talked about in chapter 7) works so well. But
while the frequencies used in grounding take advantage of the natural
frequency of the earth, when you become entrained to any disruptive
external frequency—such as the frequency emitted by your wireless router
—you can lose the integrity of your intrinsic frequencies (like the natural
vibration of your cells), which can degrade physical and mental
--- END PAGE 1185 ---

--- PAGE 1186 ---
performance and create huge potential for some serious downstream
health issues.
Years ago, in my book Beyond Training, I admitted that a direct cause-
and-effect relationship between electromagnetic radiation and illness or
cellular damage has been difficult to prove, but since then, the number of
studies on the link between EMF and human biological damage has
exploded. In addition to the books mentioned earlier, to understand the
seriousness of this issue and get the nitty-gritty details on protecting your
home and body against the ravages of EMF, I recommend you read Zapped:
Why Your Cell Phone Shouldn’t Be Your Alarm Clock and 1,268 Ways to
Outsmart the Hazards of Electronic Pollution by Ann Louise Gittleman and
Disconnect: Truth About Cell Phone Radiation, What the Industry Has Done to
Hide It, and How to Protect Your Family by Devra Davis. Of course, you
don’t necessarily need to read all these books, as I’ve summarized the
best-of-the-best in this short section, but I figured I’d equip you to take a
deeper dive if you’re so inclined.
In Pineault’s book The Non-Tinfoil Guide to EMFs and via a host of
studies on PubMed and at EMF-Protection.us, I discovered several
shocking facts, including these:
• In the last one hundred years, the microwave radiation we’re exposed
to has increased a quintillion times (yes, that’s a real number), and it’s
still steadily increasing!
• EMF exposure triggers oxidative stress in your cells after just five
seconds.
What You Can Do About Radiation
From the Fukushima disaster in Japan to the average airport security line to
medical tests that use radioactive compounds, we’re constantly bombarded
--- END PAGE 1186 ---

--- PAGE 1187 ---
by nuclear, X-ray, and microwave radiation—and it’s an unfortunate fact that
a nuclear disaster that occurs thousands of miles away can affect you as you
sit sipping iced tea in your own backyard.
One problem with radiation is that certain glands and tissues with high
amounts of iodine receptors, including thyroid, prostate, and breast tissue,
are extremely sensitive to oxidation and cell damage from radiation,
especially when these tissues are low in the nutrient iodine. When
radioactive iodine (found in most forms of radiation, including all the stuff
that gets blown into the atmosphere after a disaster such as Fukushima)
gets into areas of your body that have numerous iodine receptors and those
receptors are lacking iodine, then the radioactive iodine latches on and
begins ionizing, oxidizing, and harming these tissues. As you can imagine, if
the receptors have had adequate dietary exposure to iodine, then they are
already filled with normal iodine and do not readily grab the radioactive
version.
The other issue with radiation, as I alluded to above, is that it is highly
capable of causing oxidation—just as eating a lot of heated vegetable oil or
sugar can cause free-radical damage, but to a much greater extent.
Radiation exposure is the equivalent of a bunch of tiny bullets passing
through your tissues.
Contrary to popular belief, you cannot stop ionizing radiation from entering
or passing through your body by taking some special nutritional supplement
or drug. To get complete protection from radiation, you’d have to shelter in
an underground bunker and get lead or concrete walls between you and the
source of the radiation. Good luck with that.
So, rather than run from radiation, I recommend you speed up your body’s
ability to repair damaged tissues and organs and equip yourself with high
amounts of the proper nutrients to counteract the effects of ionizing,
oxidizing radiation, including these:
• Oral magnesium in supplemental form (around 400 to 600 mg per day,
or until you get loose stool). Magnesium offers strong protective effects
against small daily doses of radiation.
• Algae, which can naturally protect against radiation. In addition to
organic chlorella and spirulina tablets, which you can eat, swallow, or
sprinkle into smoothies, you can liberally include sea vegetables in your
diet.
--- END PAGE 1187 ---

--- PAGE 1188 ---
• A full spectrum of antioxidants from a diet rich in wild plants, herbs, and
spices, along with the antioxidants in chapter 19.
• Additional antioxidants from a supplement that contains high-quality
omega-3, along with adequate intake of vitamins A, D, E, and K.
• Emerging evidence suggests that the use of ketone esters may help with
both acute and chronic effects of radiation. On long-haul flights, you’ll
always find me with a small bottle of drinkable ketones in my bag.
If acute radiation exposure occurs, you’ve had a medical exam such as a CT
scan or fluoroscopy, or you’re frequently traveling to irradiated areas, also
include these:
• 6 mg of nascent iodine (a liquid form that contains all three iodine
molecules: iodide, iodate, and molecular iodine) per day in a glass of
water. The evidence on iodine for radiation protection is so good that I
even consume a 130 mg potassium iodide capsule daily for a week after
I’ve traveled internationally and on long-haul flights.
• One or two servings of edible clay each day. Clay can draw out stored
radioactive compounds from your body, and, yes, it literally tastes like
eating dirt. I recommend food-grade bentonite clay, which can be
ordered from Amazon or found at many health-food stores. Zeolite is a
good alternative.
• Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) has been shown in research to be a potent
oral radioprotective agent. Given its efficacy and low toxicity at 3 to 20 g
per day, it is a good candidate for a wide variety of radiation exposures,
including nuclear accidents and medical radiation.
Finally, to learn more about protecting yourself from radiation and the huge
problem with radiation exposure in our modern era, I recommend you read
Dr. Mark Sircus’s book Nuclear Toxicity Syndrome.
--- END PAGE 1188 ---

--- PAGE 1189 ---
•

In 2017, the Phonegate Alert report, devoted to exposing phone
misinformation and scandals, found that 90 percent of all cell phones
in the world exceed acceptable radiation standards.
• One study gave thirty healthy volunteers a simple memory test
without any exposure to Wi-Fi radiation, then gave them the test again
while they were exposed to a 2.4 GHz Wi-Fi. Half the participants
experienced noticeable decrease in memory accompanied by a change
in brain activity and a drop in brain frequency levels related to
alertness.
• Children generally absorb twice the amount of radiation as adults (and
their bone marrow alone absorbs up to ten times more!). Exposure to
radio frequency radiation from Wi-Fi and cell phones can disrupt
normal cellular development, especially in babies and children. Several
--- END PAGE 1189 ---

--- PAGE 1190 ---
studies have linked radiation exposure to delayed kidney development;
the disruption of protein synthesis is so severe that the authors of one
study noted, “This cell property is especially pronounced in growing
tissues, that is, in children and youth. Consequently, these population
groups would be more susceptible than average to the described
effects.”
• A 2007 study investigated the impact of low-frequency cell phone
signals on sleep. Participants were exposed to the signals from real
phones or a placebo signal from fake phones. Those exposed to the
real signals had a significantly more difficult time falling asleep and
experienced changes in brain wave patterns deleterious to sleep.
• In an admittedly somewhat anecdotal but nonetheless compelling
study, a group of Danish high schoolers placed one group of plants in a
room that was shielded from wireless radiation, and they placed
another group in a room with two Wi-Fi routers, which together
emitted the same amount of radiation as a cell phone. The plants in
the room with the radiation didn’t grow nearly as well as those in the
other room, and the closer a plant was to a router, the sicklier it was.
In photos, they appear to be colorless and shrunken.
• A recent analysis of a multitude of studies of oxidative stress clearly
demonstrated not only that EMF exposure triggers oxidative stress in
various tissues, but also that it causes significant changes in levels of
blood antioxidant markers. Fatigue, headache, decreased learning
ability, and cognitive impairment were shown to be among the
symptoms caused by EMF.
The increasingly popular 5G technology is also problematic. 5G uses
bandwidths of extremely high-frequency millimeter waves (MMW),
between 30 GHz and 300 GHz, in addition to some lower and midrange
frequencies. This isn’t all bad. After all, faster speeds mean less time for
--- END PAGE 1190 ---

--- PAGE 1191 ---
your body to be exposed to the frequency, so 5G resonates and penetrates
less than the lower frequencies do.
But the fact that it travels shorter distances means that 5G
infrastructure requires a host of cell towers situated closer together, with
more input and output ports than there are on 4G towers. This results in
wireless antennas every few feet, on every lamppost and utility pole in
your neighborhood ( just scan the telephone poles as you drive and you
can see that 5G boxes are popping up nearly everywhere). Since 4G
frequencies continue to be used, all these new frequencies are just
compounded on top of the previous frequencies without phasing them
out, resulting in a more highly concentrated EMF soup that you and I
must live in each day. You can dig into evidence on the resources page for
this chapter that shows 5G signals may have these effects:
• DNA single- and double-strand breaks
• Excess oxidative damage that leads to tissue deterioration and
premature aging
• Disruption of cell metabolism due to cell membrane damage
• Increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier (see chapter 2)
• Melatonin reduction (leading to insomnia and, because melatonin has
an antioxidant effect, increasing cancer risks and further oxidative
damage)
• Disruption of brain glucose metabolism
But despite some of the evidence above, large-scale studies on 5G
really don’t exist. It was rolled out without pre-market testing, based on
the assumption that all the other wireless technologies before 5G were
completely safe, which is untrue since proper toxicology was never done
in the first place.
The paper “The assumption of safety is being used to justify the
rollout of 5G technologies” and a podcast interview with my own EMF
--- END PAGE 1191 ---

--- PAGE 1192 ---
consultant, Brian Hoyer, describe why 5G is likely to be as harmful as all
previous generations. Brian explains how the vast majority of studies
showing harm, in which scientists argue that radiofrequency radiation
(cell phones, cell towers, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, etc.) should be classified as a
Class 1 carcinogen, have been done on humans or animals exposed to 2G
or 3G only, and there’s no biological reason why 5G should be any
different. In 2019, the Australian Minister for Communications asked a
committee to complete an inquiry into the deployment, adoption, and
application of 5G. The resulting report begins with the statement “5G is
dangerous and will harm every living being” and goes on to share some
shocking research. I’ll include a link to the full report, along with links to
the paper and podcast interview, on the resources page for this chapter.
What You Can Do
Are you convinced yet that you may need to be thinking about this
problem? Here’s a quick, practical guide to jump-start your EMF radiation
protection.
TEST.
While you can certainly hire a good building biologist like Bryan Hoyer of
Shielded Healing or Brian Johnson of Senergy360 to come to your house
and do comprehensive testing using a wide variety of meters that
thoroughly test all electrical and magnetic signals, you can also start
simple by purchasing an Acoustimeter, which is a simple, affordable device
that allows you to test microwave, dirty electricity, and radio frequency
(RF) of your devices, appliances, and technology, along with any hotel
room or Airbnb you stay in. The Cemprotec 33 meter is another good
option that measures wireless, magnetic fields, and electric fields at the
same time. A reading of more than 3.0 μW/m2 is considered dangerous to
--- END PAGE 1192 ---

--- PAGE 1193 ---
cellular biology. Concerningly, my body spikes to that level when I’m
merely holding my iPhone if it isn’t in airplane mode. Scary, eh?
USE DIRTY-ELECTRICITY FILTERS IN ALL THE MAIN
ROOMS OF THE HOUSE.
Dirty electricity is unusable electromagnetic energy that is created by
electrical devices as they operate. It is caused by interruptions in the flow
of normal 60 Hz AC power traveling through wires and electrical systems
in your home, hotel room, or office. These interruptions result in voltage
spikes, or surges, as well as frequency variations (also called high-
frequency voltage transients) that combine to form harmful
electromagnetic fields. A dirty electricity filter works by mitigating or
reducing this noise via capacitors and other electronic components that
absorb or redirect excess electrical energy, smoothing out fluctuations in
voltage and current. Shielded Healing and Orgone Energy make good
whole-house dirty-electricity filters. Shielded Healing, Greenwave, and
Stetzer make dirty-electricity filters that can be installed in outlets in each
room of your house, and Shielded Healing also has a solar power panel
dirty-electricity-filtering option that limits the amount of electrical
pollution during DC-to-AC conversion from a solar panel.
LIMIT ELECTRICAL POLLUTION IN YOUR
WORKSPACE.
On BoundlessBook.com/20, you’ll find a link to a video in which I explain
seven ways to limit electrical pollution in your office. In addition to
installing dirty-electricity filters and plugging a negative ion generator into
the wall outlet, these simple steps include buying a grounding cable for
any laptops that don’t have a three-prong charging cable, hardwiring your
computer into the router or wall via an ethernet cable, and placing a
--- END PAGE 1193 ---

--- PAGE 1194 ---
Schumann resonance generator or any other 7.8 Hz frequency generator,
such as a PEMF device, in or near your workspace.
WHEN YOU’RE NOT USING YOUR WIRELESS
ROUTER, UNPLUG IT OR SWITCH IT OFF WIRELESS
MODE.
You can purchase a digital wall timer that will automatically turn off your
Wi-Fi between, say, 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. In addition, place your router in the
garage, a corner of the basement, or as far away from living spaces as you
can. If you are building a home, you can do as I did and hard-wire the
entire home with metal-shielded Cat 7 ethernet cable so no Wi-Fi is
necessary. (I recommend running all electrical wiring in a new building
through metal conduits to reduce EMF.) Although it’s not yet
commercially available, I’m keeping my eye on LiFi (light fidelity), which
is a bidirectional wireless system that transmits data via LED or infrared
light and needs only a light source with a chip to transmit an internet
signal. Finally, hard-wire anything you can hard-wire: connect your
desktop computer to the internet via a wired Ethernet connection and
avoid wireless keyboards, mice, game systems, printers, and portable
house phones. Opt for the wired versions.
LIMIT ARTIFICIAL LIGHT RADIATION, FLICKERING,
AND EMF FROM LIGHTING.
Natural sources of light, such as sunlight, do not pulse or flicker. But
artificial light sources can generate imperceptible flicker that you may not
consciously notice, but your eyes certainly do. Studies show the human
eye can detect flicker of up to 2,000 Hz (cycles per second), and this
flicker is correlated with long-term and short-term health effects such as
eyestrain and a decline in cognitive performance. One review I just read
the week I’m writing this sentence reported that greater exposure to
--- END PAGE 1194 ---

--- PAGE 1195 ---
artificial light at night can disrupt stress hormones and negatively affect
cardiovascular health. In the specific case of cardiovascular disease,
artificial light at night (ALAN) inhibits melatonin secretion, which reduces
mitochondrial recycling (mitophagy) and efficiency and circadian clock
gene expression, so it dysregulates the circadian rhythm, causing systemic
inflammation and oxidative stress.
Artificial light from bulbs plugged into the electrical grid run on 50 or
60 Hz AC pulsed electrical frequencies. A light source running from these
frequencies pulses at the same rate as that source of power, which means
that the light will flicker on and off 120 times per second. Your eyes must
constantly adjust to this imperceptible flicker, but your brain doesn’t
process the information fast enough to process it, causing eyestrain that
leads to headaches, along with hormone disruption because of stress on
the hypothalamus and pituitary glands, which depend on the eyes for
signals from the light environment to regulate circadian biology. In
summary, if you’re constantly standing under flickering lights, you’re
constantly in sympathetic, fight-or-flight mode. This is why I recommend
flicker-free lighting that is also low-EMF.
In addition, the spectrum of natural sunlight changes throughout the
day and with the seasons. Your body uses these wavelengths to signal
circadian clocks for hormone production, mitochondrial ATP production,
cellular respiration, and antioxidant synthesis. This natural spectrum
during the day contains large amounts of visible light (52 to 55 percent)
and near-infrared light (~43 percent) as well as small amounts of UVA and
UVB radiation (3 to 5 percent). An ideal daytime lighting environment
simulates this natural scenario.
To re-create a natural lighting environment indoors, you can use a
combination of incandescent and LED lighting. LED bulbs contain more
blue, green, and yellow wavelengths but are missing deeper red and
infrared wavelengths, while incandescent and halogen bulbs have less
--- END PAGE 1195 ---

--- PAGE 1196 ---
intensity in the blue, green, and yellow spectrums and more in the orange,
red, and infrared. Later, I’ll give you recommendations for bulb choices
that satisfy these criteria.
DITCH THE BLUETOOTH.
Instead of Bluetooth, use a wired headset or, although the audio quality is
not quite as good, an air tube headset for your phone, which allows sound
to travel through tubes rather than wires, so you are not exposed to any
radiation from wires—I recommend the headsets by Aircom,
DefenderShield, and A3. If you must use Bluetooth buds, I recommend
small Waveblock stickers, which can reduce some of the radiation effect,
and, for over-ear headphones, the DefenderShield air tube option or the
more expensive Focal option. I realize this is inconvenient in an era of
fancy earbuds that allow you to tune in to your devices without being
wired down, but think of it this way: you have only one brain, and it’s
smart to protect it however you can, especially if something is next to your
brain four to eight hours each day. If you don’t mind risking a hoarse
voice, talking with your phone on speaker, several feet away from your
body, is also a decent solution.
For my podcasts and longer Zoom calls or listening sessions, I opt for
the somewhat more expensive ($600+) headphones, which use low-
emission technology to minimize low-frequency fields, which reduces
magnetic radiation by up to 98 percent compared to standard headphones.
MAINTAIN SOME DISTANCE BETWEEN YOU AND
ELECTRONIC SIGNALS.
Keep your cell phone or laptop several inches away from your skin
whenever possible, and put your phone on airplane mode if you need to
put it in your pocket or near your head while sleeping or exercising. If you
--- END PAGE 1196 ---

--- PAGE 1197 ---
keep your phone in your pocket, consider purchasing a DefenderShield
case or an inexpensive Faraday shield pouch to put it in.
If you need to place an electronic device such as a laptop in your lap,
use an EMF-blocking pad such as a DefenderShield pad or Harapad to
protect your precious crotch.
And for goodness’ sake, exercise caution with VR devices, which can
emit radiation up to five times higher than the FCC’s safety threshold of
1.6 watts per kilogram (W/kg), which is concerning when you consider the
proximity of these devices to the face, eyes, and brain, not to mention the
massive amount of flickering, circadian-disrupting blue light that they
produce.
AVOID USING YOUR CELL PHONE WHEN THE
SIGNAL IS WEAK.
A weak signal amplifies EMF—including that single bar you desperately try
to connect to as the plane is about to land (you know who you are!). You
can also turn off the Enable LTE or 4G/5G option on the Settings/Cellular
page on your iPhone. This can reduce radiation by up to 84 percent!
CHOOSE APPLIANCES WISELY.
Avoid using smart appliances and thermostats that depend on wireless
signaling—especially the new “smart” TVs, which emit a Wi-Fi signal that
cannot be shut off. Consider using a large computer monitor as your TV
instead since these don’t emit Wi-Fi. If you use a microwave oven,
consider replacing it with a steam convection oven or an air fryer, which
heat food as quickly and far more safely, or keep the microwave unplugged
when you’re not using it.
SLEEP IN A FARADAY CAGE OR BLANKET.
--- END PAGE 1197 ---

--- PAGE 1198 ---
If you’re surrounded by Wi-Fi signals and you’re very concerned about
dirty electricity in your home or environment, you can purchase a Faraday
cage or sleeping blanket to protect you for the approximate third of your
life that you are in bed. LessEMF.com sells these along with many forms of
shielding fabrics and clothing, and Shielded Healing can even create a
custom shield for your bed like they did for mine. The only downside to a
bed cage? It can get pretty warm inside, so you’ll need a solution like a
BedJet to keep your sleeping environment cool.
TRAVEL WITH EMF PROTECTION.
While grounding (see below), unplugging as much as possible in your
travel environment, and packing dirty electricity filters are all smart
options, you can also travel with a portable device that helps reduce the
field strength of the area you’re living and sleeping in, like the smaller
Waveguard travel devices, which are filled with a conductive fluid that has
been found to significantly lower the electrical field strength in your
environment.
If you want full-body anti-radiation protection while flying, look into
EMF protection gear like Lambs or NoChoice. For example, I wear a full-
body NoChoice tracksuit when flying. It includes a hoodie that zips all the
way up over my head, with see-through mesh fabric for the eye area and
tiny metal alligator clips on the pants for easy grounding when I get to my
destination. While it may not be the sexiest flight fashion, it offers
protection from all the Wi-Fi and cell signals bouncing around the cabin,
and I feel and sleep much better when arriving at my destination. The
downside? Airport security flips out if you try to wear this type of clothing
through a scanner, as it blocks the millimeter-wave technology used in
scanners. So, unless you want a full-body pat-down, put on your EMF-
blocking gear after you’ve gone through security. For a more minimalist
--- END PAGE 1198 ---

--- PAGE 1199 ---
solution, you can opt for a Lambs hat and underwear, which protect the
more vital regions.
SUPPLEMENT.
Most people are deficient in magnesium, which can worsen the impact of
EMFs. If you’re deficient in this nutrient, you can—especially when
exposed to excess EMF—experience increased activity of the voltage-
gated calcium channels, which allows high amounts of calcium influx into
the cells. This occurs due to overactivation of the N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor and can contribute to neurodegenerative conditions.
Nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is a transcription factor
that regulates cells’ defense against oxidative insults and toxic substances,
and raising your level of Nrf2 may help ameliorate EMF damage. One
simple way to activate Nrf2 is to consume Nrf2-boosting food compounds,
which include sulforaphane-containing cruciferous vegetables,
carotenoids (especially lycopene), sulfurous compounds from alliums like
onions and garlic, isothiocyanates from the cabbage group, and terpenoid-
rich foods like citrus fruits. Molecular hydrogen has also been shown to
target free radicals produced in response to radiation. Multiple studies
have shown molecular hydrogen can mitigate about 80 percent of this
damage and can activate Nrf2 to lower inflammation, improve
mitochondrial function, and stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis.
USE GROUNDING/EARTHING.
You’ve already learned in previous chapters about the benefits derived
from having your skin in contact with the surface of the Earth or a
grounding mat that simulates that surface. Since heavy exposure to EMF
causes depolarization and an influx of positive ions, the negative ions you
are exposed to when grounding can help “recharge” your body. Grounding
is theoretically simple: for at least twenty minutes and preferably an hour
--- END PAGE 1199 ---

--- PAGE 1200 ---
per day, get outside barefoot or wearing grounding shoes, lie outside on
your back, stand on a grounding or earthing mat, use a PEMF mat (which
is similar to grounding), or, for the strongest grounding effect, swim in a
natural body of water or even do a cold plunge that is in contact with the
ground via a metal surface or conductive cable plugged into the ground
near the plunge.
However, it’s important to understand that not all outdoor ground is
created equal. In places with a lot of EMF, such as crowded cities and
manufacturing facilities, high-tech equipment sends electricity into the
soil to ground. This makes the ground current vary, and this varying
ground current can expose you to excess EMF. So find a place to ground
outdoors that is away from technology and EMF radiation, and, if you use
a grounding mat indoors, make sure the room it’s located in also has a
dirty electricity filter and ideally has been scanned for EMF levels.
Resources for Learning More
If you do everything listed above, you’ll be well on your way to protecting
yourself and your home from electrical pollution, but if you really want to
geek out on EMFs, perform a thorough test of the EMF levels in your
home, or upgrade your home with low-EMF technology, then visit the
website LessEMF.com, where you’ll find a host of content on EMF-
proofing your home, along with the equipment you’ll need to do so.
Nick Pineault and Brian Hoyer teamed up to create the Electro-
Pollution Fix—a simple, step-by-step EMF protection course that will
teach you the best way to get started if you want to clean up your home
from all this toxic EMF pollution and help your entire family thrive. Nick
also has a good podcast titled Smarter Tech, with up-to-date interviews and
research reports on EMF.
--- END PAGE 1200 ---

--- PAGE 1201 ---
Another good resource, in addition to the books already listed, is
EMFCenter.com, which is chock-full of free videos and e-courses. It also
offers on-site professional consulting and EMF-proofing for your home or
office. Finally, Nick Pineault has a fantastic EMF-mitigating course called
ElectrosmogRx, which you can access through BoundlessBook.com/20.
Finally, I’m often asked if EMF protection devices like harmonizers
and blockers actually work. While I can’t argue with the research that
companies like Somavedic, Blushield, Leela, and Airestech have produced
showing fewer electrohypersensitive symptom responses, higher HRV, and
lower red blood cell clumping when these strategies are scattered
throughout a house or worn on the body, along with my own body and
brain feeling better with these devices around (possibly placebo!), the
only company from which I’ve seen solid research displaying an actual
reduction in electrical field strength is Waveguard. For this reason, you’ll
find a Waveguard unit placed under my desk and another under the dining
room table.
--- END PAGE 1201 ---

--- PAGE 1202 ---
LIGHT
Most of us think of light as just a wave of energy that signifies the absence
of darkness, but the fact is, light has a profound impact on human biology,
for better or worse. Chapter 7 explained the effects of artificial light on
circadian rhythms and sleep, and other sections of this book described
biohacks that use light, such as photobiomodulation, near-infrared, far-
infrared, UVA, and UVB.
But the effects of light go beyond its potential for positively hacking
sleep or enhancing recovery, especially when it comes to the potential for
artificial light to damage your overall wellness. The negative health impact
of artificial light sources includes the risk of cataracts, blindness, age-
related macular degeneration, mitochondrial dysfunction, metabolic
disorders, heart disease, and more. Multiple recent studies have reported
that exposure to artificial light can also cause breast cancer, circadian
phase disruption, and sleep disorders. One 2015 meta-analysis reviewed
eighty-five scientific articles and showed that outdoor artificial lights, such
as streetlamps and porch lights, are a risk factor for breast cancer and that
more-intense indoor artificial light elevates this risk. This study also found
that exposure to artificial bright light at night suppresses melatonin
secretion, increases sleep onset latency, and increases alertness, and that
the circadian misalignment caused by artificial light exposure can have
significant negative effects on psychological, cardiovascular, and metabolic
functions.
The Dangers of LEDs
One perfect example of the hazards of modern light is LEDs (light-
emitting diodes). There are a few LEDs that aren’t harmful, which you’ll
learn about shortly, but the modern LEDs that are rapidly replacing
--- END PAGE 1202 ---

--- PAGE 1203 ---
compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) bulbs pose a significant health problem.
This surge in LED usage is primarily because LEDs, unlike CFLs, do not
contain mercury, and they’re far more energy-efficient. LEDs are used in
aviation lighting, car headlights, emergency vehicle lighting, advertising,
traffic signals, camera flashes, and general lighting. Large-area LED
displays are used in stadium signage, dynamic decorative displays, and
dynamic billboards on freeways. But LEDs pose significant environmental
risks and toxicity hazards because they contain high amounts of arsenic,
copper, nickel, lead, iron, and silver.
LEDs can cause irreversible retinal damage to the photoreceptors in
the eye and have been shown to induce necrosis in eye tissue. The
American Medical Association even put out an official statement warning
of the health and safety issues associated with white LED streetlamps.
Things get even worse once dimming and color-changing features are
introduced into LED lighting, which is a common feature in smart homes.
The problem is that, unlike incandescent and halogen lights, LED
lamps are a form of digital lighting. In a color-changing system that allows
you to dim or adjust the color of the lights, there are typically three LED
sources: red, green, and blue. The intensity of these sources has to be
changed to achieve different colors, and this means the LEDs rapidly
alternate between on at full intensity and completely off over and over
again, resulting in a lighting phenomenon called flicker. Even though it
appears to your naked eye that the LEDs aren’t changing color or intensity
that much, your retina perceives this flicker, and you can often observe
this phenomenon if you use an older camera or a device called a flicker
detector to record an LED light in your house or an LED-backlit computer
monitor. This trick doesn’t work with newer cameras and smartphones,
which have a built-in algorithm that detects the flicker frequency and
automatically changes the shutter speed accordingly, but I’ve found that
by switching my iPhone to slow-motion video recording, I can often detect
--- END PAGE 1203 ---

--- PAGE 1204 ---
flicker in a monitor or light. Although this flicker is present in all LED
systems, it’s the worst in LEDs that can change color or have intensity-
dimming functions.
Research has shown that flicker can irreparably damage the
photoreceptor cells in the retina, resulting in headaches, poor eyesight,
brain fog, lack of focus, increased risk of cataracts, and sleep disruptions.
Unfortunately, energy-saving lamps such as CFLs can cause similar issues,
along with endocrine and hormonal damage, and can also induce oxidative
stress damage that affects not only the eyes but also sensitive
photoreceptors on many other areas of the skin.
However, not all LED lighting is bad for you. One type is called OLED,
which stands for organic light-emitting diode. You can find good flicker-
free, low-EMF OLED bulbs and other similar modified LED bulbs that
have been engineered to reduce flicker and EMF. (I give recommendations
for both options later in this chapter.) You can use these healthier LEDs in
areas where you spend a lot of time during the day, since blue light from
white LEDs is only detrimental at the wrong time of day. When combined
with light from incandescent or halogen lighting, they can create an indoor
environment that closely simulates sunlight. In general, around 25 percent
of your daytime lighting should be incandescent or halogen that contains
near-infrared wavelengths to balance out the blue light, and around 75
percent can be healthy LEDs.
This strategy works so well because incandescent and halogen lights
create light by using heat. The near-infrared frequencies stimulate your
mitochondria to produce energy (ATP) and stimulate melatonin
production. Most windows block out infrared frequencies from the sun, so
unless your home or office windows are open, you are not receiving near-
infrared wavelengths. However, these bulbs put off a lot of heat, use a lot
of energy, and don’t produce an appreciable amount of blue light, so you
should combine them with healthy LED lighting.
--- END PAGE 1204 ---

--- PAGE 1205 ---
The Benefits of Natural Light (and Dark)
Light can be good for you, too. In fact, the therapeutic use of full-
spectrum light—also known as photobiology—offers many surprising
health benefits. In the 1700s, scientist and inventor Andreas Gärtner built
the first phototherapeutic device, which was a foldable hollow mirror he
used to concentrate sunlight onto the aching joints of his patients. A gold
leaf on the mirror absorbed UV radiation from sunlight and then
transformed this light into near-infrared and red wavelengths, which can
penetrate deeply into the tissue. Similarly, many people today use infrared
saunas to manage joint pain.
In the 1800s, General Augustus Pleasonton published the book
Influence of the Blue Ray of the Sunlight, in which he describes the “Blue Ray
of Sunlight and Blue Colour of the Sky” as instrumental in “Restoring
Health from Acute and Chronic Disorders to Humans and Domestic
Animals.” In the late 1870s, Dr. Edwin Dwight Babbitt published his book
Principles of Light and Color, in which he reports on his own research on
the therapeutic effects of using colored lights on different parts of the
body. In 1897, Indian physician Dinshah Ghadiali used chromotherapy in
the form of indigo-colored light as a treatment for gastric inflammation
and colitis, and in the late nineteenth century Niels Ryberg Finsen of
Denmark, who was awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology in 1903, used
red light to treat smallpox and other light spectrums to address chronic
diseases such as tuberculosis. In the decades following, Finsen
phototherapy developed into a cutting-edge therapeutic intervention,
explained in the groundbreaking book Light Therapeutics by Dr. John
Harvey Kellogg and in work by Dr. Oscar Bernhard, a Swiss surgeon who
used heliotherapy (sun therapy) during surgeries.
Light can affect metabolism as well. mTOR, the master fuel sensor in
our cells, facilitates protein synthesis and growth while inhibiting the
recycling of damaged cells, and more natural light can activate mTOR.
--- END PAGE 1205 ---

--- PAGE 1206 ---
This is one reason plants and humans grow more in the summertime—not
only is there more food, but there’s more natural light, too. But your body
also needs darkness, and winter. The master fuel sensor in the winter and
in darkness, including at night, is AMP-0-activated protein kinase (AMPK),
which optimizes energy efficiency and stimulates the recycling of cellular
materials.
Now, consider what happens if you are constantly exposed to light:
your hormones and metabolism shift toward constant mTOR activation
growth and anabolism, which, in excess, is generally associated with
cancer and shortened lifespan. In contrast, when you experience periods
of darkness (along with, ideally, fasting), you strike a balance between
constant anabolism with no cellular cleanup and smart catabolism with
adequate time for natural cell turnover.
11 Ways to Biohack Light to Optimize Your
Body and Brain
So how can you mitigate the damage done by the wrong kind of light,
maximize the benefits of the right kind of light, and strike a balance
between light and darkness? You’re about to learn my top eleven tips.
--- END PAGE 1206 ---

--- PAGE 1207 ---
1. CHOOSE YOUR LIGHTING CAREFULLY.
If you wandered through my home, you’d notice that the lighting options
vary depending on whether the area gets heavy daytime use, such as the
office and gym, or is an evening space, like our dinnertime dining area,
bedroom, and the Zen Den where I do meditation, sauna, foam rolling, etc.
Once you understand how to choose your lighting carefully and correctly,
you won’t find it too difficult to optimize your sleep and energy using
these same strategies.
For daytime use in waking and working areas, choose flicker-free 60-
watt bulbs, such as Philips Eye Comfort Candelabra light bulbs. Other
good options are BonCharge and Block Blue Light, both companies that
sell a wide variety of low-EMF and red-light devices and have developed
smart bulbs that change color but don’t use Bluetooth or Wi-Fi. They’ve
also reverse-engineered the common LED bulb to minimize flicker by
including a current alternator within the bulb and use this technology in a
daytime bulb, a low-blue-light bulb perfect for early evening, and a blue-
light-blocking bulb for sleeping areas.
For incandescent bulbs that can be used in a room that also has LED
bulbs, one of the best is the Chromalux CLEAR (not frosted) incandescent
bulb that is 100 watts or more (if your electrician verifies that your
fixtures can handle that much wattage). Higher wattage in an
incandescent means less flicker and more full-spectrum light wavelengths.
Halogen bulbs, also made by Chromalux, tend to run hotter (resulting in
increased room heat, in case that’s a concern) but can be run at lower
wattage and have even less flicker. These bulbs also have a higher
spectrum in blue and green than incandescent filament bulbs, and for this
reason, they can be a great early-morning to early-afternoon daytime
option. Many incandescents are coated with white to make them more
aesthetically pleasing. Steer clear of these: the coating changes the
beneficial wavelengths.
--- END PAGE 1207 ---

--- PAGE 1208 ---
At twilight, when the sun starts going down and it begins to get dark
outside, you want to switch to a bulb with a warmer hue and less
brightness. One good approach is to have a few appropriate options
available in light or lamp stands that you can switch to when you turn off
your daytime lights. These bulbs have very little blue light but still provide
adequate visible light at this time of day. For twilight, at least 75 percent of
your lighting should be incandescent and up to 25 percent can be twilight
LEDs. Vintage Edison bulbs—such as those hanging over my dining room
table for dinnertime eating—are a good option because they have a thin
filament that burns hotter and has low flicker with full-spectrum but lower
blue-light output. Brightown, Hudson, Jslinter incandescents, and Ascher
LED 60 watts are all good brands, as are the Boncharge low-blue-light
options.
Finally, after the sun has set, or two to three hours before bedtime, you
should restrict all forms of blue light. If you opt for incandescent light, I
recommend the SaunaSpace Zero EMF Photon Light, which is a 250-watt
incandescent bulb with a red stained-glass filter on it. For LED, choose a
flicker-free orange or red option, such as Sunlite, Lumi, or Boncharge.
Should this all seem too complex, you can opt for a flicker-free LED
Biolight by Boncharge or Block Blue Light, which has three modes that can
easily be changed throughout the day and evening with the flip of a switch.
Even if you use this option, however, it’s important to balance out LEDs
with the wavelengths of light from incandescent or halogen based on the
recommendations above.
2. GET MORNING SUN.
Unless you’re trying to shift your circadian rhythm forward by sending
your body a message that it isn’t morning yet (review chapter 7 for
information on timing your sun exposure, circadian rhythm, and sleep),
you should expose yourself to as much natural sunlight as possible first
--- END PAGE 1208 ---

--- PAGE 1209 ---
thing in the morning. In fact, the more sun you get in the morning, the
more melatonin you make at night—which is why many sleep experts say
that an ideal night of sleep begins when you wake up. A fasted morning
walk in the sunshine is one of the best ways to optimize your overall
health, and the full spectrum of UVA, UVB, near-infrared, and far-infrared
rays from sunlight can also mitigate some of the damage done by artificial
light the rest of the day. You can also use a UVB-generator light, such as
the SolRx 1000-Series full-body light panel.
Research by my friend Chris Masterjohn shows that if you are deficient
in the fat-soluble vitamins A and D, your photoreceptors become less
sensitive and the strategy of getting adequate sunlight becomes less
effective—so be sure to implement everything that enables sunlight to
charge your internal battery, including a diet rich in healthy fats and
minerals, clean, pure water, and frequent skin contact with the earth.
This is yet another reason I am a fan of the Kion Omega supplement.
Not only does it have high amounts of vitamins A and D from purified fish
liver oil, but it also contains a full milligram of astaxanthin, which can
protect photoreceptors from oxidative damage generated by artificial light.
As a matter of fact, I used to use 40 mg of astaxanthin when racing
Ironman Hawaii to protect myself during ten hours of intense UVA and
UVB radiation on the island of Kona. Other compounds similarly
supportive for skin damage from excess sun radiation include collagen or
amino acids, vitamin C, and any supplement that contains polypodium
leucotomos.
If you can’t get out into the morning sunlight, you can use an
ultraviolet desk lamp or light clamp. For example, the zero-flicker
Ultraviolet UVA 395 provides the spectrum of UV light from sunlight that
windows normally filter out. Another pioneering light company, Ott Light
Systems, uses SOL Nutritional Light Technology that provides full-
spectrum light similar to sunlight that includes both visible and invisible
--- END PAGE 1209 ---

--- PAGE 1210 ---
wavelengths ranging from 350 to 1000 nm. These are not bulbs that you
would place in overhead light cans in your home, but rather clip-on lights
and desk lamps, and they are what I have in my office to get the best dose
of sunlight similarity while indoors.
3. USE BLUE-LIGHT BLOCKERS.
More than a decade ago, in an attempt to minimize the slight headache
and eye discomfort I often experienced after working at my computer for
long stretches, I purchased my first pair of blue-light-blocking glasses.
These glasses significantly reduced my exposure to monitor flicker and
even allowed me to wander through malls and grocery stores without
being bothered by the harsh artificial lighting. I slept much better and
began to wear a red lens in the evening, especially when looking at backlit
monitors or traveling to locations with bright overhead lighting, and a
yellow lens at twilight or during daytime hours when I spent more time on
the computer.
Many companies, such as Ambr, Felix Gray, and Swannies, now
produce untinted antiglare glasses that block the higher range of the blue-
light spectrum, and other brands, such as Spektrum and Block Blue Light,
produce slightly tinted glasses that reduce even more of the blue-light
spectrum. I use Ra Optics, which offers a yellow lens for daytime or
twilight and a red lens for nighttime, along with different fashion options
and even children’s models. If you want to block the most harmful
wavelengths of light, make sure the glasses block the spectrum of 400 to
485 nm (the Ra Optics glasses are an example that blocks that specific
spectrum).
4. AVOID ARTIFICIAL LIGHT IN THE MORNING AS
WELL AS AT NIGHT.
--- END PAGE 1210 ---

--- PAGE 1211 ---
You’ll often hear that you should be careful with isolated and concentrated
sources of blue light at night (especially when not balanced with red
wavelengths of light), but this rule applies in the morning, too. Until
you’ve gotten out into the sunlight, you should avoid artificial light as
much as possible in the morning, particularly by limiting harsh,
concentrated sources of blue light such as artificial home and office
lighting and bright screens, and instead open curtains to allow as much
natural light into your home and office as possible.
In addition, you’ll often find me wearing blue-light-blocking glasses for
the first hour or so of the morning, and I avoid turning on the kitchen and
bedroom lights unless absolutely necessary (trust me, making a big cup of
hot coffee in the dark isn’t a good idea). This allows my cortisol-
awakening response and circadian rhythms to awaken gradually rather
than being blasted all at once with bright LED lighting and backlit screens
first thing in the morning. Basically, I treat the first hour of my daytime
light exposure very similarly to how I treat the evening time, and I attempt
to make my home and office area simulate red sunlight as much as
possible. When I do flip on the lights, particularly when it’s dark and gray
outside or when I’ve been traveling and need to shift my circadian rhythm,
I use bright desktop lights like the EVY or Beacon40 or light-producing
glasses like the AYO or Re-Timer. These strategies do produce flicker, so to
avoid excess retinal strain, it’s important to use them only for short
periods (e.g., twenty minutes) in the morning.
5. USE RED LIGHT IN THE EVENING.
For the bedroom, consider red incandescent bulbs (detailed in point #1
above), particularly in the fixtures near the bed. Candles are another
excellent option for both the bedroom and the dinner table, although you
must choose fragrance-free candles because many scented candles are
riddled with paraffin, soy, toxic dyes, and of course artificial fragrances. If
--- END PAGE 1211 ---

--- PAGE 1212 ---
your phone or e-reader has the option, always turn on night shift mode or,
better yet, red-light mode in the evening (on BoundlessBook.com/20 and
in chapter 7, you’ll find a handy hidden trick to easily switch your phone to
red-light mode). The Hooga rechargeable desk lamp is a good bedside
reading lamp that is void of blue light. If you get up at night to pee or (not
that you’d ever do this) dip into that pint of ice cream in the freezer, you
can install motion-detecting red lights in specific areas of the house. The
Sleep Aid Night Light has auto settings that turn it on only at night or
when motion is detected. When I travel, I always grab my cheap red-light
headlamp from Amazon (under 20 bucks) that allows me to get around a
hotel room at night without flipping on the bright overhead lights.
6. INSTALL IRIS SOFTWARE ON ALL MONITORS.
I first became aware of Iris when I interviewed a young Bulgarian
computer programmer named Daniel Georgiev on my podcast. Daniel
invented software that goes far beyond the blue-light-blocking computer
software called f.lux, which many people are already familiar with. Iris
controls the brightness of your monitor with the help of your computer’s
video card, allows you to have adequate brightness without flicker, reduces
the color temperature of your monitor, optimizes screen pulsations to
reduce eyestrain, adjusts the brightness of your screen according to the
light around you, and even automatically adjusts your monitor’s settings
based on the sun’s position wherever you happen to be in the world. It has
settings for pre-sleep, reading, programming, movies, and many others,
and even allows you to receive pop-up reminders for activities such as eye
exercises and stretching. There’s a link to Iris-Tech and my podcast with
Daniel on BoundlessBook.com/20.
7. USE AN ANTIGLARE COMPUTER MONITOR.
--- END PAGE 1212 ---

--- PAGE 1213 ---
Fancy LCD monitors are not flicker-free, even though many people think
they are because they don’t look as harsh as older monitors. These LCD
monitors originally started out by using cold cathode fluorescent lamps as
a backlight source for the monitor, but in recent years manufacturers have
shifted to LEDs. If you have a thin monitor or a laptop, then you probably
have an LCD monitor with LED, and if you are unsure, you can find the
model number on the back of the monitor and Google it. Due to the way
brightness is controlled on LED backlights, it produces the same LED light
flicker you’ve already learned about.
Two good options are the Eizo FlexScan EV and BenQ brands, which
regulate brightness and reduce flicker without drawbacks such as
compromised color stability. They also allow you to adjust the typical
factory preset color temperature setting of 6,500 K down to the more
natural 2,700 K, and they even have a Paper Mode feature, which produces
long reddish wavelengths and reduces the amount of blue light from the
monitor. The Eizo monitors have antiglare screens, which reduce eye
fatigue by dissipating reflective light that otherwise makes the screen
difficult to see.
Next to your computer or TV, you can use a Zero EMF Photon Light,
which helps reduce flicker stress by adding in the missing infrared light
and bathing the entire room in infrared energy similar to that of the sun.
SaunaSpace’s upgraded ThermaLight Bulbs are a good option.
8. USE LIGHT-BLOCKING TAPE OR STICKERS.
Even if you are using blue-light-blocking glasses, a sleep mask, and
blackout curtains to block light from reaching your eyes at night, you still
need to be cognizant of items in your bedroom that have LED lights, such
as televisions, clocks, power strips, and computer chargers. This is because
even if your eyes are covered, your skin has photoreceptors that can detect
all these sources of light.
--- END PAGE 1213 ---

--- PAGE 1214 ---
Even if you have mitigated all light sources in your own bedroom,
walking into any hotel room at night presents you with a veritable
Christmas tree–like lighting experience.
Fortunately, you can easily purchase simple and affordable light-
blocking pieces of tape, such as Lightdims, which act like blackout shades
for LED lights on electronics. They can dim or completely cover unwanted
LED glare or flare in any room. You simply peel off a sticker and apply it to
your electronics, keeping them functional while dimming annoying LEDs
to a comfortable or completely unnoticeable level. If you ever feel like you
are being bombarded with LEDs or external sources of light in any room—
even when you’ve shut off everything you can—these stickers work
perfectly. I’ve also covered my refrigerator lights and any bright panels
from devices in the bedroom with thin sheets of blue-light-blocking wrap,
available in large sheets for under ten bucks on Amazon from companies
like Selen.
9. USE A DRIFTTV FOR YOUR TV.
A driftTV is a small box that you plug into your television. It removes a
percentage of blue light from the content you watch and allows you to
view the screen at night with far less artificial-light exposure. You can set
how much blue you want to take out—for example, you can set it to
remove 50 percent of all blue light over a period of one hour (that way, the
transition is virtually unnoticeable if you’re watching a movie at night).
10. DON’T OVERUSE SUNGLASSES.
Unless I’m trying to avoid snow blindness from a day of snowboarding on
a glaring white slope or I’m at a windy beach getting sand blown in my
face, you’ll rarely find me sporting sunglasses. Why? Our bodies are
designed to cope with sunlight. The retinas in your eyes register how
--- END PAGE 1214 ---

--- PAGE 1215 ---
bright your environment is and then secrete hormones to keep you safe
from the sun.
Specifically, sunlight stimulates your pituitary glands via the optic
nerve to produce a hormone that triggers the melanocytes in your skin to
produce more melanin, which allows you to tan and offers some
protection from excess UV radiation. When you wear sunglasses, less
sunlight reaches the optic nerve, and thus less protective melanin is made
and the higher your risk of a carcinogenic and uncomfortable sunburn.
However, if you don’t happen to have a set of blue-light-blocking
glasses handy, wearing sunglasses at night can be advantageous, especially
while driving: car headlights are notorious sources of concentrated blue
light from LEDs!
11. USE PHOTOBIOMODULATION DAILY.
Photobiomodulation therapy involves using light of all wavelengths,
including visible light, ultraviolet light, and near-, mid-, and far-infrared
wavelengths to combat the effects of artificial light and to elicit some
surprising research-proven health benefits for the entire body. For
example, blue light therapy has been shown to be good at relieving joint
pain, although it can be harsh on the eyes and the circadian rhythm if you
overdo it. Red light has a host of research proving its efficacy for relieving
inflammation, balancing blood sugar, reducing body fat, improving
macular degeneration, assisting with melatonin production, increasing
blood flow to the brain, building stem cells in bone marrow, and
enhancing kidney and thyroid function. Perhaps most surprisingly,
Olympic athletes are now using red light therapy to increase time to
exhaustion.
One of the most commonly used wavelengths of light in
photobiomodulation is near-infrared, which begins at about 750 nm and
goes all the way into 1,200 nm. In the lower range, near-infrared
--- END PAGE 1215 ---

--- PAGE 1216 ---
penetrates beneath the skin, and at the high range it penetrates deep into
the body, resulting in a significant release of nitric oxide and stimulation
of mitochondrial pathways that assist with ATP production. Far-infrared is
another spectrum frequently used in photobiomodulation, especially in
the form of heat lamps or infrared saunas. It is absorbed by the water in
your body, which is why it cannot penetrate as deeply as near-infrared, but
it also has significant healing effects, especially if you are well hydrated on
some form of structured water while using it (read Gerald Pollack’s book
The Fourth Phase of Water for more on this).
As a word of warning, there appears to be a Goldilocks effect when it
comes to photobiomodulation. Most photobiomodulation devices use a
power density between 10 and 20 mW/cm2. That is the equivalent light
dose of 1 joule per 100 seconds, and since approximately 10 joules is
considered to be a therapeutic dose, you really don’t need to use
photobiomodulation for more than twenty-five minutes per day
(depending on the power of the device you use and your distance from the
device). In addition, all light emits a frequency, and it appears that the
ideal frequency for broad-range effects is 10 to 40 Hz, although
frequencies up to 100 Hz can be used to stimulate the vagus nerve or
during meditation. As mentioned in earlier chapters, I use a
photobiomodulation Joovv panel of clinical-grade red and near-infrared
light for twenty minutes per day, along with a head-worn device called a
Vielight for twenty-five minutes every other day, a far-infrared sauna for
twenty to forty-five minutes four or five times per week, and a wraparound
red-light device like the Kineon or Lumaflex for spot treatments of joints.
Your Skin Is an Eye
I’m going to stop for a second and go down a rabbit hole here. You may be
wondering why on earth you should limit the amount of light that your skin
--- END PAGE 1216 ---

--- PAGE 1217 ---
is exposed to. In brief, it’s because your skin is an eye.
In the animal kingdom, light-sensing photoreceptors that go far beyond the
eyes are quite prevalent. Most of these photoreceptors are located in the
brain or the nerves (or, in insects, on the antennae). But a number of
photoreceptors have been found on animals’ skin, particularly in color-
changing cells or skin organs called chromatophores. You likely know these
as the black, brown, or brightly colored spots on fish, crabs, frogs,
octopuses, and squid. Many animals can control these chromatophores,
matching the color and pattern of a background for camouflage or
producing colorful marks to signal aggression or to attract a mate.
It appears that in addition to those vital roles, chromatophores help
maintain normal circadian rhythms, even without precise knowledge of a
light source’s location in space or time (such as the location of the sun
overhead). These circadian rhythms include the timing of daily cycles of
alertness, sleep and wake, mood, appetite, hormone regulation, and body
temperature. In some animals, chromatophores have a quite different task:
magnetoreception, which is the ability to detect the earth’s magnetic field
for the purposes of finding direction, an underlying mechanism for
orientation in birds, bees, and cockroaches.
It turns out that people have nonvisual photoreceptors, too. With the
discovery of light-sensitive retinal cells that convert light to signals that can
stimulate biological processes, it became obvious that humans must use
some sort of nonvisual pathway for certain behaviors and functions. For
example, pupil size and circadian rhythms vary with changing light even in
blind people who have lost all rods and cones due to genetic disorders.
Research on rodents at Johns Hopkins University suggests that these
nonvisual pathways can regulate mood and learning ability.
Just like in animals, photoreceptors in humans go far beyond the eyes: they
are found in our skin, subcutaneous fat, central nervous system, and other
areas in the body. Because our skin is exposed to a wide range of light
wavelengths, one study investigated whether opsins, the light-activated
photoreceptors in the eye, are expressed in the skin to potentially serve as
photosensors. The study showed that four major opsins are indeed
expressed in two major human skin cell types—melanocytes and
keratinocytes—and that these opsins are capable of initiating light-induced
signaling pathways to the rest of the body.
--- END PAGE 1217 ---

--- PAGE 1218 ---
Another study discovered melanopsin, another photoreceptor used in retinal
nonvisual photoreception, inside blood vessels. The researchers found that
this light-sensitive protein can regulate blood vessel contraction and
relaxation and can be damaged by exposure to blue light. Interestingly,
melanopsin tends to be much weaker and more susceptible to this damage
when levels of vitamins A and D are low.
Another finding backs up the fact that it is not only the light that falls on our
eyes that determines our circadian rhythms. In this study, shining a bright
light on the skin—in this case, behind the knee—was shown to have the same
effect as shining light on the retina when it comes to regulating our twenty-
four-hour circadian clock (although this was a non-blinded study, so there
may have been a strong placebo effect of the light on the knee). Scientists
suggest that one reason people have circadian rhythm photoreceptors on
the skin is that when light falls on blood vessels near the skin, it increases
the concentration of nitric oxide in the blood, which can shift the circadian
clock. This should be especially important to you when you learn that blue
light can penetrate skin as deep as blood vessels, which means that artificial
light on your skin can directly affect your circadian rhythm.
Then there’s a photoreceptor protein called neuropsin, which is primarily
found in the retina but is also located in the skin and helps run the body’s
master clock. Neuropsin responds to UVA and violet light, while melanopsin
seems more sensitive to blue and red light. This may partially explain why
going out into the sun during the day (which activates neuropsin) may work
so well for regulating your circadian rhythm.
Finally, these photoreceptors can interact with hormone production and fat
burning. In one study, researchers put some fat cells under lamps that
simulated the sun for four hours and kept other samples in the dark. After
two weeks, the cells under the lamps had fewer lipid droplets (the
organelles that store fat) than the cells that didn’t get any light. This means
that exposure to adequate sunlight (on both the skin and the eyes) could
cause your cells to store less fat—and based on a number of compelling
studies, artificial light (especially blue light) may have the opposite effect!
If you want to take a deep dive into how profoundly light can interact with
the skin, check out the work of my former podcast guest Dr. Jack Kruse,
who talks about how light exposure affects carbohydrate sensitivity, thyroid
--- END PAGE 1218 ---

--- PAGE 1219 ---
activity, hormone production, and much more. You’ll find a few helpful links
to sections of Jack’s website on BoundlessBook.com/20.
AIR
Every day, you inhale an average of fifteen thousand liters of air, and any
toxins present in that air pass through your lungs and are circulated to
your heart, liver, kidneys, brain, and other organs. According to the World
Health Organization, long-term exposure to air pollution leads to a
marked reduction in life expectancy, primarily due to an increased risk of
death from cardiopulmonary and lung cancer, and according to recent
research from MIT, air pollution causes about two hundred thousand early
deaths a year in the US alone. Exposure to air pollution can cause preterm
births and is associated with asthma, autism, lower IQ, and worse
performance on standardized tests in children. In 2018, CNN reported on
a major study showing that the same air pollution that results in cognitive
decline now affects 95 percent of humans worldwide! The recent
systematic review Air Pollution and Cognitive Impairment across the Life
Course in Humans showcases evidence from epidemiological studies that
point toward associations between exposure to pollutants and cognitive
health effects across the entire life course: associations that have been
validated by cognitive testing, neuroimaging studies, and research on
neuroinflammatory markers. In contrast, the popular CogFX Study
demonstrated that human cognitive performance doubles in buildings
with improved indoor air quality and showed that employees in green-
certified buildings had 26 percent higher cognitive function test scores
and 30 percent fewer sick-building symptoms than those in buildings that
were not green-certified.
--- END PAGE 1219 ---

--- PAGE 1220 ---
Indoor air pollution is caused by particles like pollen, dust, pet dander,
mold spores, and smoke combined with ozone, gases, and volatile organic
compounds emitted by building materials, furniture, carpeting, paint,
household cleaners, and personal care products. The most common
sources of outdoor air pollution are motor vehicles and solid fuel–burning
industry and factories, but other sources include smoke from bushfires,
herbicides, pesticides, windblown dust, and even pollen and mold spores
released by vegetation.
One of the key ways air pollution causes damage is by causing
inflammation, along with sabotaging cellular methylation processes
(which impact just about every aspect of physiology) and impairing
immune system T-cell function. Air pollution has been shown to cause
inflammation that hardens the arteries, and free radicals from gasoline,
diesel, and jet fuel incite a host of oxidative stress on the body. New
studies suggest that exposure to high pollution levels can increase the risk
of autism and dementia, accelerate the rate of calcium deposits in the
arteries, increase the risk of heart attack and stroke, and affect pancreatic
function. (Research has found that air pollution caused 150,000 cases of
diabetes in America in 2016 alone!)
Frustratingly, air pollution is hard to avoid unless you can somehow
manage to live upwind from the industrial section of the city or settle in
the countryside. Even then, factories pop up in new areas, new highways
get added to accommodate increasing traffic, and airplanes and crop
dusters fly overhead—not to mention your neighbor’s daily lawn-spraying
ritual, muffler-free vintage truck, or loud gas-powered lawn mower.
But in your home or other areas where you can control your
environment, such as your office, there are indeed strategies you can
implement to enhance air quality and combat the threat posed by various
places you visit throughout the day.
--- END PAGE 1220 ---

--- PAGE 1221 ---
Exercise and Air Pollution
Studies have shown that there are concerningly high levels of carcinogens
in the air of the average fitness center, as well as significant amounts of
harmful bacteria on the surfaces of fitness equipment such as treadmills
and weight-training machines.
I’ll address the problem of air pollution in gyms in a moment, but I
want to tackle the elephant in the room first: compared to skipping
exercise altogether, it’s still better to exercise even if you’re exercising in a
polluted environment. But at the same time, the CDC, the EPA, and plenty
of medical journals have found that exposure to air pollutants in urban
areas is linked to higher rates of asthma and abnormal heart rhythms and
increases your risk of death from cardiovascular disease, respiratory
diseases, and all causes, and recent data shows that the indoor air quality
in some fitness centers may be just as harmful to health as the air
pollutants in urban areas. What this means is that if you have the choice
between, say, exercising in your backyard or a nearby park or forest and
exercising in the gym, you’d be far better off with the former.
WHAT YOU’RE BREATHING AT THE GYM
The idea that the air quality in some gyms is as bad as outdoor air
pollution in cities may seem surprising, but it’s backed up by the data. For
example, one study in the journal Building and Environment found
unacceptably high levels of carbon dioxide, formaldehyde, and other
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) as well as particle pollution in
multiple indoor fitness centers.
Let’s look first at carbon dioxide (CO ). Since expiration (the primary
2mechanism by which we lose fat) releases CO , its levels significantly rise
2when there are lots of people huffing and puffing in a room, especially if
that room is poorly ventilated. So the more folks you cram into an indoor
--- END PAGE 1221 ---

--- PAGE 1222 ---
space who are running on treadmills, rowing, riding bikes, lifting weights,
and jumping around, the worse the air quality in that space. This is why
I’m a bigger fan of home gyms than commercial gyms, and I’m also a fan of
getting in and out of a gym quickly by utilizing a strategy such as high-
intensity interval training.
Another study showed the highest levels of CO within a fitness center
2 were in an interior room used for indoor cycling spin classes. I’m not
saying that these CO levels are toxic and going to kill you, but they’re not
2 completely harmless, either. This is all the more concerning when you
consider that most building owners (gyms often lease from building
owners) save money by recycling used air instead of heating or cooling
fresh air from outside.
And then there’s mold. On the website SurvivingMold.com, you can
learn plenty more about hidden sources of environmental mold that
deleteriously affect the health of more than a hundred million people
worldwide. Indoor mold can be even more damaging than well-known
pollutants such as asbestos and lead, and, unfortunately, mold is common
in gyms, locker rooms, swimming pool areas, and saunas because these
areas are full of bacteria and moist air. Inhaling mold toxins can be just as
harmful as eating mold on a piece of old food.
I’ve worked at plenty of gyms and health clubs and know for a fact that
the cleaning procedures at many, many facilities are less than stellar, and
that mold is often ignored or left to hang out for long periods of time. (A
good test for the cleanliness of your gym is to leave a small piece of
chewed gum in a corner, ledge, crack, or space and see how many days it
takes to disappear. You’d be shocked at how long it can take!) So if your
gym or the locker room area in your health club is somewhat humid,
smells like sweaty socks, or has frequent puddles or pools of water
throughout the day, it likely has mold and fungus issues.
--- END PAGE 1222 ---

--- PAGE 1223 ---
Next, there’s the problem of particulate matter in indoor spaces such
as gyms. Particulate matter is a mixture of solid and liquid droplets such
as nitrates, sulfates, organic chemicals, metals, and soil or dust. It can
come from rubber mats, metal plates, and dumbbells banging together,
and even has pieces of dead skin from other people working out (ew!).
The problem is that these particles are small enough to pass through your
nasal cavities and enter your lungs, especially when you’re breathing hard
in an indoor environment.
Unfortunately, over a quarter of the gyms in the study in Building and
Environment exceed the indoor limit for these kinds of particles. It is true
that HEPA air filters and a good cleaning protocol can help out quite a bit
in this situation—unless the cleaners are made of toxic chemicals, which
can then enter the air and get recirculated. Even school gymnasiums have
been found to contain significant levels of particulate matter, such as dust,
soil, and bacteria, all of which can trigger immune, asthmatic, and allergic
responses in susceptible children.
Next is the issue of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Exposure to
high levels of VOCs can cause skin irritation, neurotoxicity, and
hepatotoxicity (toxicity of the liver). The scary fact is that over 80 percent
of the gyms that have been studied exceed the acceptable level of unsafe
VOCs, which include compounds such as formaldehyde, fire retardants,
acetone, and other substances that off-gas from carpeting, furniture,
cleaners, and paint. Levels of VOCs tend to be higher in gyms with newer
equipment and in spaces that have been recently cleaned (because of the
cleaning chemicals used).
Finally, there are all those synthetic fragrances, colognes, and
deodorants that your fellow gym-goers have plastered all over their bodies
and that are filling the air around you. I address these types of hormonal
and endocrine disruptors in a podcast episode all about estrogen
dominance, which is linked to on BoundlessBook.com/20, but the bottom
--- END PAGE 1223 ---

--- PAGE 1224 ---
line is that these are a serious issue that, frustratingly, can be out of your
control unless you have the courage to ask the woman running on the
treadmill next to you to slather on a bit less perfume next time.
WHY YOU SHOULD EXERCISE OUTDOORS
Now, let’s compare all this to outdoor exercise. In one podcast episode
(linked to on BoundlessBook.com/20), my guest Evan Brand and I
discussed research showing that something as simple as spending time
among trees, walking in forests, exercising on nature trails, or hiking
outdoors exposes you to tiny particles and phytochemicals that plants
release, and these particles and phytochemicals help decrease cortisol,
depression, and anger.
In addition, stepping outside the constant comfort of air-conditioning
and heaters and instead getting frequent exposure to temperature
fluctuations and weather—cold air, snow, rain, sun, heat, and other
environmental variables—can increase stress resilience, burn more
calories, increase cardiovascular performance, and get you more fit
quickly.
An article in the Journal of Physiological Anthropology titled “Natural
Environments, Ancestral Diets, and Microbial Ecology: Is There a Modern
‘Paleo-Deficit Disorder’?” highlighted research from as early as the 1960s
showing that early-life experience with microbiota and other bacteria
found in outdoor situations, along with environmental stress, can
positively influence longevity and health. The authors recognized the
coevolutionary relationship between microbiota and the human host and
pointed out that there is worse health, more anxiety and depression, and
higher incidence of immune-related diseases in developed nations that
have become too sanitized—where people aren’t outside around dirt,
trees, animals, and other natural areas of microbial ecology (which, by the
--- END PAGE 1224 ---

--- PAGE 1225 ---
way, is far different than man-made bacteria and synthetic toxins and
chemicals in gyms).
In a Japanese study of shinrin-yoku (defined as “taking in the forest
atmosphere” or “forest bathing”), researchers found that elements of the
environment, such as the smell of wood, the sound of running streams,
and the scenery of the forest, can promote relaxation and reduce stress,
and those taking part in the study experienced lower levels of cortisol,
slower heart rates, and lower blood pressure.
This should all really come as no surprise. Scientists have long known
that sunlight can lower depression, especially depression from seasonal
affective disorder (SAD). One study from the University of Essex found
that something as simple as a walk in the countryside reduced depression
in 71 percent of participants. These same researchers found that nature
therapy, also known as ecotherapy, and spending as little as five minutes in
a natural setting, whether walking in a park or gardening in the backyard,
improved mood, self-esteem, and motivation.
Healthcare professionals are also finding that being in a natural
environment has numerous benefits for kids and can combat obesity,
anxiety, depression, and other health issues. Nurse Stacy Bosch of the
Clark County School District in Nevada runs a nature therapy program for
children, and she reports that more often than not, students who are
overweight or have type 2 diabetes spend shockingly little time outside. To
get the kids and their parents away from the TV or computer and increase
their physical activity, which can help control weight and blood sugar,
Bosch writes a prescription for the entire family to go into natural areas
and simply take a walk. In my book Boundless Parenting, many of the
parents interviewed place a strong emphasis on hikes, nature immersion,
and outdoor adventures with their children, and several, including myself,
work with local wilderness survival and outdoor education programs for
extracurricular activity outside school hours and during the summer.
--- END PAGE 1225 ---

--- PAGE 1226 ---
HOW TO GET STARTED GETTING OUTSIDE
Now that you know that constantly being indoors in a gym may not be the
best thing for your health and that being outdoors in nature provides you
with a myriad of benefits, what are some ways you can start exercising
outdoors? The following are five quick-and-dirty tips.
1. Commute with your body.
It always surprises me when folks drive just a few miles (or less!) to the
gym so they can move when it would have been just as easy to bike or walk
to the gym. Say you have a concurrent strength-endurance workout that
involves running and lifting. Why not run to the gym, do your lifting, and
run back? Too far? Allow me to introduce you to a novel machine called a
bicycle, available for rent or purchase anywhere in the world. It’s pretty
rare these days that I use my truck at home for anything except hauling
alfalfa for the goats or transporting a paddleboard, and it’s also rare that I
even rent a car or use public transport when I travel. You’d be surprised at
how many places you can get by walking or cycling. Often, if I’m at a hotel
or Airbnb, I’ll use Google Maps to hunt down a grocery store within three
miles, walk to the store, and then “farmer’s walk” my groceries back to my
lodging. Of course, you can always step up this style of commuting a notch
with a weighted vest, rucksack, or backpack.
2. Find a park.
Anytime I’m traveling, I use the “find nearby” option on Google Maps to
find the nearest park where I can do dips and push-ups on park benches,
pull-ups from bars or tree branches, mini workouts at the children’s play
area (if it doesn’t creep out the parents too much), a jog or run on the park
trails, yoga in a quiet grassy area, or skips, hops, bounds, and sprints on a
wide-open section of grass. One of my standby workouts? Run the
--- END PAGE 1226 ---

--- PAGE 1227 ---
circumference of the park, choose three exercises (such as push-ups,
burpees, and lunge jumps), do a high-rep set of all three, then run again.
3. Use nature as a gym.
In my article “Strongman Workouts for Fat Loss, Muscle Gain, and
Performance” (there’s a link on BoundlessBook.com/20), I give you plenty
of backyard and outdoor gym ideas, including these:•

Make a sandbag: I made my sandbag in about thirty minutes by
purchasing a couple of military duffel bags online, putting pea gravel
into plastic contractor bags, and putting the gravel-filled plastic bags
inside the duffel bags. You’ll find other good sandbag instructions on
BoundlessBook.com/20.•

Get a tire: I pulled into my local tire store and asked them if they had
any old heavy tires they didn’t need anymore. They gave me four of
them for free and even offered to help toss them into the back of the
pickup truck for me! Afterward, I realized that a true strongman
competitor probably would have put the tires into the truck himself.•

Hunt down a tree: Whenever I go on a hike, I make it a goal to find at
least one log and carry it for a little while, either overhead, clutched in
my arms, or on my shoulders. The past couple of times, I’ve taken the
heavy logs home so that I have them in my backyard for easy access.•

Find a rock: My nearby river has some nice big rocks that I
transported to my yard in my pickup. These decently large river rocks
are smooth and don’t give you as many scrapes and cuts as some of the
rougher varieties.•

Push a vehicle: Have a manual car or truck, and a driveway or access to
a big empty parking lot? Simply put your vehicle into neutral and get
ready for the workout of your life.
--- END PAGE 1227 ---

--- PAGE 1228 ---
Want even more? Check out Zach Even-Esh’s book The Encyclopedia of
Underground Strength and Conditioning and consider approaching outdoor
exercise sessions as if you’re trying to mimic a nineteenth-century farmer
who’s pushing, pulling, lifting, hoisting, bending, twisting, and moving all
day long. While you may not have a farm or want to build a giant wooden
barn or till a field, you can still inject a little extra fitness in your daily
routine with activities such as these:
• Go to your local hardware store, buy a rope, attach it to a tire or cinder
block, and practice dragging it in your driveway or backyard.
• Plant a small patio garden and go outside (moving!) to water, pick,
plant, and care for your plants.
• Go to a park that has a safe and sturdy wooden fence and climb over
and under it, or even balance on top of it.
• Find a heavy river rock and carry it up or down a hill, or (more
practically) build a wall or firepit in your backyard with large rocks.
You get the idea.
4. Hike.
Hiking solo is one of my favorite ways to recharge and reboot my body, but
hiking is also a great activity to do with friends or family because it allows
you to socialize, forage for plants, and get nature therapy while you’re
exercising. With a little research on your local area, you can often find
short hikes that offer good scenery that aren’t too difficult and don’t
require special equipment.
Contrary to popular belief, hiking doesn’t need to be a passive, easy
walk. More-difficult hikes with weighted vests and backpacks, boulder
scaling, and even stops to carry heavy rocks or logs can provide you with
an extreme fitness challenge that’s just as tough as any hard class you
--- END PAGE 1228 ---

--- PAGE 1229 ---
might take at a gym. My go-to app for hunting down good hikes just about
anywhere is AllTrails.
5. Find water.
From swimming to kayaking and canoeing to paddleboarding, getting out
on rivers, lakes, or the ocean gives you the benefits of cold thermogenesis,
a non-weight-bearing form of exercise, and exposure to even more
elements of nature—without all the chlorine and mold issues of indoor
pools. Beach workouts that involve sprints, burpees, push-ups, mountain
climbers, lunges, and squats can easily be combined with forays into the
water for freestyle and underwater swimming. A good underwater MP3
player like Finis, H2O Audio, or Zygo can spice things up a bit (these
players conduct sound through your jawbones!).
WHAT ABOUT OUTDOOR AIR POLLUTION?
Of course, no consideration of exercise and air pollution would be
complete without addressing air pollution outdoors, which in some major
metropolitan areas can be just as concerning as indoor air pollution. In
2013, the American Lung Association published a report on the latest
measurements of soot particles and ozone in the air for almost one
thousand countries and cities in the United States. The results come as no
surprise, especially for major cities like Los Angeles. In fact, LA is one of
the most polluted cities in the US, and not too far behind are the highly
urbanized cities of Houston, Washington, New York, Cincinnati, and
Philadelphia. On the other hand, cities in North and South Dakota, as well
as Palm Beach, Florida, are considered the cleanest.
Whether you live in a polluted city or not, you’ve surely had to make
do with working out along busy, polluted roads at some point in your life.
Whether you’re a serious athlete or a recreational cyclist or runner, it’s
prudent to educate yourself on whether working out in polluted areas
--- END PAGE 1229 ---

--- PAGE 1230 ---
causes damage to your lungs and your brain. My most vivid memory of air
pollution is from a couple of speaking tours I did in India, where in some
places the air hazard index resulted in the lung damage equivalent of
smoking twenty cigarettes a day—just by being outdoors for a couple
hours walking! While in India, I hammered through antioxidant
supplements like vitamin C, vitamin E, and glutathione, along with a
portable nebulizer for a hydrogen peroxide and saline solution—and when
I returned, I nebulized glutathione and exosomes daily for a week to speed
up lung healing.
According to an Australian review of pollution studies worldwide,
during exercise, even a minimal concentration of air pollutants can
damage the lungs. This damage is as severe during minimal exposure
during exercise as it is during exposure to high concentrations of soot and
air pollutants when not working out! The researchers concluded that
individuals who work out outdoors, especially in highly polluted areas,
should be worried about their health.
Harmful particles in the air can get past the nasal hairs, the body’s first
line of defense, and end up in the lungs, where they cause inflammation
and irritation. Sometimes they end up in the bloodstream as well, and
when this occurs, the risk for heart attack and stroke increases. Because
working out means taking deeper breaths, more of these particle
pollutants get past your nasal filtering.
Yet another study, this one from the New England Journal of Medicine,
concluded that women who live in areas with high amounts of soot in the
air are more likely to die from a heart attack than women who live in
cleaner air. The researchers concluded that soot particles are especially
harmful to athletes who take in higher concentrations during exercise.
In a similar study at the University of Edinburgh, healthy subjects were
made to exercise for thirty minutes on stationary bikes inside a laboratory
that piped in diesel exhaust fumes at levels similar to that of a busy
--- END PAGE 1230 ---

--- PAGE 1231 ---
highway during rush hour. Researchers found that their blood vessels were
less able to distribute blood and oxygen to the muscles, and their levels of
tissue plasminogen activators, which are naturally occurring proteins that
dissolve clots in the blood, significantly decreased. Because of these
findings, the researchers concluded that working out along polluted roads
may possibly set in motion the preliminary stages of a heart attack or
stroke.
But new research offers a glimmer of hope to athletes and exercise
enthusiasts who have no choice but to exercise in polluted urban areas. In
a study in the journal Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, an
extended timeline was utilized to study the effects of air pollution during
exercise. It’s crucial to note that this study was quite unlike previous ones
that took measurements immediately after exercise—this one looked at
the effects over time. Two groups of mice were subjected to regular doses
of diesel exhaust fumes for five weeks. The first group did not exercise,
while the second did. In the mice that did not exercise, there was an
alarming spike in lung inflammation and free radicals at the end of the five
weeks. Astonishingly, the mice that were made to exercise while exposed
to diesel exhaust fumes seemed to undergo changes that allowed their
bodies to combat the harmful effects of the pollution.
These findings led researchers to conclude that long-term aerobic
exercise may protect against the effects of pollution, potentially because of
the body’s ability to naturally produce antioxidants. Granted, the study
was conducted on mice. So what about the effects of pollution during
exercise on humans?
It’s no secret that the more polluted the air is in a particular area, the
more hospital admissions there are for cardiovascular and respiratory
issues. But on the other hand, the health benefits of exercise seem to more
than balance the harmful effects of air pollution. A 2010 study in the
Netherlands utilized epidemiological data and estimated that short daily
--- END PAGE 1231 ---

--- PAGE 1232 ---
trips using a bicycle in polluted cities would take away between 0.8 and 40
days from a person’s average lifespan. But the researchers also found that
the additional exercise would lengthen an individual’s lifespan by three to
fourteen months. It appears, therefore, that exercising outdoors is indeed
better than not working out at all, even in an urbanized and polluted area.
Another study was conducted at the University of British Columbia’s
Environmental Physiology Lab. The research utilized two groups of
individuals for seven straight weeks. The first group cycled at various
intensities while exposed to diesel engine exhaust. The second group,
meanwhile, performed a similar activity in an environment with filtered
air. The subjects who cycled in polluted air appear to have adapted and
showed signs of combating the harmful effects of pollution the way that
the mice in the earlier study did.
Of course, additional studies have to be conducted to truly establish as
fact the anti-inflammatory effects of exercise against pollution. But even
the limited studies available right now may help allay your concerns—they
all suggest that going outdoors to exercise is better than not exercising at
all even in a polluted area.
While your body may have a built-in mechanism to protect itself from
the harmful effects of air pollution, it’s still prudent to take additional
steps to lessen the damage. So consider the tips below if you exercise
outdoors near polluted roads or indoors in polluted gyms—or you’re
encountering any other form of air pollution or smoke exposure.
1. Know when to exercise.
As you probably already know, air quality is most compromised when
temperatures are highest. Sunlight and heat essentially charge up the air
along with all the chemical compounds that are present in the
atmosphere. This concoction then combines with the nitrogen oxide in
the air to create smog, which is a harmful combination of smoke, soot, and
--- END PAGE 1232 ---

--- PAGE 1233 ---
chemical fumes. So it’s a good idea to schedule your workouts for the
cooler mornings or early evenings.
2. Avoid working out along roads.
Steer clear of roads, particularly busy streets, as these areas tend to have a
higher concentration of airborne pollutants. Simply choosing to run, walk,
or cycle a few meters from the road can do wonders. Of course, altogether
avoiding busy roads is by far the best choice if you truly want to minimize
your exposure to airborne pollutants.
3. Educate yourself about your community’s air pollution
levels.
Before a major run or bike session, check AirNow.gov, where you will find
the latest EPA air-quality forecasts for all the major cities in the US. That
way, you can schedule your workouts for the least-polluted hours of the
day.
4. Don a mask.
Wearing a good filtration mask like an N95 is a smart move as well.
Athletes who wear filtration masks during their workouts in polluted
urban areas tend to have fewer incidences of pollution nausea than those
who don’t wear masks. Sure, you may look like a bird flu hypochondriac,
but if you’re going to be running alongside traffic, it’s a small price to pay
to avoid the adverse effects of air pollution.
5. Take antioxidants regularly.
Though your body produces its own antioxidants, they may not be enough
to combat the daily stress that pollutants subject you to. To help your
body fight harmful free radicals, boost your intake of antioxidant-rich
fruits like cherries, pomegranates, and blueberries, as well as dark green
vegetables like kale, bok choy, Swiss chard, and purple cabbage; bitter
--- END PAGE 1233 ---

--- PAGE 1234 ---
herbs and spices such as rosemary, turmeric, and curry powder; and foods
high in sulfur, such as garlic, onions, broccoli, and cauliflower. You can
also eat foods rich in omega-3, like fish, flax seeds, and chia seeds, along
with taking fish oil, and consume supplements like vitamin C, vitamin E,
and glutathione. Finally, in a randomized controlled trial,
supplementation with curcumin reduced inflammation and improved lung
function in participants with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, suggesting that turmeric or curcumin may be a valuable addition
to this air pollution stack.
6. Hydrate.
When you’re exposed to pollution, secondhand cigarette smoke, nearby
wildfires, or any other lung assailant, heavier hydration can help protect
against poor air quality. Drinking water keeps your lungs healthy by
thinning the mucosal lining, which improves breathing. In contrast,
dehydration can increase the risk of chronic and acute airborne
respiratory diseases. Research has shown that hydrogen-enriched water,
produced in portable hydrogen bottles or hydrogen tablets, can help
eliminate fine particles from the lungs and blood by enhancing phagocytic
“cleanup cell” activity.
So that’s it. Don’t stop exercising—even in gyms and polluted areas.
Just do as much as you can to mitigate the damage, and if you have the
option to exercise outdoors in fresh, clean air, do that instead.
Protecting Yourself from Air Pollution and
Toxins
So aside from exercising outdoors whenever possible and taking the steps
above to protect yourself during exercise, what can you do to minimize the
effects of air pollution? Here are my top eight suggestions.
--- END PAGE 1234 ---

--- PAGE 1235 ---
1. BREATHE THROUGH YOUR NOSE WHENEVER
POSSIBLE.
The air we breathe is first processed through the nose, which is lined with
tiny hairs called cilia that filter, humidify, and warm or cool the air before
it enters the lungs. It is estimated that these cilia protect us from over
twenty billion particles of foreign matter every day.
And there are many other benefits to nasal breathing. For example,
breathing in and out through the nose helps you take fuller, deeper
breaths, which stimulates the lower lungs to distribute greater amounts of
oxygen throughout the body. The lower lungs are rich with the
parasympathetic nerve receptors associated with calming the body and
mind, whereas the upper lungs, which are used in chest and mouth
breathing, are associated with hyperventilation and trigger sympathetic
nerve receptors, which are involved in fight-or-flight reactions.
Here’s another benefit: the lungs actually extract oxygen from the air
during both exhalation and inhalation, and because the nostrils are
smaller than the mouth, air exhaled through the nose creates a backflow of
oxygenated air into the lungs. Plus, because we tend to exhale more slowly
through the nose than we do through the mouth, the lungs have more time
to extract oxygen from the air we’ve already taken in.
Proper nose breathing also reduces hypertension and stress and keeps
you from overexerting yourself during a workout. Finally, your sinuses
produce nitric oxide, which, when carried into the body through the
breath, can open blood vessels and combat harmful bacteria and viruses.
During the COVID pandemic, both Anders Olsson and Patrick McKeown
wrote about the potential benefits of nasal breathing against viral
infections, highlighting how many people never consider the nose’s
unexpected role in triggering a cascade of hormones and chemicals that
lower blood pressure and ease digestion. Immune function, weight,
circulation, mood, and sexual function can all be heavily influenced by the
--- END PAGE 1235 ---

--- PAGE 1236 ---
amount of nitric oxide in the body. In fact, the popular erectile
dysfunction drug sildenafil (aka Viagra) works by releasing nitric oxide
into the bloodstream, which opens the capillaries in the genitals and
elsewhere, and nasal breathing does the same thing. Studies looking at the
relationship between nitric oxide and SARS (a form of coronavirus)
showed that nitric oxide has a potent effect helping to neutralize the virus
and inhibiting replication. Who knew nasal breathing could be so
powerful?
2. BRING THE OUTDOORS INSIDE.
As with light, the simplest place to start cleaning the air is to get as much
help from nature as possible. Opening windows and doors to circulate air
regularly is key (install screens if necessary). Of course, if you’re living in a
relatively polluted area, this means that you need to pay close attention to
the next two strategies.
3. GET PLANTS.
To ensure that the air circulating in your home is pure, clean, and filtered,
have air-cleaning plants in as many rooms as possible. NASA did a clean
air study and found that plants such as peace lilies, Boston ferns, English
ivy, areca palms, and other easy-to-grow indoor plants can absorb toxic
chemicals through their leaves, roots, and even the soil they rest in,
removing many of the compounds that may be lurking in our
environment, including benzene, formaldehyde, and trichloroethylene. Of
course, added benefits of plants are that they help us de-stress and emit
beneficial aromatic polyphenols, similar to an essential oil diffuser (more
on that later). The companies Neoplants and Origen Air have even created
bioengineered “enhanced plants”—now available commercially—that
purify and clean the air while metabolizing airborne toxins such as volatile
--- END PAGE 1236 ---

--- PAGE 1237 ---
organic compounds (VOCs) like formaldehyde, benzene, toluene, and
xylene.
4. INSTALL A HEPA AIR FILTER IN YOUR HOME.
A good HEPA (high-efficiency particulate arrestance) filter removes not
just particles but also volatile organic chemicals and gases. For stand-
alone units, I recommend Jaspr or AirDoctor HEPA filters placed
throughout your home and office. These units can monitor indoor air
quality, generate negative ions, and capture 99.99 percent of ultrafine
particles, along with VOCs like formaldehyde.
If you want to spend more money, you can upgrade to another stand-
alone unit, a Molekule, which contains nanotechnology that destroys
pollutants at the molecular level. Many harmful pollutants such as viruses
and some smaller VOCs are smaller than 0.3 microns, and even AirDoctor
HEPA filters can’t remove all of them. Molekule’s technology, called
photo-electrochemical oxidation (PECO), works at the molecular level to
eliminate all indoor air pollution and is able to destroy pollutants one
thousand times smaller than HEPA filters.
Finally, if you don’t want stand-alone air filters spread all over your
house, you can do as I did and install a HEPA filter with an ozonator and
negative ion generator in the central air duct of your home. Look for one
that traps particles smaller than 2.5 microns and is approved by the
California Air Resources Board, which is one of the strictest regulatory
bodies for air quality. Two of my favorites are JASPR and AirDoctor. For
my whole-house filtration, I use a brand called AllerAir, and in my gym I
have a Lifebreath unit, which uses energy-efficient technology to
recirculate, filter, and replace indoor air with fresh outdoor air. For the
crème de la crème of whole-home or office filtration technologies, look
into the MinotAir, which combines heat pump technology, heat recovery,
ventilation, dehumidification, and HEPA all in one.
--- END PAGE 1237 ---

--- PAGE 1238 ---
5. USE ESSENTIAL OIL DIFFUSERS.
Saturate the air throughout your house with strategically placed essential
oil diffusers, which can release a variety of different scents and help purify
the air due to the antifungal, antiviral, and antibacterial properties of
many essential oils, most notably lemon, thieves, oregano, peppermint,
rosemary, and lavender.
6. USE NATURAL HOUSEHOLD CLEANERS.
From toilet bowl cleaners to laundry detergent, synthetic, chemical-based
cleaners are an enormous source of health issues and environmental
pollution. For example:
• Tide laundry detergent has high levels of 1,4-Dioxane, a carcinogenic
contaminant. (In people who are sensitive to molds and mycotoxins,
Tide is a major trigger for chemical sensitivity reactions.)
• Most fabric softeners contain synthetic fragrances that can cause
respiratory irritation, headaches, and autoimmune reactions.
• All-purpose cleaners contain the sudsing agents diethanolamine (DEA)
and triethanolamine (TEA). When these substances come into contact
with nitrites in the environment or your body and mouth, they react to
form nitrosamines carcinogens.
In contrast, if you peek into the cleaning cabinet of the Greenfield
home, you’ll see three basic ingredients: lemons, baking soda, and white
vinegar. These three ingredients form the basis of our household cleaning
solutions, from disinfectants to window cleaners. Sure, occasionally we’ll
throw in essential oils such as tea tree, oregano, thieves (a blend of cloves,
lemon, cinnamon, eucalyptus, and rosemary—I talked about it at length in
chapter 15), or lemon, but even then, you’ll find no strange chemicals.
--- END PAGE 1238 ---

--- PAGE 1239 ---
Fact is, there are many inexpensive, easy-to-use natural alternatives
that can safely be used in place of commercial household products. You’ll
find a list of the best natural household cleaning ingredients and recipes
for cleaning solutions on here to here, along with plenty of additional
helpful recipes on BoundlessBook.com/20.
7. CHOOSE THE RIGHT FURNISHINGS.
Your new carpet or cabinet could be slowly poisoning you with chemicals
such as benzene, ethylene glycol, or formaldehyde via a process called off-
gassing. In one test of furniture for a baby’s nursery, a rocker put off seven
times more formaldehyde than the state of California considers safe, the
paint for the nursery contained five times the amount of chemical gases as
the recommended limit, and more than one hundred chemicals wafted
from the crib mattress, including alcohols and industrial solvents.
The good news is that many furniture items emit low or no levels of
hazardous chemicals, especially those with a Greenguard certification.
Stem Furniture is one company that produces furniture with absolutely
zero VOCs. When it comes to engineered wood, such as flooring or
cabinets, look for an indoor air quality low-emission certification, such as
one from Greenguard or SCS Global Services. In addition, look for non-
VOC paint, and as an alternative to vinyl flooring, consider natural
linoleum.
8. BE COGNIZANT OF MOLD AND MYCOTOXINS.
Mycotoxins, as you may recall from chapter 4, are toxic compounds
produced by various species of mold. Among a variety of other health
issues, they can cause mitochondrial dysfunction, asthma and other
breathing issues, cancer, cardiovascular disease, altered kidney and liver
function, disrupted sleep, stunted muscle recovery, miscarriage, and a bad
case of fuzzy brain. There are a host of mycotoxins and molds in foods
--- END PAGE 1239 ---

--- PAGE 1240 ---
that are commonly perceived to be healthy, and the website
SurvivingMold.com is a good tool for discovering whether a food you
frequently eat may be tainted with dead organic matter that is
deleteriously affecting your health and performance.
In a nutshell, unless you completely trust the source or the amount of
time it’s been around, I’d seriously reconsider the blue cheese at the salad
bar and other potentially moldy foods, including sour cream, buttermilk,
and sour milk; cured, pickled, and smoked meats and fish; prepackaged
meats, like lunch meats, salami, smoked fish, and some sardines;
commercial, store-bought pickles, olives, capers, salad dressing, or
ketchup; vinegar and soy sauce; and the average hotel room coffee. I’m not
saying you have to live your life completely abstaining from these foods,
but you should go out of your way to avoid them if you don’t know how
they were packaged or how long they have been open to the environment.
But mycotoxins aren’t just found in food. By getting a test such as an
ERMI (environmental relative moldiness index) from a licensed
contractor (I don’t recommend this as a DIY project), you may find that
your house has toxic mold that produces bacteria that can often be more
deadly than what you find in food. When an area of moisture forms in your
house, within twenty-four to forty-eight hours mold can form, chomp
down, and multiply on just about any part of your home that mold
considers a food source, including dust, wood, paint, paper, cotton, oil,
and modern building materials like drywall.
To avoid mold formation and exposure, I recommend you do the
following:
• Keep house dust to a minimum. Mop all floors and dust all surfaces at
least once a week. Use a vacuum cleaner with a HEPA filter. HEPA-
filter vacuums capture the widest range of particles and potential
allergens.
• Use a dehumidifier in mold-prone rooms such as basement bathrooms.
--- END PAGE 1240 ---

--- PAGE 1241 ---
• Use an oscillating fan in the bathroom after showering and fix any
leaks as soon as possible.
• Regularly clean surfaces where mold usually grows—around showers
and tubs and beneath sinks.
• Be conscious of toxins in carpeting, especially in products made from
synthetic materials. Buy natural-fiber wool and cotton rugs. If you
really want to take things to the next level, replace your wall-to-wall
carpeting with hardwood floors, all-natural linoleum, or ceramic tiles,
and use nontoxic glues, adhesives, stains, or sealers for installation.
• Seal or replace particle board walls, floors, and cabinets, which often
contain formaldehyde, which emits unhealthy fumes. Avoid any
synthetic, strong-smelling plywood, fiberglass, fiberboard, and
paneling.
• Consider adding a WaterCop around every drain, sink, and bathtub in
your home. This device will shut off the water to the house at the first
sign of a leak. Most models are wireless, but there are wired options,
too.
The Best Natural Household Cleaners
The natural cleaning ingredients below can all be used alone or combined to
create nontoxic cleaning solutions for many applications. At right are recipes
for some of my favorites, and you can find many more thorough instructions
for anything you’d ever need at Eartheasy.com, which is an organic living
website owned by my friend Aran Seaman.
Of course, if you don’t have time, you don’t have to make your own cleaning
supplies. There are a growing number of commercial nontoxic home-
cleaning products, and you can find these and other organic, natural
products, from kitty litter to diapers, on websites such as EWG.org,
ThriveMarket.com, and OrganicConsumers.org. On BoundlessBook.com/20,
you’ll find links to some of the products I recommend most.
--- END PAGE 1241 ---

--- PAGE 1242 ---
Baking soda cleans and deodorizes.
Rubbing alcohol is good for cleaning floors, especially tile.
Borax, despite its scary name, is simply sodium borate. It cleans, deodorizes,
disinfects, softens water, and cleans wallpaper, painted walls, and floors. It is
also good for killing mold.
--- END PAGE 1242 ---

--- PAGE 1243 ---
White vinegar cuts grease and removes mildew, odors, some stains, and
wax buildup.
Washing soda, also known as SAL soda, is sodium carbonate decahydrate, a
natural mineral. It cuts grease, removes stains, softens water, and cleans
walls, tile, sinks, and tubs.
There are dozens of essential oils, but we stick to three when we need to kill
bacteria or clean our bodies or kitchen counters: oregano, thieves, and
lemon.
--- END PAGE 1243 ---

--- PAGE 1244 ---
Lemon is a natural acid that is effective against most household bacteria
Cornstarch can be used to clean windows, polish furniture, and clean
carpets and rugs.
Unscented natural soap, such as castile soap, goat’s milk soap, and coconut
oil soap, comes as a liquid, flakes, powders, or bars. It’s biodegradable and
will clean just about anything, and you can make it at home yourself. We get
most of our soap-making goods from Mountain Rose Herbs.
--- END PAGE 1244 ---

--- PAGE 1245 ---
All-purpose cleaner: Mix ½ cup vinegar and ¼ cup baking soda into ½ gallon
of water. You can also use natural fiber cloths, which remove dirt, grease,
and dust on their own, without any cleaning solution, because they are
formulated to penetrate and trap dirt. You’ll find a number of brands listed
on BoundlessBook.com/20.
Toilet bowl cleaner: Mix ¼ cup baking soda and 1 cup vinegar, pour it into
the toilet bowl, and let it sit for a few minutes. Scrub with a brush and rinse.
A mixture of two parts borax and one part lemon juice will also work.
Mold remover: Mix one part hydrogen peroxide (3 percent) with two parts
water in a spray bottle and spray on areas with mold. Wait at least one hour
before rinsing or using the shower.
Oven cleaner: Mix ¾ cup baking soda, ¼ cup salt, and ¼ cup water to make a
thick paste, and spread it throughout the oven. Let sit overnight, remove
--- END PAGE 1245 ---

--- PAGE 1246 ---
with a spatula, and wipe clean.
Dishwashing soap: Use any nontoxic liquid soap, such as Dr. Bronner’s. For
tough jobs, add 2 or 3 tablespoons of vinegar to the warm, soapy water.
Stain remover: For stains on clothes, you can use a 1:1 solution of water and
3 percent grade hydrogen peroxide to soak out grass, underarm, and many
food stains.
Floor cleaner and polish: For vinyl and linoleum, mix 1 cup vinegar and a
few drops of olive oil in 1 gallon of warm water. For wood, use a solution of ¼
cup vinegar and ½ gallon of warm water. For polishing wood, apply a thin
coat of equal parts vegetable oil and vinegar and rub in well.
Window cleaner: Mix 2 teaspoons of white vinegar with 1 quart of warm
water. Spray it on windows and glass and wipe it off with crumpled black-
and-white newspaper or a cotton cloth. Alternatively, you can buy Citra
Clean natural window and glass cleaner.
--- END PAGE 1246 ---

--- PAGE 1247 ---
Carpet cleaner: Mix equal parts white vinegar and water in a spray bottle.
Spray directly on the stain, let it sit for several minutes, and then clean with
a brush or sponge using warm soapy water. For fresh grease spots on the
carpet, you can sprinkle cornstarch onto the stain and then wait 15 to 30
minutes before vacuuming. For a heavy-duty carpet cleaner, mix ¼ cup each
of salt, borax, and vinegar, rub the paste into the carpet, and leave it for a
few hours before vacuuming.
Disinfectant: Mix 2 teaspoons borax, ¼ cup vinegar, and 3 cups hot water.
Dishwasher soap: Mix equal parts washing soda, baking soda, and salt.
Laundry detergent: Grate a 5-ounce bar of castile soap and mix it with 2
cups of washing soda. You can also try Eco Nuts, an effective laundry
detergent made from the dried fruit of the soapberry tree.
--- END PAGE 1247 ---

--- PAGE 1248 ---
If you want to know if you have been exposed to mold, there are a few
options. In the US, you can get mold exposure tests that you’ll learn about
momentarily, or you can simply pay attention to symptoms. If you
suddenly begin to experience allergy-like symptoms such as asthma,
congestion, frequent sickness, headaches, joint pain, or brain fog, and
you’ve recently moved into a new house or apartment or haven’t changed
anything in your diet, you should suspect mold.
Chapter 4 explained how to get tested for mold exposure and some
exercises you can do if you have been exposed. I also recommend
revisiting chapter 13 and following the detoxification instructions there.
Finally, if the laundry list of potentially mold-containing foods above
makes you nervous or stressed about your diet, I recommend you do a
simple Coca pulse test after you eat a meal that is a frequent staple in your
diet and you suspect may be causing symptoms. This basically involves
using a phone app (I use one called NatureBeat) and a connected chest
strap heart rate monitor to track your heart rate before, during, and after
eating. If your heart rate increases by five or more beats after eating, you
may have an allergy to the food, or there may be mycotoxins in it. In plain
terms, the change in your heart rate indicates that your body is going into
fight-or-flight mode after eating—which is not a good sign!
Need more resources? Three good books for discovering how to de-
mold your house are My House Is Killing Me! and The Mold Survival Guide,
both by Jeffrey C. May, and The Mold Medic by Michael Rubino (Rubino
also has a great list of resources for mold prevention, remediation, and
more at Homecleanse.com/mold-resources). You should also check out
my podcast with “The Moldfinder” Brian Karr, which I’ll link to on the
resources page for this chapter.
WATER
--- END PAGE 1248 ---

--- PAGE 1249 ---
In my hometown of Spokane, Washington, they don’t fluoridate the water,
and boy, am I glad.
Fluoride is certainly a crucial compound—in pesticides, that is. That’s
right: sodium fluoride is a registered insecticide and rodenticide that is
used in rat and roach poisons. It is a toxic waste by-product of the
manufacturing of phosphate fertilizers and the aluminum-refining
industry, which means it also has a lot of lead as well as other toxic
substances in it. But it’s cheaper to simply dump fluoride into our water
supply than to pay toxic waste disposal fees. Unfortunately, this can cause
cancer, hip fracture, dental fluorosis, stained teeth, neurological
impairment, lower IQ in children, and learning disorders.
Sure, fluoride certainly has a good antidecay effect when you apply it
directly to the tooth itself—but you don’t have to swallow the stuff, and
frankly, when it comes to tooth decay, there is little to no difference
between countries with fluoridated water and countries with
nonfluoridated water. If you really want to dig into the issue with fluoride,
listen to a podcast that I recorded with Paul Connett, coauthor of the eye-
opening book The Case Against Fluoride (the podcast is linked to on
BoundlessBook.com/20), or read the book The Fluoride Deception by
Christopher Bryson.
Of course, fluoride isn’t the only issue with water. Since 2004, testing
by water utilities has consistently found thousands of pollutants in the tap
water we drink on a daily basis. More than half of the chemicals detected
are not subject to health or safety regulations and can legally be present in
any amount. Unfortunately, at least in the US, the federal government has
not set a single new drinking-water standard since 2012—and water
utilities spend nineteen times more on water-treatment chemicals every
year than the federal government invests in protecting lakes and rivers
from water pollution in the first place.
--- END PAGE 1249 ---

--- PAGE 1250 ---
Chlorine is probably one of the more common chemicals that many
health enthusiasts encounter in the gym or in drinking water. Particularly
in swimming pools that are not naturally cleaned, we soak up chlorine
through our skin while simultaneously breathing in chloramines, the toxic
by-products that form when chlorine reacts with organic matter such as
dead skin cells.
If you’re a swimmer, a triathlete, or someone who hits the pool or hot
tub often, you’re likely getting exposed to plenty more chlorine than
you’re drinking in your municipal water supply or from a glass of tap water
at a restaurant. And even if you’re not a swimmer, you’re still getting
significant skin exposure to chlorine simply from showering or bathing in
your city’s water (if you’re not using the filtration methods I’ll describe
shortly). This chlorine exposure can cause both cell wall damage and
internal soft tissue damage, along with autoimmune, asthma, and allergy
issues. If you’re not filtering your water, chlorine can even vaporize from
toilet bowls and into the air as you wash your clothes or dishes!
But perhaps you’re already aware that chemicals in water are an issue.
Perhaps you’re also aware of the importance of drinking enough water,
and that your body consists mostly of water, which is needed for just
about every physiological process and biochemical reaction that exists,
including blood circulation, metabolism, body temperature regulation, and
detoxification.
But did you know there are different types of water that go far beyond
regular H O?2
EZ Water and DDW
In his TEDx Talk “Water, Cells, and Life” and his books The Fourth Phase of
Water and Cells, Gels, and the Engines of Life, University of Washington
professor Gerald Pollack explained the role of water in the functioning of
--- END PAGE 1250 ---

--- PAGE 1251 ---
cells and the importance of negatively charged structured water, also
known as exclusion zone (EZ) water. This water can both hold and deliver
electrical energy, much like a battery. Typical tap water is simply H O, but
2EZ water is actually H O , which is more viscous and alkaline than regular
3 2water and has a refractive index about 10 percent higher, allowing it to
more readily respond to light photons from sources such as an infrared
sauna, photobiomodulation light panels, and sunlight.
It is also the same kind of negatively charged water that your cells and
extracellular tissue naturally contain. This is important because cell
membranes are hydrophilic (water-loving) surfaces with a net negative
charge, and EZ water can accumulate next to these hydrophilic surfaces.
As negatively charged particles from the water and the cell membranes
repel each other, energy is created. This is because a key factor that allows
positive charges to migrate into a cell is the water surrounding the cell.
The electrical conductivity of water acts like a battery that drives the
cellular machinery by inducing a charge separation that is able to shuttle
positive protons along the cellular cytoskeleton while leaving negatively
charged electrons in the water. If you always thought this was achieved by
a sodium-potassium pump, as most biology textbooks still teach, then you
should look up the work of Gilbert Ling on PubMed, where you’ll find
research articles that thoroughly debunk the notion of a sodium-
potassium pump.
Dr. Thomas Cowan wrote in his books Human Heart, Cosmic Heart and
Cancer and the New Biology of Water about how this negative charge allows
blood, which consists largely of water, to more easily navigate through the
chambers of the heart, reducing cardiovascular strain and increasing
overall heart health. In addition, my former podcast guest Dr. Stephanie
Seneff has an excellent TEDx Talk about how negatively charged ions in
EZ water help to generate sulfate, which enhances cell fluidity and reduces
any tendency for cells to clump, particularly when sunlight is present. EZ
--- END PAGE 1251 ---

--- PAGE 1252 ---
water may even upregulate p53, a transcription factor that acts as a potent
tumor suppressor and modulator of DNA damage, making it potentially
useful for cancer therapy.
Then there’s deuterium-depleted water (DDW). DDW—which can be
purchased in bottles or created by a DDW generator—is also known as
“light water” and contains a very low concentration of deuterium.
Deuterium is a hydrogen isotope that has roughly double the mass of a
hydrogen atom. This means that high amounts of deuterium in the body—
which are often found in people who have been exposed to pesticides,
herbicides, municipal water, a high-sugar or acidic diet, or many other
unhealthy scenarios—can displace hydrogen and deleteriously impact cell
function. Reducing levels of deuterium can restore proper cell function
and health. I strongly suspect that hydrogen-enriched water (which I
talked about in chapter 12), structured water, and DDW are three forms of
water that are going to receive plenty of attention in the wellness world
over the next decade as people come to realize that not all water is created
equal.
How to Manage Exposure to Metals
I spend time in my basement infrared sauna at least three times a week,
because saunas have been shown to be an excellent way to release metals
through the skin, and because I know that everything from brake dust on the
road to metals in airports and airplanes to the occasional sushi binge
exposes me to my fair share of metals. If it’s not cleaned up and removed
from the body, this type of chronic metal exposure can cause chronic
fatigue, poor mood, disrupted sleep, headaches, poor immune system
function, low hormone levels, and brain fog.
The biggest culprit for metal exposure is modern dentistry. Even though
about 50 percent of dentists in the US are now mercury-free, only an
estimated 10 percent of dentists fully understand the health risks associated
--- END PAGE 1252 ---

--- PAGE 1253 ---
with amalgam fillings—which contain toxic mercury, despite what the term
silver filling might lead you to believe.
If you decide you want to pull the metal out of your mouth, then you should
know that the process of removing and replacing amalgam fillings comes
with the risk of acute toxicity from the mercury released during the removal
process, and this can cause serious damage to organs such as your liver and
kidney.
Because of this, and because other metals can get absorbed into your
mouth when you’re at the dentist, my family and I only go to a holistic
dentist (also known as a “biological dentist”). These dentists make a special
effort to limit your exposure to toxins and chemicals. When they’re removing
amalgam fillings, they use a cold-water spray to minimize mercury vapors,
put a dental dam in your mouth so you don’t swallow or inhale any toxins,
use a high-volume evacuator near the tooth at all times to evacuate the
mercury vapor, wash out your mouth immediately after the fillings have
been removed, and use powerful air purifiers in each room. They also take
precautions during regular cleanings, such as using natural products to
ensure you are not exposed to chemicals and toxins.
One option for finding a good dentist is to call my dentist (introduced in
chapter 17)—Dr. Eniko Loud at Whole Health Dentistry in Phoenix, Arizona—
to inquire about becoming her patient or get a recommendation for
someone near you who uses her same techniques, but the following
organizations can also help you find a holistic dentist:
• Consumers for Dental Choice
• International Academy of Biological Dentistry & Medicine (IABDM)
• Dental Amalgam Mercury Solutions (DAMS)
• Huggins Applied Healing
• Holistic Dental Association
• International Association of Mercury Safe Dentists
Unfortunately, you can get heavy-metal exposure from all sorts of sources
that go way beyond metal in your mouth. These sources include:
• Smog
• Car keys
• Toys made in China
--- END PAGE 1253 ---

--- PAGE 1254 ---
• Secondhand cigarette smoke
• Pesticides and herbicides
• Protein powders and dietary supplements
• “Pristine” water (like my local Lake Coeur d’Alene) that in fact has high
amounts of mining runoff
• Food stored in metal containers
• Big fish like tuna and dolphin
• Nuclear fallout from the Fukushima disaster in Japan
You can get tested for heavy metals via an HTMA test or any of the toxin
tests you can find at the BenGreenfieldLife.com recommended tests page,
but if you’ve been exposed to any of the above, you can assume you’d
benefit from pulling metals out of your body. Binding heavy metals and
pulling them out of your body is called chelation, and many substances can
do this. The metals generally exit your body in stool, urine, hair, breath, and
sweat. Some forms of chelation are accomplished with drugs such as DMPS,
but the website DMPSBackfire.com shows you some of the serious problems
that can be caused by conventional chelating drugs.
Chelators bind by way of ionic bonds, which are the attractions between the
positive charge of a heavy metal and the negative charge of the chelating
molecule. Because of this, chelation can extract precious minerals from your
body, but it can also spread metals throughout your body, so that they wind
up deposited elsewhere. So to get heavy metals out of your body, I do not
recommend chelation drugs or natural chelation. Instead, I recommend you
use natural compounds that can gently draw heavy metals out of your body.
As with most detoxification programs, you can’t simply pop a supplement or
chug a giant bottle of activated charcoal water and walk away. Instead, to
ensure that metals and other toxins are actually removed and don’t travel
throughout the body, you need to follow a specific, systematized detox
protocol. Review chapter 13 for more information on proper detoxification.
According to Pollack, you can build EZ water naturally in your cells by
not only drinking pure and preferably structured water (described later in
this chapter), but also by chilling your water, exposing your water to
--- END PAGE 1254 ---

--- PAGE 1255 ---
sunlight or infrared light, drinking fresh vegetable juice, drinking coconut
water blended with turmeric, exposing your bare skin to sunlight, using an
infrared sauna, and walking barefoot outside, which allows you to absorb
negatively charged ions from the surface of the earth. According to Robert
Slovak, whom I interviewed in a podcast (linked to at
BoundlessBook.com/20), the same can be said for DDW: instead of
purchasing relatively expensive DDW water to add small amounts to your
drinking water during the day (a good strategy if you have very high
deuterium levels, a problem I discuss in my “Deuterium Demystified”
podcast with the Center for Deuterium Depletion in Los Angeles), you can
achieve low deuterium levels by lowering your carbohydrate intake and
increasing your healthy fat intake, which allows your body, through the
process of beta-oxidation, to produce its own DDW!
Who knew water was so much more complex than just H O?2
Best Practices for Pure Water
You’re no doubt aware that we live in a modern postindustrial era in which
our water is filled with chemical contaminants from bleach, salts,
pesticides, metals, toxins, and drugs, along with biological or microbial
contaminants that include bacteria, viruses, protozoans, and parasites, and
even radiological contaminants such as cesium, plutonium, and uranium.
So what can you do to ensure you’re protecting yourself from
contaminants and chemicals in your drinking water, bathwater, and
cooking water, while at the same time consuming water that is in the most
natural, ancestral, mitochondria-supporting state possible? Here are my
top six tips.
1. FILTER YOUR WATER.
--- END PAGE 1255 ---

--- PAGE 1256 ---
When it comes to filtering your water, the gold-standard method is to
install a whole-house carbon block filtration system or reverse osmosis
(RO) system. Carbon filters are less expensive but effective at removing
chlorine and large particulates. They can also remove 10 to 15 percent of
total dissolved solids (TDS). However, a carbon filter can’t remove all
contaminants as thoroughly as an RO system can.
RO filters, which work by pushing water through a microscopic filter
material, remove 95 to 97 percent of TDS. They can filter down to 0.001
micron, which is 500 times smaller than most carbon filters. However,
they can also remove minerals, so the system should have
remineralization technology to add them back in. Demineralized water is
also more acidic. So, to make your water healthy with good minerals once
again and to increase its alkalinity, you can remineralize it with trace
liquid mineral drops, use sea salt liberally, make Hunza water (structured
water rich in hydrogen and minerals that also has a naturally high pH—
you can find instructions for making it on BoundlessBook.com/20), or
dress up your drinks and diet with extra electrolytes and minerals.
To transform your RO water into EZ water, you may want to install a
whole-house structured water system along with your RO system. The
website GreenfieldWater.com (founded by my father and now operated by
my sister) has a variety of both whole-house and portable structured-
water filters that easily allow you to create your own EZ structured water
(the Hunza water mentioned above is also naturally high in EZ water). For
example, one of Greenfield Water’s popular whole-house filtration
systems combines activated carbon with minerals in a highly porous block
filter and then structures the water after it has passed through the filtering
system. This unique carbon adsorbent can soak up a variety of organic and
inorganic substances, including chlorine and chloramine, which can be
difficult to remove. It provides the highest-quality drinking water possible
from a carbon block filter and simultaneously structures the water, which
--- END PAGE 1256 ---

--- PAGE 1257 ---
enhances both absorption and hydration. Other features include pH
adjustment technology and a turbo descaler that reduces scale and is a
good alternative to a salt-based water softener. In my current home, I use
the fanciest system on the market: Ophora, which employs a fourteen-
stage filtration process to deliver ultra-purified, oxygen-infused, and
mineral-balanced water.
Finally, if you’re serious about drinking water, avoid hot water and tap
water whenever you are on an airplane. Most flight attendants will not
even drink hot water on the plane, including coffee or tea. Why? The tap
water on a plane is delivered to the airport via a water tanker truck where
it is stored in a facility. Then another truck is filled from the storage tank
and delivers the water to the plane. The water can be contaminated at any
point during transport, and indeed has tested positive for pathogenic
coliform bacteria, which indicates that human fecal waste is present. This
is not surprising considering that the plane’s water tanks are disinfected
only every three months! So, when flying—if you don’t want to be drinking
“poop”—bring your own water or drink bottled only!
2. USE FILTERS ON ALL FAUCETS.
If you forgo a whole-house RO system, then at least purchase a countertop
RO system and showerhead and faucet filters. In a conversation I had with
renowned water expert Robert Slovak, he told me about a reverse osmosis
purifier that presents none of the bacteria issues of a standard tank-based
RO system, is incredibly affordable, and can be placed on any countertop.
Called an AquaTru, it uses a miniaturized version of the same reverse
osmosis technology used by all the major bottled water brands.
I highly recommend you also install a KDF showerhead and faucet or
Fixt showerhead filter in your bathroom (after all, if you’re filtering the
water that goes into your mouth but not the water that comes in through
--- END PAGE 1257 ---

--- PAGE 1258 ---
your skin, it’s a bit of a wasted effort). You’ll find links and discount codes
on BoundlessBook.com/20.
3. USE GLASS INSTEAD OF PLASTIC BOTTLES.
This is a no-brainer: just don’t use plastic. If you must travel with a plastic
bottle or drink from a plastic bottle while exercising, use a BPA-free brand
that also filters your water, such as Berkey, LifeStraw, Fixt, or
LifeDefender. This will save you plenty of money on bottled water,
especially while traveling through airports. I also recommend stainless-
steel bottles from a company such as Yeti or, better yet, a MOBOT water
bottle, which doubles as a foam roller-esque deep tissue massage device.
Consider how many plastics you’re using in your kitchen. For example,
for sous vide cooking, I use Stasher brand bags, which are heat-resistant
bags made of food-grade silicone rather than the thin plastic that comes
with most sous vide machines. Instead of a coffee maker that uses plastic
fittings and tubes, I opt for a stainless-steel French press. I also use glass
Pyrex containers for storing food rather than Tupperware-style plastic
containers.
Finally, don’t get stuck in a hotel with the average hotel plastic bottled
water, and definitely don’t pay $8.75 for the glass bottle in the minibar.
Instead, do as I do and preorder through Amazon or Instacart to your
hotel, and make your first stop a grocery store where you can grab filtered
water in glass bottles. See the sidebar for some of my other go-to grocery
items when I’m staying at a hotel with a kitchenette or an Airbnb.
4. FIND A LOCAL NATURAL SPRING.
If you want to get as close to a natural source of water as possible, visit
FindASpring.com to browse through a user-created database of natural
springs around the world. You’d be surprised at how much free, mineral-
rich, clean spring water flows in an area that’s often just a few minutes
--- END PAGE 1258 ---

--- PAGE 1259 ---
from your front door. Armed with a glass carboy, you can legally and
inexpensively harvest it for drinking or bathing!
5. MAKE SURE YOU GET THE RIGHT MINERALS AND
VITAMINS.
Sulfate, cholesterols, and minerals are important for adequate water
absorption. Get sufficient amounts of cobalamin (vitamin B ),
12glutathione, iron (preferably from grass-fed animal sources), sulfur (from
broccoli, cauliflower, garlic, onions, and liver), zinc (shellfish and black ant
extract are good sources), fresh air, grounding or earthing, and sunlight.
Replenish minerals and electrolytes by adding quality salts to food and
water and using products like 10X, LMNT, Quinton, Manna Shilajit, or
BEAM minerals. Avoid exposure to glyphosate and heavy metals. For the
sulfur piece, it’s a good idea to check your DNA data to see if you’re sulfur
sensitive, as it’s a common sensitivity and requires caution with high
intake of sulfurous foods.
6. MANAGE CHLORINE EXPOSURE.
To mitigate the damages of chlorine, especially on days that you’re in a
chlorinated pool or hot tub, fight the oxidation by getting the following
into your body:
• 2 to 5 g of vitamin C
• 2,000 to 4,000 IU of vitamin D
• 10 to 20 IU of a natural source of vitamin E that includes tocotrienols,
mixed with omega-3 fatty acids (I recommend Designs for Health
Annatto-E and Kion Omega)
• A diet rich in wild plants, herbs, and spices
--- END PAGE 1259 ---

--- PAGE 1260 ---
Unfortunately, most soaps and shampoos that are designed to strip
chlorine from skin and hair are laden with endocrine disruptors and
dangerous personal-care-product chemicals. SwimSpray is a natural
vitamin C–based spray that will remove chlorine odor and some residue
from the skin, but it’s not going to stop much chlorine from getting
absorbed into your body. So the best thing you can do is equip yourself
internally to handle the ravages of chlorine. If you need to test your
antioxidant levels to see how well equipped your body is to fight chlorine
damage, I recommend the Metabolomix panel from Genova (see chapter
16 for details).
A Sample List of Grocery Items to Buy on
Vacation
I’m often asked what I would get if I went to a grocery store while on
vacation and stocked up for an entire week of clean eating from the average
Airbnb or suite with a kitchen. So here is a list of all the basics I might get—
and bonus points if you ruck to the grocery store and carry your purchases
back in a large backpack, which I often do for my first workout when I get to
my destination:
• A variety of fresh organic meat and fish
• Pastured eggs
• Canned sardines/anchovies
• Organic avocados
• Organic berries
• Organic cucumbers/tomatoes
• Organic mushrooms
• Organic salad greens
• Coconut yogurt
• Grass-fed butter
--- END PAGE 1260 ---

--- PAGE 1261 ---
• Apple cider vinegar
• Extra-virgin olive oil
• Sea salt
• Black pepper
• Cayenne pepper
• Organic dried dill seasoning
• Raw honey
• Stevia
• Balsamic vinaigrette
• Good clean ketchup
• Good clean mustard
• Organic hot sauce
• Rice
• Sourdough bread
• Gluten-free wraps
• Nori seaweed wraps
• Organic almond butter
• Organic peanut butter
• Brazil nuts
• Macadamia nuts
• Very dark chocolate
• Unsweetened coconut flakes
• If available, some kind of natural protein powder or meal-replacement
powder for smoothies
Pesticides and Herbicides
I’ll admit it: I don’t eat organic, completely pesticide-free produce all the
time. Sometimes I end up with conventionally grown, pesticide-laden
produce. Usually that happens when I’m at a backyard barbecue or a friend’s
--- END PAGE 1261 ---

--- PAGE 1262 ---
home for dinner, and that spinach salad or handful of cherries just looks so
appealing.
But the majority of the time, I buy organic produce (and when I don’t, I use a
simple vinegar-based cleaning trick I’ll tell you about shortly). Many people
seem to feel just fine when they eat pesticide-laden produce. This is because
you won’t necessarily feel the effects immediately after pesticide exposure.
In fact, the biggest danger from pesticides is the harm that comes from
repeated low-dose exposure.
Recent data collected by the EPA reports that in the US alone,
approximately five billion pounds of active pesticide ingredients are applied
to our foods annually. That’s a tremendous amount of poison entering our
bodies, and, sure enough, a 2002 University of Washington study found that
109 out of 110 urban and suburban children had pesticides in their urine
samples, which is even scarier when you consider how prevalent pesticide
exposure has become since then.
Food grown on certified-organic farms contains significantly less pesticide
residue than food grown with synthetic pesticides. That may seem obvious,
but the evidence for this fact has only been available since 2002, when
research proved that children fed organic food have lower residues of
certain pesticides in their bodies than children fed conventionally grown
food.
So buy certified-organic produce or, if you’re at a farmers market or can
contact a company by phone or through their website, ask what type of
pesticides or herbicides they do or do not use, since many small
manufacturers can’t necessarily afford a certified organic label. If you really
want to make an educated decision and fill your body with the most
nourishing and least damaging produce, I recommend you check out the
book Rich Food, Poor Food. Mira and Jayson Calton have an excellent list of
the produce items that tend to be most laden with, not only harmful
pesticides, but also GMOs, chemical fertilizers, various synthetic substances,
sewage, and irradiation. Following their advice allows you to reduce your
pesticide exposure by 80 percent and avoid genetically modified produce
100 percent of the time.
And for that simple vinegar trick I mentioned to remove the pesticides and
herbicides from nonorganic produce? Simply mix a solution of ½ cup vinegar
and 5 cups water as a bath in your kitchen sink and then briefly place your
--- END PAGE 1262 ---

--- PAGE 1263 ---
nonorganic vegetables or fruit in the solution, swish them around, and rinse
thoroughly in plain water.
But solving the produce problem doesn’t address the entire scenario: you
also need to watch out for the pesticides and herbicides in your yard. After
all, the average suburban lawn soaks up ten times as much chemical
pesticide per acre than conventional farmland, with over seventy million tons
of fertilizers and pesticides applied to residential lawns and gardens
annually!
I’ll admit, I’m not a huge fan of lawns. My wife and I prefer to dig up most of
the trimmed, neat grass or sod in the yard and replace it with fruit trees and
a big, dirty vegetable garden fertilized with compost, which reigns supreme
in the world of natural fertilizers. But if you do want that pristine expanse of
green grass, the only way to reduce your dependence on chemical lawn
fertilizers is to develop a healthy lawn that is naturally resistant to weeds,
insects, and disease, using the following steps:1.

Improve the soil. You can get a lawn pH tester for a few bucks. When you
test, it should read between 6.5 and 7.0, which is slightly acidic. Soil that
is too acidic needs a sprinkling of lime, and soil that is not acidic enough
needs a sprinkling of sulfur.2.

Choose native grass. Grasses vary in preferred climate, required water
and nutrients, shade tolerance, and the degree of wear they can
withstand. Ask your local garden center to recommend grass that is well
adapted to your area.3.

Mow often, but don’t trim the grass too short. Giving your lawn a marine
cut is not the best idea because surface roots become exposed, the soil
dries out faster, and surface aeration is reduced. Don’t cut off more than
one-third of the grass at any one time, and shoot for grass that’s about
2.5 to 3.5 inches high. When your lawn is finished growing for the season,
cut it a bit shorter, to about 2 inches. This will minimize the risk of mold
buildup during the winter.4. 
Water deeply, but not too often. Regular watering encourages your lawn
to develop deep root systems, which make the lawn hardier and more
drought-resistant. But be sure you let the lawn dry out before rewatering.
Most healthy lawns require only 1 inch of water per week, which is about
fifteen to twenty minutes’ worth of sprinkling once per day. It’s best to
water in the early morning, when less water will be lost to evaporation.
--- END PAGE 1263 ---

--- PAGE 1264 ---
5. Use natural lawn fertilizer. I recommend the Ringer brand, which is a mix
of certified-organic minerals.
A good resource for more chemical-free yard recommendations is The
Organic Lawn Care Manual by Paul Tukey. I also highly recommend you flip
back to chapter 13 to read about glyphosate and the proper supplements to
protect your gut.
Finally, if you have the luxury of a home pool or hot tub, treat it with a
healthy alternative to chlorine. Several companies make natural minerals
and enzymes that can clean water without the use of chlorine. These
mineral systems use silver and copper to keep water clean and free of
bacteria and algae. Some also include limestone, which absorbs the acid
from chlorine and helps maintain a neutral pH level. Other options are
saline water, filters that include ozonator generators to kill bacteria, non-
chlorine shock, and bromine. Many of these still require trace amounts of
chlorine. For example, for my hot tub, I use Spa Solution mineral cleaning
solution and small amounts of non-chlorine shock, but it still needs about
2 tablespoons of chlorine each week to keep it sparkling clean. I’ll include
a few good brands on the online resources page for this chapter, but it’s
wise to speak to your local spa or pool maintenance company because they
can test your water and determine the best customized solution for you.
THE LAST WORD
Ultimately, you can’t do much about invisible assailants like the diesel
exhaust getting piped out of the trucks that drive on the roads you run or
bicycle on, the chemical-laden disinfectants that get sprayed on the
treadmills and other exercise equipment at the gym, the pesticides and
--- END PAGE 1264 ---

--- PAGE 1265 ---
herbicides that litter the grass at a public park, your neighbor’s Wi-Fi
signals, or street lights and bright headlights of oncoming cars.
But there is plenty that you can control, and now you’re equipped with
what you need to know to maximize your protection against modern
invisible assailants and ensure that electricity, air, light, and water are fully
optimized in your environment, without having to go completely off-grid
or to move to a pristine Himalayan mountaintop.
Perhaps your head is spinning with all your newfound knowledge
about the dizzying array of steps you can take. But don’t let that stress you
out. Start with the small steps, like these:
• Install dirty-electricity filters in every room of your house.
• Buy an air tube headset and a DefenderShield case for your phone, and
keep it in airplane mode when you don’t need to have it on, or at least
disable Wi-Fi and Bluetooth.
• Turn off your Wi-Fi router when you aren’t using it, or hardwire in
with an ethernet cable.
• Replace your regular water bottles with glass jars or BPA-free plastic
bottles, and store food in glass, not plastic.
• Glance at the labels of your personal care products and household
cleaners and understand what you’re smearing on your body, your
desk, or your countertop.
• If you need a fast air and water solution, buy a standalone HEPA filter
and an AquaTru water purifier, and if you want a more permanent
solution, install a whole-house reverse osmosis filter and central HEPA
air filter in your home.
• Purchase and use a set of blue-light-blocking glasses and switch your
phone to red light at night. Stay mindful of natural light by day and red
light by night.
--- END PAGE 1265 ---

--- PAGE 1266 ---
ONE THING YOU CAN DO THIS
WEEK
Regarding EMF and light exposure, I’m not a total Luddite who has sworn
off technology, nor have I moved to Amish country or thrown out all my
devices. But the most important places to protect are the places where you
engage in parasympathetic, restorative activities: namely where you eat,
sleep, and detox. In other words, try to have low EMF and good lighting in
your dining space, your bedroom, and—if you have one—the room where
you engage in activities like sauna, meditation, or napping. This will allow
you to better withstand the soup of artificial electricity and light you may
encounter in other spaces the rest of the day or night. So this week, walk
through your bedroom, look for light and electricity sources that might be
unnecessary, and simply remove them.
Finally, for the most up-to-date manual for building a complete,
biohacked healthy home from the ground up, including all the strategies I
used to build my home in Idaho, check out Paula LaPorte’s Prescriptions for
a Healthy House: A Practical Guide for Architects, Builders and Homeowners. It
contains strategies for flooring, walls, roofing, appliances, cleaning, mold
remediation, EMF, furniture, paint, and much more. I was so impressed
with it that I purchased it for my builder, architect, and electrician, and we
relied on it heavily during the entire building process.
For citations for all the research studies mentioned in this chapter and a
deeper dive into the topics of this chapter—including links to podcasts, blog
posts, recommended tools and supplements, and much more—visit
BoundlessBook.com/20. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 1266 ---

--- PAGE 1267 ---
21
ROUTINES AND RITUALS
A PLAN FOR YOUR PERFECT DAY
I stared out the window at the doe gently padding its way from the tree line of
the forest and across my driveway. It stopped and glanced in my direction. Could
it possibly hear the loud buzzing emanating from the modified car buffer I was
massaging my head with as I stood barefoot in the kitchen, staring off into the
wilderness behind my home? As the doe crossed the driveway and entered the
--- END PAGE 1267 ---

--- PAGE 1268 ---
trees on the other side, I moved the car buffer from the right side of my skull to
the left, the rapid vibrations gently digging into the tight craniosacral muscles at
the back of my head.
Why such a strange morning habit? It improves the blood flow to my skull,
provides a bit of a wake-me-up buzz for my head, and lowers my blood
pressure and stress for the remainder of the day by relaxing my neck and
trapezius muscles. But my morning routine is not limited to applying a car
buffer to my head. Indeed, my entire day is rife with elaborate routine.
Why? Consider just a few snippets of the daily routines of a handful of
successful pop culture, historical, and political icons, all from the book
Daily Rituals: How Artists Work:
Secretary of state and president John Quincy Adams skinny-dipped in
the Potomac River in the morning, always trying to see how long he
could swim without touching the bottom (he got up to 80 minutes
before his wife told him to stop).
After putting his kids to bed, President Obama went over briefing
papers and did paperwork and then read a book for pleasure for a half
hour before turning in.
Stephen King writes every day of the year without exception,
beginning work between 8:00 and 8:30 a.m. He has a glass of water or
cup of tea and takes a vitamin pill each day, ensuring he is in the same
seat and his papers and desk are arranged in the same way every single
day. King has a daily writing quota of two thousand words and rarely
allows himself to quit until he’s reached his goal.
Harvard dropout and founder of Facebook, Mark Zuckerberg, is well
known for almost always wearing a plain gray T-shirt, saying in a 2014
interview that wearing the same shirt helps allow him to make as few
decisions as possible.
--- END PAGE 1268 ---

--- PAGE 1269 ---
I don’t know any successful people who do not have some kind of
structured and occasionally elaborate daily routine. Daily Rituals notes
that novelist Franz Kafka, frustrated with his living quarters and day job,
wrote in a letter to his fiancée, Felice Bauer, in 1912, “Time is short, my
strength is limited, the office is a horror, the apartment is noisy, and if a
pleasant, straightforward life is not possible then one must try to wriggle
through by subtle maneuvers.”
Kafka is just one of the 161 great minds profiled in the book. These
novelists, poets, playwrights, painters, philosophers, scientists, and
mathematicians all had daily rituals (often automated and slightly
subconscious), such as waking early or staying up late; self-medicating
with a morning doughnut or a hot bath; drinking vast quantities of coffee
(it is said the philosopher Voltaire consumed forty to fifty cups per day);
or taking long daily walks. Novelist Thomas Wolfe, for instance, wrote
standing up in the kitchen, the top of the refrigerator as his desk, dreamily
fondling his male configurations (and you thought my infrared-light-on-
the-balls trick was strange!). Philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre ingested ten
times the recommended dose of corydrane (a mix of amphetamine and
aspirin) each day. Philosopher René Descartes preferred to linger in bed,
his mind wandering in sleep through woods, gardens, and enchanted
palaces where he experienced every pleasure imaginable. British author
Anthony Trollope made himself write three thousand words each morning
(precisely 250 words every fifteen minutes for three hours) before going to
his job at the postal service, which he kept for thirty-three years, during
which time he wrote more than two dozen books. Choreographer George
Balanchine did most of his work while ironing, and composer and pianist
George Gershwin worked for twelve hours a day from late morning to
midnight, composing at the piano in pajamas, a bathrobe, and slippers.
While I don’t necessarily endorse an elaborate four-hour morning
routine that includes ten pages of gratitude journaling, a sauna session, a
--- END PAGE 1269 ---

--- PAGE 1270 ---
coffee enema, a clay mask, a trampolining session, breathwork, and a cold
bath (sure, a few of those each morning is fine, but not all of them!), a
smartly structured and efficient daily routine gives structure and
momentum to each day, and gives you something to fall back on in times
of stress. Whether you’re at home or on the road, routine serves as a
fantastic source of comfort, peace, and relaxation when life moves fast or
becomes difficult. Consider the following statistics released by
Leaders.com and based on Harvard Business Review:
• 92 percent of highly successful people have a solid morning routine.
• 88 percent of wealthy people dedicate at least thirty minutes daily to
reading.
• 63 percent of successful people set an alarm at night and wake up
early. (I don’t use a traditional alarm per se, but rather naturally wake
or use a more gradually wakening light-based alarm, Apollo device, or
bed warmer, as detailed in chapter 8.)
In this book, I’ve presented countless ways to optimize your mind,
body, and spirit with tools, supplements, dietary hacks, exercises, regular
practices, and much more. I cannot recommend highly enough that you
pick the suggestions that work best for you and systematize them into
daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly routines. You’ll find my routines, as well
as more advice for creating your own, on BoundlessBook.com. In the rest
of this chapter I’ll provide an example of my own daily routine that
incorporates many of the principles found throughout this book, my
weekly exercise routine, how things change when I travel, and helpful
instructions for decoding what diet and supplement plan is right for you.
--- END PAGE 1270 ---

--- PAGE 1271 ---
THE BOUNDLESS WEEKLY
PROGRAMS
These programs for exercise, diet, and supplements weave a host of the
principles, habits, and guidelines in this book into a single week of living,
moving, and eating. While they don’t necessarily include every single boundless
biohack, supplement, trick, tool, and tactic, they will allow you to easily develop
a rock-solid foundation that you can build upon with additional strategies if you
see fit.
Each program includes beginner, intermediate, and advanced options so that
you can take as deep a dive into a boundless life as you’d like. Enjoy!
BEN’S BOUNDLESS ROUTINES
After over fifteen years of interviewing wildly productive tech
entrepreneurs, CEOs, successful athletes, biohackers, billionaires, and
other high achievers, I’ve noted that common threads persist among their
daily habits, particularly regarding their morning routines. So, if you give
yourself certain categories to “check off ” for maximizing productivity,
relationships, health span, and lifespan, what are the elements of a
successful morning routine?
Generally, your first few hours of waking—whether at home or when
traveling—should include the following:
• Spiritual practice (devotional, spiritual text or Bible reading, prayer,
meditation, breathwork, silence, solitude, journaling, etc.)
--- END PAGE 1271 ---

--- PAGE 1272 ---
• Oral, skin, face, and hair care (oil pulling, tongue scraping, flossing or
brushing, face washing, dermarolling, serum, toner, moisturizer, etc.)
• Hydration (large glass of filtered water with minerals or other goodies
such as hydrogen, vitamin C, morning supplements, etc.)
• Movement/stretching (foam rolling, deep tissue work, rebounding,
yoga, walking the dog in the sunshine, etc.)
• Deep productive work and/or any urgent reactive work, depending on
schedule (writing, recording, critical meetings, high-priority emails,
etc.)
• Detoxification/bathroom (good bowel movement, abdominal self-
massage, sauna, etc.)
• Family time/relationships (systematic quality time or personal check-
ins with spouse, children, friends, roommates, etc.)
• Workout or other form of hormetic stress (exercise session, hot-cold
contrast, breathwork, oxygen therapy, etc.)
• Fuel, depending on diet and schedule (coffee, tea, smoothie, breakfast,
etc.)
Based on this, the following is a glimpse into my own optimized daily
morning routine and weekly exercise routine, both at home and when
traveling. While your goals or access to certain biohacking technologies
and exercise equipment may differ from mine, and you don’t necessarily
need to replicate my exact fitness, diet, or supplement regimen, I hope
this gives you a helpful framework to create your own routines that deliver
boundless daily energy!
Daily At-Home Morning Routine
--- END PAGE 1272 ---

--- PAGE 1273 ---
•

5 a.m. wake: This can fluctuate depending on bedtime the night before,
but my goal is to spend 7 to 8 hours in bed each night. If less than that,
I alter the day’s schedule to squeeze in a post-lunch nap, yoga nidra
(non-sleep deep rest) protocol, or meditation session.•

Upon waking: Head to bathroom for coconut oil pulling and tongue
scraping, wash face, apply toner, serum, and moisturizer.•

Within 20 minutes of waking: Read Bible and pray for 15 to 20
minutes.•

Within 1 hour of waking: Prepare tea or coffee, take morning
supplements with large glass of water, then head downstairs to do 15
minutes of mobility work, stretching, rebounding, and breathwork (see
chapter 10 for details).•

After mobility: Grab tea or coffee and head into office to do 45 to 60
minutes of deep work and writing, along with any urgent emails or
messages.•

7 a.m.: Family huddle for reading devotional, praying, and meeting
about the day.•

7:30 a.m.: Bathroom break. Once per week, include binder like
activated charcoal paired with coffee enema.•

8 a.m.: Work out for 60 minutes, alternating one day of strength
training and one day of HIIT and calisthenics or kettlebells for
Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Friday, and sauna, breathwork, and
cold therapy for Wednesday, Saturday, and Sunday (see chapter 10 for
details). More details below.•

9 a.m.: Make smoothie.• 
9:30 a.m.: Officially start workday with writing, consults, meetings, and
podcasting.
--- END PAGE 1273 ---

--- PAGE 1274 ---
Daily Travel Morning Routine
When traveling, I try to simulate my home routine as closely as possible.
This is important because adhering to a similar routine allows you to
adjust to new time zones much more quickly and maintain the same daily
productivity and feel-good momentum.•

5 a.m. wake: When traveling, I often don’t have the opportunity for a
siesta in the afternoon, so I usually stay in bed an extra 20 minutes and
do a Sensate session, yoga nidra body scan, or relaxing breathwork
before getting out of bed.•

Upon waking: Head to bathroom for coconut oil pulling and tongue
scraping, wash face, apply toner, serum, and moisturizer.•

Within 20 minutes of waking: Read Bible and pray for 15 to 20
minutes.•

Within 1 hour of waking: Prepare tea or coffee in hotel room, then do
5 Tibetan longevity exercises or any of the other daily body moves
from chapter 10, including tai chi–style bouncing, shaking, and
breathwork in the room.•

After mobility: Bathroom break.•

After bathroom: Work out for 30 to 60 minutes (depending on work
obligations), primarily utilizing blood flow restriction bands and
bodyweight training on hotel room floor, or super-slow training using
machines or free weights at hotel gym if it has anything more than a
vintage elliptical trainer and a pair of rusty dumbbells. If time permits,
I leave the BFR bands on after my workout and walk for 20 to 30
minutes in the sunlight while catching up on phone calls and emails.
More details below.• 
After workout: 5-minute contrast shower alternating 20 seconds cold,
10 seconds hot.
--- END PAGE 1274 ---

--- PAGE 1275 ---
• After shower: Head out to speak, podcast, meet, or go wherever else
my travel work is taking me.
Sample At-Home Weekly Exercise Routine
Monday: Super-slow training on ARX or with free weights, including one
set to failure each of deadlift, chest press, pull-down or pull-up, squat,
overhead press, and row. On days I’m including a good warm-up, mobility
exercises, and a few extra rehab exercises for any problematic joints, along
with a cool-down, I’m in and out of the gym within an hour.
Tuesday: 20 to 30 minutes of kettlebell exercises (swing, goblet squat, get-
up, snatch, lunges, presses, etc.) paired with plyometrics and calisthenics
(push-ups, lunge jumps, planking, hanging from a bar, etc.). I start or
finish with 20 to 30 minutes of HIIT cardio, such as a Vasper session, VO2
max, mitochondria or lactate training (see chapter 10 for details). 1 hour
total.
Wednesday: 30 minutes of yoga and/or breathwork in sauna, followed by
2-to-5-minute cold plunge. If time permits, Foundation Training, Knees
Over Toes rehab exercises, or other light body work and body therapy. 1
hour total.
Thursday: Same as Monday.
Friday: Same as Tuesday.
Saturday: Same as Wednesday, but addition of 1 to 2 hours of frisbee golf,
pickleball, rucking, paddleboarding, or any other seasonal sport or outdoor
exercise.
Sunday: Recovery day. Longer massage or foam rolling session, along with
a longer hot-cold contrast session, such as 5 minutes hot tub, 5 minutes
cold plunge, then 4 minutes of each, laddering down to 1 minute each.
--- END PAGE 1275 ---

--- PAGE 1276 ---
Every day: Begin with simple mobility and breathwork for 15 minutes. In
addition, I set a daily goal of 10K steps, achieved during podcasts, phone
calls, consults, meetings, etc.
Sample Travel Exercise Routine
Monday: Blood flow restriction (BFR) training with bodyweight exercises
like push-ups, squats, lunges, dips, door frame suspension strap pull-ups,
and core exercises, followed by walking with BFR bands on. If hotel gym is
good, I do a concurrent training session instead—meaning I mix up
strength sets and cardio sets to hit as many muscles and physiological
systems as possible in the shortest period of time, such as one set weight
training exercise (see examples below) to 2 minutes maximum sustainable
pace cardio, repeated for available time. 30 to 60 minutes total.
Tuesday: 20 to 30 minutes breathwork (in sauna if available) followed by
2-to-5-minute cold shower or cold plunge. If the hotel has a pool, include
lap swimming, underwater sets, and aquatic fitness work. 30 to 60 minutes
total.
Wednesday: Same as Monday.
Thursday: Same as Tuesday.
Friday: Same as Monday/Wednesday.
Saturday: 30 minutes electrical muscle stimulation (EMS) with portable
Katalyst suit (see chapter 11 for details). Plenty of walking or cycling for
commuting, sightseeing, etc.
Sunday: Recovery day. Long walk, hike, pickleball session, or outdoor
“animal flow” workout (see below) at a park.
Every day: Begin with 15 minutes of simple mobility and breathwork.
During the day, since I walk more often when I travel, I set a goal of 15K
--- END PAGE 1276 ---

--- PAGE 1277 ---
steps during walks to grocery store or meetings, podcasts, phone calls,
consults, etc.
My Go-To Exercises
Just like I have favorite meals that allow me to maintain dietary
predictability and simplicity, I have go-to exercises that I rely on when
designing a workout to do at my home gym, a health club, or a hotel.
Having a few dozen exercises that target all necessary body parts and
systems—exercises that you can do proficiently and have committed to
memory—allows you to walk into just about any gym on the planet and
construct an effective workout. Videos are available on the online
resources page for this chapter.
Strength Exercises
You can substitute kegs, logs, rocks, kettlebells, and sandbags for most of
these strength moves if you’d rather train outdoors or strongman-style (see
Zach Even-Esh’s The Encyclopedia of Underground Strength and
Conditioning for good examples).
UPPER-BODY PUSH•

Machine chest press
• Barbell or dumbbell bench press
• Incline barbell or dumbbell bench press
• Standing overhead press
• Standing cable press
• Weighted, assisted, or super-slow dip
• Loaded push-up with weighted vest, or super-slow bodyweight push-up
• Any other push-up variation
UPPER-BODY PULL• 
Machine pull-down
--- END PAGE 1277 ---

--- PAGE 1278 ---
• Bent barbell or dumbbell row
• Weighted, assisted, or super-slow pull-up
• Weighted, assisted, or super-slow horizontal pull-up
• Single-arm cable or dumbbell row
• Lat pull-down
• Seated row
FULL-BODY MOVES*•

Man Maker
• Turkish get-up
• Bear complex (power clean, front squat, push press, back squat, second
push press)
• Deadlift to overhead press
• Overhead squat
• Burpee with overhead press
* Get more full-body complex examples at
BenGreenfieldLife.com/complexes.
LOWER-BODY PUSH•

Leg press
• Barbell squat
• Goblet squat
• Front squat
• Single-leg squat
• Front lunge
• Reverse lunge
• Barbell or dumbbell step-up
LOWER-BODY PULL•

Back extension machine
• Deadlift
• Suitcase deadlift
• Romanian deadlift
• Hex bar deadlift
--- END PAGE 1278 ---

--- PAGE 1279 ---
Core & Mobility Exercises•

Torso twist
• Cat/cow
• Birddog (opposite arm-leg extensions)
• Yoga Sun Salutation series
• Hindu push-up
• Banded side-to-side walk
• Mountain climber
• Foam rolling
• Bridging
• Banded side-walk
• Lunging mobility exercises
Carrying & Moving Exercises• 
Walking dumbbell lunge
--- END PAGE 1279 ---

--- PAGE 1280 ---
• Walking overhead dumbbell lunge
• Farmer’s walk
• Incline sit-up
• Incline sit-up with rotation
• Any version of a knee-up, V-up, or get-up
• Any version of a hanging bent-leg or straight-leg raise
• Reverse hyperextension
• Slow torso twist
• Turkish get-up
Power & Plyometric Exercises
UPPER-BODY PUSH•

Overhead push press
• Explosive or clap push-up
• Medicine ball chest throw or overhead throw
• Snatch
• Burpee
UPPER-BODY PULL•

Jumping pull-up
• Explosive horizontal pull-up
• Battle rope
• Fast single-arm cable or dumbbell row
• Muscle-up
LOWER-BODY PUSH•

Jump squat
• Lunge jump
• Explosive step-up
LOWER-BODY PULL•

Power clean
• Hang clean
• Clean and jerk
• Kettlebell swing
--- END PAGE 1280 ---

--- PAGE 1281 ---
• Medicine ball slam
CORE/CARRY/MOVE•

Lunge jump
• Box jump
• Fast farmer’s walk
• Sled push
• Explosive stair climb
• Explosive torso twist
• Medicine ball side throw
• Rowing machine
• Bicycle
• Treadmill or another sprint
• Banded side-to-side walk
• Mountain climber
• Burpee
• Muscle-up
Sample Full-Body Kettlebell Training Session
Here’s an example of the type of kettlebell training session I do a couple
days a week when at home.
Do 3–5 rounds of the following:
• 5 Turkish get-ups per side
• 30 swings, split into 3 sets of 10 with 10 seconds’ rest after each set
• 5 goblet squats
• 30 snatches per side, split into 3 sets of 10 with 10 seconds’ rest after
each set
• 5 bottoms-up presses per side
• 60 seconds of walking with two kettlebells “racked” on your chest or held
farmer’s walk–style at your side
Outdoor Movement / Animal Flow
--- END PAGE 1281 ---

--- PAGE 1282 ---
This workout is similar to a travel workout I do if I can hunt down a nearby
park, or an outdoor spring/summer workout at home. Exercises are flexible
but should be primarily body weight and functional and include movements
such as crawling, carrying, lunging, hanging, traversing, and swimming. Total
workout time is 30–60 minutes.
Examples of workouts include these:
1. Riding your bike to a river or lake to go for a swim
2. Completing a bodyweight or functional CrossFit WOD like “Fat Amy”
3. Walking briskly on a nature trail and stopping at park benches or other
areas for dips, push-ups, squats, hanging from tree branches, pull-ups,
etc.
4. Doing a circuit like the following:
• Farmer’s walk—20 meters
• Bear crawl—10 meters
• 60-second asymmetrical carry (like carrying two heavy objects of
different weights farmer’s walk–style); swap sides at the 30-second
mark
• Frogger—10 meters
• Overhead walk—single hand, swapping hands at the 10-meter mark
• Duck—10 meters
Repeat for 3 to 5 total rounds.
This is your chance to mix things up and try new moves. The only rules:
don’t lift heavy, and make it fun and functional.
For plenty more workout ideas and workout videos, check out my channel
at YouTube.com/BenGreenfieldFitness, and for customized workout plans
designed by me and my coaching team, visit BenGreenfieldCoaching.com.
--- END PAGE 1282 ---

--- PAGE 1283 ---
THE BOUNDLESS DIET
There are a host of diets out there that are designed to optimize health,
and which one will work best for you depends entirely on your
biochemical individuality. Here, I’ve compiled the best of these diets and
grouped them into beginner, intermediate, and advanced categories based
on a trajectory from a very clean and somewhat restrictive reset diet to a
more liberal eating plan with a larger selection of foods, and finally to a
widely varied diet that’s easy to sustain for life. In other words, unlike in
the exercise program, the beginner, intermediate, and advanced categories
have nothing to do with how difficult a diet is; it’s all about taking you
--- END PAGE 1283 ---

--- PAGE 1284 ---
from a standard American diet to a more ancestral, health-optimizing,
widely varied way of eating.
For each diet, I’ve listed test results and symptoms that may make the
diet the right one for you, and I’ve provided a sample day of meals for
each. If you’ve read chapters 13 and 14 and done much of the self-
quantification from chapter 16, you are already equipped with most of the
information you need to customize your diet, but if you’re looking for
something “done-for-you,” these protocols will give you plenty to work
with.
No matter which diet you decide to pursue, make sure you adhere to
the following principles:
• Incorporate regular intermittent fasts or longer fasting periods.
• Ruthlessly eliminate inflammatory foods and control glycemic
variability.
• Rather than engaging in long-term calorie and carbohydrate
restriction, occasionally refeed your body with adequate calories and
carbohydrates.
• Occasionally engage in periods of more intense detoxification.
• Whenever given the option between real food and packaged or
processed food, choose the former.
• Eat a very wide variety of multicolored plants, bitters, herbs, and
spices.
• Whenever possible, choose clean, organic, wild, non-GMO foods and
ingredients.
• Whenever possible, eat locally grown in-season foods.
• Chew food thoroughly, and eat in a relaxed, grateful parasympathetic
state.
--- END PAGE 1284 ---

--- PAGE 1285 ---
• Review the longevity tips in chapter 19 and incorporate those key
principles into your diet as often as possible.
Beginner
The diets in this beginner section are clean eating protocols that aren’t
meant to be followed permanently, but instead temporarily implemented
for cleansing, detoxification, and preparing for a less restrictive diet after
one to twelve weeks. These are somewhat restrictive plans that I do not
necessarily recommend following for life unless you have a serious
condition such as celiac or Crohn’s disease or severe food allergies.
If you’ve been eating a diet or living a toxic or unhealthy lifestyle that
has caused gut damage, inflammation, sugar dependency, or similar gut
problems, I recommend that you follow any of the diets in this section
before progressing to an intermediate plan. If you have more serious gut
issues, autoimmune symptoms, or a condition like dysbiosis, stick to this
type of diet until your symptoms subside, which sometimes takes up to six
months. (In the case of the GAPS diet, it is recommended that you follow
it for up to two years to fully heal a leaky gut.) If you need to detox or
cleanse at any point throughout the year, you can return to one of these
diets—for example, you can perform a one-to-two-week liver cleanse in
the spring and winter or follow an Elemental Diet for the first thirty days
of each year.
Ultimately, rather than recommending one single diet—which you
know from chapter 14 is a flawed approach—I’m equipping you with a
number of diets that you can use to heal your gut, ease digestion, detox
your body, and prepare your digestive system for more variety.
AUTOIMMUNE PALEO (AIP) DIET
--- END PAGE 1285 ---

--- PAGE 1286 ---
Also known as the Paleo autoimmune protocol, the AIP diet is a much
stricter version of the Paleo diet (which is based on meat, fish, vegetables,
nuts, and seeds). It eliminates dairy, grains, eggs, nightshades, legumes,
and other foods that may cause inflammation in people with a leaky gut.
As explained in chapter 13, leaky gut can lead to an autoimmune response
in which your own immune system tags your tissues, such as your eyes or
nervous system, with certain types of antibodies, including those listed
below. This falsely signals to your immune system that those tissues are
foreign invaders, and your immune system then attacks those tissues.
Each autoimmune disease also has markers specific to that condition, and
BoundlessBook.com/21 includes more information on which antibodies
are specific to which diseases. By focusing on nutrient-rich foods and
avoiding inflammatory ones, the AIP diet aims to heal inflammation and
any holes in the gut.
People who follow the AIP diet typically should follow it strictly for
four to eight weeks and then slowly reintroduce foods that they have been
avoiding. The best book to accompany this diet is The Autoimmune Paleo
Cookbook by Mickey Trescott, since it has a host of tasty recipes that don’t
taste like cardboard. After you’ve spent at least four to eight weeks on one
of the diets in this section, the Wahls Protocol (outlined in the
intermediate section) is also an excellent diet for managing autoimmunity
long term.
You may be a good candidate for the AIP diet if you have elevated
antibodies as indicated by an autoimmune blood test, leaky gut syndrome,
or a diagnosed autoimmune condition. Basic symptoms suggestive of
autoimmune disease can also include chronic fatigue; joint pain or
stiffness; muscle weakness; skin rashes; gastrointestinal symptoms such as
bloating, diarrhea, or constipation; and systemic inflammation. Blood tests
may reveal markers of autoimmune activity, such as elevated levels of
antibodies directed against specific tissues or organs, like anti-nuclear
--- END PAGE 1286 ---

--- PAGE 1287 ---
antibodies (ANA), anti-thyroid antibodies (e.g., anti-TPO, anti-Tg), anti-
citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA), or anti-tissue transglutaminase
antibodies (anti-tTG). Genetic testing may identify specific gene
variations associated with autoimmune susceptibility, such as HLA-DQ2
and HLA-DQ8 for celiac disease or specific human leukocyte antigen
(HLA) alleles for autoimmune conditions like rheumatoid arthritis or type
1 diabetes. Gut testing, such as comprehensive stool analysis or intestinal
permeability testing, may reveal imbalances in gut microbiota, intestinal
inflammation, or increased intestinal permeability (leaky gut), which are
commonly associated with autoimmune conditions. Urine testing may
assess levels of specific metabolites or inflammatory markers, providing
additional insight into immune function and systemic inflammation.
A Sample Day of the AIP Diet
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACKBlack Sesame

Go Greenfields
Tuscan Pesto
Seared Tuna with
Blueberry Pie
Mint Smoothie
Chicken Skillet
Wasabi Citrus
Energy BallsBowl
Aioli

SPECIFIC CARBOHYDRATE DIET (SCD)
The Specific Carbohydrate Diet (SCD) was first described by Sidney V.
Haas in 1924 as a way to treat celiac disease and was further refined in the
1951 medical textbook The Management of Celiac Disease. It was later
repopularized in 1987 by Elaine Gottschall, the mother of one of Haas’s
patients.
The SCD is a gluten-free and grain-free diet and was a popular
treatment for celiac disease decades before gluten was even discovered.
--- END PAGE 1287 ---

--- PAGE 1288 ---
The diet eliminates complex carbohydrates such as grains, starches, most
dairy products, sugars, and processed foods while emphasizing nutrient-
dense foods that are easily digested and absorbed, including lean proteins,
certain fruits, nonstarchy vegetables, nuts, and healthy fats. By reducing
the intake of fermentable carbohydrates that can fuel pathogenic bacteria
and promote inflammation in the gut, the SCD aims to restore balance to
the gut microbiota, reduce intestinal inflammation, improve digestive
function, and alleviate symptoms. It may be supplemented with
probiotics, digestive enzymes, and other gut-supportive nutrients to
further enhance gut healing and optimize digestive health.
I recommend you follow this plan if you have IBD, IBS, bloating, gas,
or gut inflammation, particularly if these issues are brought on by gluten
or grain consumption. The best book to accompany the SCD program is
Gotschall’s Breaking the Vicious Cycle.
Symptoms of conditions that may benefit from the SCD diet include
chronic gastrointestinal symptoms such as abdominal pain, bloating,
diarrhea, and/or constipation, as well as systemic symptoms such as
fatigue, joint pain, and weight loss. Blood tests may reveal markers of
inflammation, such as elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) or fecal
calprotectin, which are commonly associated with inflammatory bowel
diseases like Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis. Genetic testing may
identify specific gene variations associated with increased susceptibility to
IBD, such as NOD2/CARD15 mutations. Gut testing, including
comprehensive stool analysis or microbial profiling, may uncover
imbalances in gut microbiota, dysbiosis, intestinal inflammation, or
increased intestinal permeability (leaky gut), which are common features
of conditions like IBD, IBS, and other gastrointestinal disorders. Urine
testing may assess levels of specific metabolites or inflammatory markers,
providing additional insights into gut health and systemic inflammation.
--- END PAGE 1288 ---

--- PAGE 1289 ---
Based on these assessments, individuals with confirmed or suspected
gastrointestinal conditions such as IBD, IBS, or celiac disease and related
symptoms may benefit from following the SCD.
A Sample Day of the SCD
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACK
Asparagus,
Slammin’ Salmon
Ginger-Spiced
Paleo Pumpkin
Tomato &
Burgers
Chicken Skewers
Chia PuddingFontina Frittata

GUT AND PSYCHOLOGY SYNDROME (GAPS) DIET
Dr. Natasha Campbell-McBride, a neurologist and nutritionist, developed
the GAPS diet and wrote the book Gut and Psychology Syndrome to assist
her patients—especially children—who were experiencing problematic
gut-brain issues. Like the SCD, the GAPS diet removes potentially
problematic foods, particularly grains and gluten-containing foods, but it
also focuses on adding healing, nutrient-dense foods. If you have cognitive
issues, irritation, brain fog, or nervous system–based problems affected by
the gut, such as ADHD, this can be a good program to follow.
The diet emphasizes nutrient-dense whole foods that are easily
digested and absorbed, while eliminating potentially inflammatory or
allergenic foods that may contribute to gut dysbiosis and inflammation. It
typically involves three stages: the Introduction diet, which focuses on
healing and sealing the gut lining; the Full GAPS diet, which includes a
wider variety of foods while continuing to support gut health; and the
Maintenance diet, which is tailored to individual needs and focuses on
long-term gut maintenance and overall health. By removing potentially
--- END PAGE 1289 ---

--- PAGE 1290 ---
harmful foods and incorporating gut-healing foods such as bone broth,
fermented foods, and nutrient-dense vegetables, fruits, and healthy fats,
the GAPS diet aims to reduce inflammation, support digestive function,
and improve neurological and psychological symptoms. It may be
supplemented with probiotics, digestive enzymes, and other gut-
supportive nutrients to further enhance gut healing and optimize overall
health and well-being.
Symptoms of conditions that may benefit from the GAPS diet include
gastrointestinal issues such as chronic bloating, abdominal pain, diarrhea,
and constipation, as well as neurological or psychological symptoms such
as anxiety, depression, mood swings, and cognitive difficulties. Blood tests
may reveal markers of inflammation or immune dysregulation, such as
elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines or antibodies, which are
commonly associated with conditions like IBS, IBD, autoimmune
disorders, and neurological or psychiatric conditions. Genetic testing may
identify specific gene variations associated with increased susceptibility to
gut dysbiosis, inflammation, and neurological or psychiatric disorders. Gut
testing, such as comprehensive stool analysis or intestinal permeability
testing, may uncover imbalances in gut microbiota, dysbiosis, intestinal
inflammation, or increased gut permeability (leaky gut), which are
common features of conditions like IBS, IBD, SIBO, and other
gastrointestinal and neurological disorders. Urine testing may assess
levels of specific metabolites or neurotransmitters, providing additional
insights into gut health, neurotransmitter balance, and systemic
inflammation.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACKTomato Soup
Cheesy Turmeric

Sweet Potato
with Coconut
Keto Meatloaf
& Garlic Kale
Toast
and Curry
Chips
--- END PAGE 1290 ---

--- PAGE 1291 ---
A Sample Day of the GAPS Diet
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
SWISS DETOX DIET / COLORADO CLEANSE
Both the Swiss Detox Diet, developed by Dr. Thomas Rau, and the
Colorado Cleanse, developed by Dr. John Douillard, are comprehensive
approaches to healing and detoxifying the gut, liver, and gallbladder. Both
programs are simple and consist of foods such as kitchari, olive oil, and
celery juice.
If you need a liver or gallbladder cleanse, these protocols work well,
and they can also be used as one-to-two-week jump-starts for any of the
other diets in the beginner, intermediate, and advanced sections. They’re
good choices if you have any of the indicators of liver or gallbladder issues
listed in the table. The best books to read to better understand the
protocols and get more recipes are Dr. Thomas Rau’s The Swiss Secret to
Optimal Health and Dr. John Douillard’s Colorado Cleanse, Eat Wheat, and
Body, Mind, and Sport.
I am a fan of using either of these protocols as a cleanse once or twice
a year, especially when I am not traveling and can give my body a little
extra rest and recovery. I also highly recommend a visit to the Swiss
Mountain Clinic in the Swiss Alps for a done-for-you retreat that
incorporates the Swiss Detox Diet. I’ve been to this facility for a complete
colon and liver detox, which combines European biological medicine
practices with a detox diet for treatment of excessive toxins and also
Lyme, Parkinson’s, mold and mycotoxin overload, cancer, and beyond.
You may want to follow this diet as a brief one-to-two-week cleanse if
you have abnormal liver enzymes or poor gallbladder function as indicated
by a blood test, high levels of toxins or metals, gastrointestinal discomfort,
and/or difficulty with bowel movements and generally want a done-for-
--- END PAGE 1291 ---

--- PAGE 1292 ---
you short-term cleansing approach particularly relevant to liver and
gallbladder function. For example, low or high levels of alanine
transaminase, aspartate transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin,
albumin, or gamma-glutamyl transferase can all be measured on a blood
panel to assess liver and gallbladder health, while abnormal levels of
bilirubin, urobilinogen, amylase, and lipase can be measured in the urine.
Yellow, tar-colored, or pale stool—along with higher levels of
proteobacteria than Firmicutes (types of gut bacteria that can indicate
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease)—can also indicate issues.
A Sample Day of the Swiss Detox / Colorado Cleanse
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACKRosemary,

Chia Yogurt
Quinoa-Stuffed
Maple Baked
Squash & Pear
Custard
Eggplant
ApplesSoup

CARNIVORE DIET
In chapter 14, I described my approach to and experience with the
carnivore diet. The diet originated in the early 1900s with an Arctic
explorer named Vilhjalmur Stefansson, who noticed a near-complete
absence of chronic diseases in the Inuit culture, where the diet consisted
entirely of meats and animal fats. He subsequently began experimenting
with an all-meat diet, consuming nothing but meat and water for a year,
and experienced noticeable results in his overall health and vitality.
The carnivore diet is a meat-based diet that excludes all sources of
carbohydrates. It is restrictive, allowing only proteins (beef, chicken, pork,
and some fish), animal fats (primarily from the above meat sources), and
--- END PAGE 1292 ---

--- PAGE 1293 ---
organ meats (such as liver, kidney, and bone marrow). Other animal foods
like dairy and eggs can also be consumed, and eating all animal parts such
as organs, cartilage, and bones is encouraged. Off-limits foods include nuts
and seeds, legumes, whole grains, fruits, vegetables, and all other plant-
based foods.
While there are no clinical trials that assess the benefits of an all-meat
diet, a 2021 survey involving over 2,000 participants who had been on a
carnivore diet for at least six months showed self-reported improvements
in sleep disruption, fatigue, brain fog, cognition, and mental clarity, being
overweight or underweight, blood sugar dysregulation (type 1 and 2
diabetes and metabolic syndrome), autoimmunity, joint and muscle pain,
mental health, skin issues, and urinary difficulties.
I typically only recommend the carnivore diet as a short-term stint to
heal the gut, which can happen when you eliminate all plant defense
compounds and simplify the confusion of figuring out what’s aggravating
you by eliminating just about everything—except meat. Despite the fact
that modern humans are omnivores, proponents of the carnivore meal
plan believe that it is completely safe to stay on long term. However, if you
choose to do so, you must incorporate organ meats into your diet to avoid
becoming deficient in certain nutrients, like B vitamins and vitamin C.
Many folks who transition to this diet begin with a modified approach
of intermittent fasting and including foods like honey, berries, squash, and
cucumber (which is low in lectins and oxalates). If you still experience
symptoms on the carnivore diet, it could be a reaction to eggs, lactose, or
fish, which you can also eliminate, but if you do, you need to include an
iodine source, like iodized salt.
Finally, the carnivore diet is ketogenic, and you may experience keto
adaptation (“keto flu”) during the first two to four weeks, which can cause
side effects like gas, bloating, abdominal pain, and loose stool due to the
natural shift in the gut microbiome that occurs when switching to a low-
--- END PAGE 1293 ---

--- PAGE 1294 ---
carb diet. In this case, supplementing with electrolyte powders or drinks
that contain sodium, potassium, and magnesium can help.
People who might benefit from a carnivore diet often report chronic
digestive issues, autoimmune conditions, or inflammatory diseases that
have not responded well to other dietary interventions. Symptoms such as
bloating, gas, joint pain, skin issues, and fatigue that persist despite trying
other diets might suggest that this more “radical” dietary change could be
beneficial.
Blood tests that might indicate a carnivore diet could be a good fit
include high levels of inflammation markers (such as C-reactive protein),
unresolved deficiencies in B and iron (despite supplementation),
12 autoimmune or food allergy issues (particularly sensitivities to grains,
grasses, legumes, etc.), and lipid profiles that suggest an intolerance to
carbohydrates (for example, elevated triglycerides and low HDL
cholesterol). Additionally, insulin resistance markers like fasting glucose
and HbA1c levels might guide a recommendation to make this shift.
Genetic testing can provide insight into how well someone might tolerate
a carnivore diet. For instance, individuals with genetic predispositions to
undermethylation may do better on a lower-plant, higher-meat diet, as
would individuals who have an ancestral history of higher amounts of
meat and fish rather than vegetables and fruits. People who clear large
amounts of LDL particles due to favorable PCSK9 genes may do better on
a carnivore diet.
A Sample Day of the Carnivore Diet
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACK
Liver and Eggs
Rib-eye Steak Grilled Salmon
Biltong,
Cooked in Butter
with Bone
Fermented Beef
--- END PAGE 1294 ---

--- PAGE 1295 ---
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACK
Marrow Stick, or Other
Style of Meat
Jerky or Cheese
SIBO BI-PHASIC DIET (B-PD)
SIBO stands for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and it is
characterized by the excessive growth of bacteria in the small intestine.
This condition can result from various factors, including maldigestion,
malabsorption, and a leaky gut. It can cause digestive and extraintestinal
symptoms such as bloating, gas, abdominal pain, heartburn, constipation,
diarrhea, rashes, headaches, and fatigue.
The SIBO Bi-Phasic Diet (SIBO B-PD) was developed by Dr. Nirala
Jacobi to manage and treat SIBO, and it is one of the best systematic
dietary approaches to eliminating gas and bloating when something like
the SCD or basic low-FODMAP diet doesn’t seem to be working. It
combines principles of the low-FODMAP and SCD diets and is divided
into two phases. The first phase restricts dietary fermentable
carbohydrates (high-FODMAP foods like certain fruits, vegetables, grains,
legumes, dairy products, sweeteners, and food additives) to reduce
bacterial overgrowth and their production of metabolic by-products,
relieve SIBO symptoms, heal the gut, and restore optimal digestive
function. The second phase introduces antimicrobial agents to remove any
remaining bacterial overgrowth while reintroducing foods into the diet.
This phase also helps you identify trigger foods and maintain a healthy and
balanced diet that supports gut health and prevents the recurrence of
SIBO in the long term.
Phase 1 of the SIBO B-PD lasts two to six weeks and involves avoiding
or minimizing intake of foods high in fermentable carbohydrates that can
ferment in the gut and exacerbate symptoms. This restrictive phase of the
--- END PAGE 1295 ---

--- PAGE 1296 ---
diet emphasizes eating smaller, more frequent meals with adequate
protein and healthy fat sources. Choices during this phase include•

Protein: poultry, beef, lamb, pork, fish, eggs•

Nonstarchy vegetables: leafy greens, zucchini, bell peppers,
cucumbers, carrots, eggplant, bok choy•

Healthy fats: olive oil, coconut oil, avocado, moderate amounts of nuts
and seeds•

Fruits: lemon, lime, berries•

Fermented foods (as tolerated): cultured vegetables, sauerkraut,
kimchi•

Beverages: water, herbal teas, black coffee
Phase 2, the reintroduction phase, lasts four to six weeks. The
objective here is to gradually reintroduce foods to expand the diet and
identify individual dietary triggers. Phase 2 naturally progresses into the
final phase of the SIBO B-PD—the maintenance phase. The overall goal of
the SIBO B-PD protocol is to create a sustainable, nutritious, and
individualized dietary plan based on your tolerance levels.
Basic symptoms suggestive of SIBO and a potential benefit of this B-
PD diet include chronic bloating, abdominal pain or discomfort, gas,
diarrhea, constipation, and nutrient malabsorption. Blood tests may reveal
markers of inflammation, such as elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) or
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), as well as deficiencies in certain
vitamins or minerals due to malabsorption. Genetic testing may uncover
gene variations associated with impaired gut motility or immune function,
predisposing you to SIBO. Gut testing, such as breath testing for hydrogen
and methane gases, can confirm the presence of SIBO by detecting
abnormal levels of these gases produced by bacteria in the small intestine.
Urine testing may reveal elevated levels of certain metabolites associated
--- END PAGE 1296 ---

--- PAGE 1297 ---
with bacterial overgrowth or gut dysbiosis, further supporting the
diagnosis of SIBO. A comprehensive stool test can also assess gut health
by measuring markers that signal inflammation, intestinal permeability,
dysbiosis, intestinal infection, and maldigestion.
A SIBO breath test, or the use of an at-home Food Marble device for
breath testing, can monitor your SIBO treatment progress and confirm
SIBO eradication by tracking changes in hydrogen, methane, and hydrogen
sulfide gas levels.
A Sample Day of the SIBO Bi-Phasic Diet
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACKSteak with

Asian Breakfast
Beef Burger with
Baked Vanilla &
Tomato &
Bowl
Carrot Chips
Coconut CustardProsciutto Salad

The SIBO Doctor website has plenty of helpful, tasty recipes for a bi-
phasic diet, along with additional details and instructions. I’ll include
other helpful resources and recipes on the resources page for this chapter.
ELEMENTAL DIET
Should you need to pull out all the stops to manage gut inflammation,
SIBO, candida, yeast, fungus, constipation, FODMAP sensitivities, or leaky
gut, or if you simply want to push the reset button on what seems to be
problematic digestion, you can spend one to four weeks on an elemental
diet. It’s a good choice if you have the indicators of SIBO or FODMAP
sensitivities, but no other solution, including any other diet in this
chapter, seems to be working.
--- END PAGE 1297 ---

--- PAGE 1298 ---
Warning: This diet is highly restrictive and only appropriate for a quick
one-week to one-month stint. The elemental diet is the simplest and,
admittedly, most boring of all the beginner diet options. It involves
consuming a meal replacement formula for breakfast, lunch, and dinner,
along with a few extra oils, fats, and amino acids for added nutrients. For a
meal replacement drink, I recommend one or two servings of Thorne’s
Mediclear SGS or Dr. Ruscio’s Elemental Health formula. For extra
protein, fat, and calories, you can blend the formula with bone broth
and/or add 10 to 20 g essential amino acids to each shake, along with a
teaspoon or tablespoon of extra-virgin olive oil and MCT or coconut oil.
These formulas are expensive, so you can also use my DIY version of
an elemental health smoothie, which tastes like an orange creamsicle
(though you may still tire of orange creamsicles after a month!). Blend the
following: ice and organic coconut water to the desired texture, a liquid
multivitamin (Mary Ruth’s is good), 10 g essential amino acids (mango
flavor Kion Aminos works well for this recipe), a dash of natural vanilla
extract, a pinch of salt, a tablespoon of honey, and an ounce of extra-virgin
olive oil. I’ll include a video of me making it on the resources page for this
chapter.
Should you want even more variety, you can include soups, broths, and
steamed vegetables in your evening meal. To learn more about the
elemental diet and what can and cannot be included, I recommend Dr.
Allison Siebecker’s website, SIBOInfo.com.
A Sample Day of the Elemental Diet
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACK
Morning
Afternoon
Steamed Broccoli
Organic
Smoothie or Meal
Smoothie or Meal
& Vegetable
Applesauce
--- END PAGE 1298 ---

--- PAGE 1299 ---
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACK
Replacement
Replacement
SoupFormula
Formula

Intermediate
After you follow any of the beginner diets for eight to twelve weeks, your
gut should be ready for a wider variety of foods. In this section, I’ll
introduce you to my favorite diets that are clean and easy to digest and
consist primarily of real, whole foods.
Many of the diets in this section tend to be low-carbohydrate or
ketogenic. This is not because a ketogenic diet is perfect for everyone but
because eating carbohydrates throughout the day can lead to blood sugar
fluctuations and inflammation. A low-carbohydrate or ketogenic approach
is a good way to avoid this, and most people have the most stable energy
levels when they consume no more than around 30 percent of their
calories from carbohydrates, especially starches and sugars.
For athletes, extremely active individuals, folks with the AMY1 gene
variant (which allows them to consume more carbohydrates), and people
who need more carbohydrates, I do recommend prioritizing the addition
of extra nightly carbohydrates to the diets in this section. In this type of
“refeed” scenario, you can add 50 to 250 g (depending on your size and
activity level) of clean starches in the form of sweet potatoes, yams, taro,
other tubers, parsnips, carrots, beets, rice, or properly prepared (either
soaked, sprouted, or fermented) grains, with foods such as dark chocolate,
berries, or coconut or organic dairy ice cream for dessert. Highly active
individuals may also benefit from a weekly carbohydrate refeed scenario, a
day on which carbs make up about 40 percent of your daily caloric intake.
WAHLS PROTOCOL (LOW-CARB VERSION)
--- END PAGE 1299 ---

--- PAGE 1300 ---
After being diagnosed with multiple sclerosis (MS), Dr. Terry Wahls began
studying food and vitamins and created a nutrient-rich, Paleo-esque diet.
Within a year of changing her way of eating, she was out of her wheelchair
and biking miles at a time. The best book to read to learn more about this
plan is her book The Wahls Protocol.
On the Wahls Protocol, you eat lots of meat and fish, vegetables
(especially green, leafy ones), brightly colored fruit like berries, and fat
from animal and plant sources (especially omega-3 fatty acids), and you
avoid dairy, eggs, grain, legumes, nightshades, and sugar. The low-carb
version of the Wahls Protocol is especially good for managing
autoimmune conditions while introducing a bit more variety than the AIP.
This diet can also work well for those with mast cell issues aggravated
by mold and mycotoxins or Lyme, and for those with mitochondrial
dysfunction or poor nervous system health. Symptoms of conditions that
may benefit from the Wahls Protocol include chronic fatigue, muscle
weakness, cognitive difficulties, mood disturbances, and neurological
symptoms such as numbness, tingling, or balance problems. From a
testing standpoint, blood tests may reveal markers of inflammation or
immune dysregulation, such as elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines,
autoimmune antibodies, or markers of oxidative stress, which are
commonly associated with autoimmune conditions, neurological
disorders, and chronic inflammatory conditions. Genetic testing may
identify specific gene variations associated with increased susceptibility to
oxidative stress, inflammation, mitochondrial dysfunction, and
neurological or autoimmune disorders. Gut testing, such as
comprehensive stool analysis or microbial profiling, may uncover
imbalances in gut microbiota, dysbiosis, intestinal inflammation, or
increased intestinal permeability (leaky gut), which are common features
of conditions like IBD, IBS, SIBO, and other gastrointestinal and
autoimmune disorders. Urine testing can also show increased levels of
--- END PAGE 1300 ---

--- PAGE 1301 ---
specific metabolites related to inflammatory markers that suggest
impairments in mitochondrial function, oxidative stress, and systemic
inflammation. Based on assessments like this, if you have confirmed or
suspected autoimmune, neurological, or chronic inflammatory conditions,
you may benefit from following the Wahls Protocol.
A Sample Day of the Wahls Protocol
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACKBalsamic Dijon–

Spinach, Onion &
Avocado, Apple
Glazed Beef
Keto Deviled
Goat Cheese
& Chicken Salad
Tenderloin with
EggsOmelet
Chimichurri

PLANT PARADOX DIET
The Plant Paradox diet, developed by Dr. Stephen Gundry and described
in his book The Plant Paradox, eliminates lectins (a natural plant-based
defensive protein that can cause gastric distress in many people and is
found in foods such as green beans, lentils, and edamame) and limits
sugar and polyunsaturated omega-6 fats. It also limits phytates, which are
a source of energy for sprouting seeds; when people eat them in plants (as
phytic acid), they bind to nutrients like manganese, iron, and zinc, making
them indigestible and increasing your risk of being deficient in those
minerals.
The Plant Paradox diet usually starts with a three-day cleanse, during
which you repopulate your gut bacteria with leafy greens, cruciferous
vegetables, clean protein, and good fats, and then has a second phase in
which you eat only from the list of approved foods for at least six weeks.
On the resources page for this chapter, I’ve simplified the diet to skip the
--- END PAGE 1301 ---

--- PAGE 1302 ---
two phases and still give you a lectin-free protocol; this version also uses a
ketogenic strategy to control blood sugar.
I recommend this diet if you want to eat a rich variety of vegetables
but have difficulty digesting them and are sensitive to lectins, phytates,
oxalates, and other built-in plant defense mechanisms—it lets you
consume a diverse array of plants prepared in a manner that makes them
easier to digest. It’s a good choice if you have indicators of plant-, legume-,
or grain-digesting issues, such as gluten sensitivities, IBS, or other
problematic responses to nuts, seeds, and legumes. Many mineral
deficiency symptoms can occur due to phytates, including paleness,
dizziness, dry hair and skin, restless legs, anxiety, headaches, and fatigue
(iron deficiency); diarrhea, hair loss, poor immune function, and loss of
appetite (zinc deficiency); or low fertility and impaired glucose tolerance
(manganese deficiency). You may also have markers of inflammation or
autoimmune issues such as low levels of blood TNF-alpha, adiponectin, or
interleukin-6; a low white blood cell count; low ferritin; or low T3. These,
along with a food allergy and intolerance test (see chapter 16), can give
you insight into whether modulating plant intake may be a good idea for
you.
A Sample Day of the Plant Paradox Diet
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACK
Homemade
Lemon Garlic
Cilantro Lime
Parmesan Daikon
Maple Coconut
Chicken
Sardine Salad
Radish FriesYogurt
Drumsticks

PALEO DIET
--- END PAGE 1302 ---

--- PAGE 1303 ---
The Paleo diet is flexible and can be adapted for your specific needs, but it
essentially cuts out modern agricultural foods that can cause an
inflammatory reaction in many people and focuses on foods that our
Paleolithic ancestors would likely have eaten, depending on seasonal
availability.
One of the fundamental concepts behind Paleo is that humans were
hunter-gatherers far longer than they’ve been farmers and cultivators. As a
result, our genes evolved to favor the nutrient-dense plants and meats of
those hunter-gatherers, not the high-sugar, high-dairy, high-refined-carb
modern Western diet.
The standard Paleo diet includes meat (especially organ meats like
liver and kidneys, bone broth, and marrow); high-quality animal fats;
seafood; eggs (ideally, pasture-raised); nonstarchy vegetables; low-
glycemic-index fruits like berries, citrus, and stone fruits; coconut oil,
olive oil, and avocado oil; nuts and seeds; and herbs and spices. The
inflammatory foods excluded from the Paleo diet include grains like
wheat, barley, oats, corn, and rice; dairy; refined sugar; processed foods;
and vegetable oils (such as soybean, peanut, corn, and canola oils). Foods
that are eaten in moderate amounts (if they are well-tolerated) include
legumes like lentils and chickpeas and nightshades such as tomatoes,
white potatoes, red potatoes, and peppers. In other words, eat like a
human being would have eaten prior to the agricultural revolution—
perhaps with the exception of all the modern, newfangled “Paleo-
approved” energy bars, drinks, and supplements that have saturated the
market! The best guide to more history and details of the Paleo diet is The
Paleo Solution by Robb Wolf.
The Paleo diet would be appropriate for someone sensitive to grains,
legumes, and dairy who wants to expand their eating beyond a more
restrictive protocol such as Autoimmune Paleo (AIP), and it may be
helpful for conditions of gut inflammation, autoimmune disease, or skin
--- END PAGE 1303 ---

--- PAGE 1304 ---
issues such as acne or eczema. Some research even suggests that type 2
diabetes may improve with a Paleo diet. This is because insulin resistance
may be caused by inflammation, and the Paleo diet eliminates common
inflammatory foods. It’s a good choice if you have any indicators of dairy
sensitivities, autoimmune disorders, or gut inflammation.
A note on dairy: You can consume dairy on a Paleo diet if you tolerate
it well and it comes from grass-fed cows, which produce milk that is
higher in anti-inflammatory omega-3 fatty acids and lower in inflammatory
omega-6s. Grain-fed cows absorb gut-irritating lectins from their feed that
are then concentrated in their milk, which can contribute to inflammation
in people who drink that milk. Ideally, any milk consumed on a Paleo diet
(or, in my opinion, any other diet) should be A2 milk, which has more A2
than A1 casein—A1 casein can produce significant gut inflammation in
many individuals. Casein concentrations vary among breeds of cows, with
some breeds—such as Guernsey and Jersey cows—having very little to no
A1 casein. You can find more details at A2Milk.com.
A Sample Day of the Paleo Diet
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACKChopped
Broccoli Salad
Beef Taco

Sweet Potato &
Basil & Peach
with Balsamic,
Stuffed
Poblano Hash
SherbetWalnuts &
Avocados
Cranberries

Advanced
--- END PAGE 1304 ---

--- PAGE 1305 ---
Although any of the intermediate diets can be followed indefinitely, I
recommend an even more widely varied diet for anyone whose gut can
tolerate it or who isn’t on a short-term cleanse or weight loss journey. If
your blood glucose and inflammation are under control; your other labs,
blood, and biomarkers look good; your body weight is where you want it to
be; your gut feels good; you have achieved full-body wellness and want to
enjoy and experiment with as many foods as possible, or even try eating
according to your ancestry, any of the strategies from this section are a
good option for you.
MEDITERRANEAN DIET (LOW-CARB VERSION)
The Mediterranean diet is a plant- and omega-3-rich diet that is prevalent
in many longevity hot spots and Blue Zones (although it is possible that
the diet’s positive health effects may also be caused by lifestyle factors
such as fasting, seasonal eating, social meals, high intake of tannin-rich
beverages and wild plants, and limited meat consumption). It is a dietary
pattern inspired by the traditional eating habits of countries bordering the
Mediterranean Sea and emphasizes whole, minimally processed foods
such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, legumes, nuts, seeds, olive oil, fish,
and poultry while limiting intake of processed red meat, refined sugars,
and unhealthy fats. The diet is rich in fiber, antioxidants, healthy fats, and
phytonutrients, which have been shown to reduce inflammation, improve
blood lipid levels, lower blood pressure, and support heart health.
A low-carb twist on the Mediterranean diet merges the well-known
beneficial health impacts of the Mediterranean diet with the positive
metabolic effects of stable blood sugar, elevated ketones, fat-burning
metabolism, and low intake of processed starches and carbohydrates.
After all, a traditional, healthy Mediterranean meal doesn’t include
unlimited breadsticks and endless salad bowls drenched in vegetable oil,
and instead incorporates a much wider variety of plants, herbs, spices,
--- END PAGE 1305 ---

--- PAGE 1306 ---
fatty fish, avocados, olive oil, fermented dairy, artisanal cheeses, and more
in a rainbow of colors. Based on a large amount of epidemiological
research, this approach can be particularly effective for managing
cardiovascular conditions, improving heart health, and managing
metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes, along with overall health span
and lifespan.
A Sample Day of the Mediterranean Diet (Low-Carb)
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACKMacadamia-

Jalapeño Bacon
Salmon Arugula
Encrusted Mahi
& Cheese
Salad with
Keto Bacon
Mahi with
Cauliflower
Creamy Balsamic
Burger BombsCucumber
Muffins
Dressing
Avocado Salsa

WESTON A. PRICE DIET
In chapter 17, I introduced the Weston A. Price diet as the ultimate diet for
increasing beauty and symmetry and ensuring you eat a full spectrum of
fat-soluble vitamins. This diet is the closest representation of the way that
my family typically eats, although we vary our selections widely based on
what is in season, what I have hunted, what is available at the local farmers
market, and where our travels take us. The best books to read to learn
more about this diet are Nourishing Traditions by Sally Fallon, along with
my cookbooks, Boundless Cookbook and Boundless Kitchen. Follow this diet
if you like to eat just about everything on God’s green earth, you’re a self-
proclaimed healthy foodie like me, and you’re willing to take the time to
prepare food using ancestral methods, including soaking, sprouting, and
fermenting.
--- END PAGE 1306 ---

--- PAGE 1307 ---
A Sample Day of the Weston A. Price Diet
For detailed recipes, instructions, and layout of the meal plan, visit
BoundlessBook.com/21.
BREAKFAST LUNCH DINNER SNACK
Tex-Mex Eggs
Benedict with
Avocado & Greek
Chili with Beef,
Salt & Vinegar
Grilled Potato
Yogurt Chicken
Beans & Chicken
Sweet Potato
Slabs & Avocado
Salad
Livers
ChipsLime Hollandaise

ANCESTRAL DIET
There are a variety of ways to customize the Weston A. Price diet to your
specific ancestry—a concept explored in chapter 19. In the book The Jungle
Effect, Dr. Daphne Miller explains the dietary wisdom of traditional
cultures whose diets are specific to their genes and ancestry. In her
research for the book (you can listen to my podcast with her, linked to on
BoundlessBook.com/21), Miller traveled to locations around the world
that she identified as “cold spots”—the opposite of hot spots!—that had a
remarkably low incidence of diseases such as diabetes, heart disease,
depression, colon cancer, breast cancer, and prostate cancer. It turned out
that many of the traditional cultures in these areas ate whole-food,
Weston A. Price–like diets that were specific to their traditions, ancestry,
and local environment. Many cold-spot inhabitants who relocate and
switch to a modern Western diet develop the very diseases for which their
traditional environments are cold spots!
The following are examples of cold spots and foods frequently eaten in
their ancestral diets:• 
Copper Canyon, Mexico (diabetes cold spot): corn, beans, squash,
peppers, nopal cactus, onions, cilantro, tomatoes, jicama, nuts,
--- END PAGE 1307 ---

--- PAGE 1308 ---
avocados•

Crete (heart disease cold spot): olive oil, chickpeas, lentils, whole-
grain pasta, potatoes, Swiss chard, kale, arugula, fish, red wine, figs,
walnuts•

Iceland (depression cold spot): fish, walnuts, purslane, flaxseed oil,
barley, rye, black tea, beans, split peas, potatoes, organic dairy
products, omega-3-enriched eggs, wild game, cabbage, bilberries•

Cameroon, West Africa (colon cancer cold spot): millet, teff, collard
greens, mustard greens, spinach, okra, plantains, beans, nuts, fish, wild
poultry and game, onions, tomatoes, bananas, yogurt, kefir, fermented
vegetables•

Okinawa, Japan (breast and prostate cancers cold spot): tofu,
tempeh, miso, fish, cabbage, bok choy, broccoli, kale, cauliflower,
brown rice, green tea, sea vegetables, sweet potatoes, mushrooms,
tomatoes, watermelons, grapefruit
For more information, read Dr. Miller’s book. Two other very good
titles on ancestral eating are Dr. Michael Smith’s Returning to an Ancestral
Diet and Stephen Le’s 100 Million Years of Food. Follow this eating plan if
you’ve done DNA testing and/or know your genetics and family history,
and you want to try eating more like your ancestors, which for many can
be ideal for health, cognition, performance, fertility, and longevity.
My “Boundless Busy Day” Diet
When I have an especially busy day, have a hectic travel day, or simply
don’t seem to have enough hours in the day but still have cognitive and
physical demands that require me to fuel my brain and body, I often fall
into the eating approach outlined here. It blends nutrient-dense, easy-to-
prepare foods with modern science, skips lunch, and incorporates a
--- END PAGE 1308 ---

--- PAGE 1309 ---
neural-enhancing, relatively simple dietary approach consisting of the
following groups:•

Meals: Primarily prepackaged fish and meats or meal replacement
mixes or powders•

Beverages: Black and green tea, red wine, and coffee—all chock-full of
antioxidants and longevity-enhancing compounds•

Supplements: Exogenous ketones, fish oil, creatine, essential amino
acids•

Nootropics: A microdose of psilocybin blended with lion’s mane
mushrooms and niacin (a mind-bending, productivity-enhancing,
brain-spinning stack made popular by mushroom expert and mycology
researcher Paul Stamets)
Here’s how a sample day looks on this diet:•

Morning supplements: Creatine, fish oil, mushroom stack•

Breakfast: Wild Planet sardines, salmon, mackerel, herring, or
anchovies wrapped in a nori seaweed or Siete gluten-free wrap with
Primal Kitchen mayo, mustard, and/or ketchup, accompanied by a cup
of green tea or a fatty coffee blended with mushrooms. The other
option is a prepackaged breakfast blend like Kreatures of Habit Meal
One meal replacement oatmeal with a clean energy bar or Keto Brick
crumbled into it.•

Snack or preworkout (optional): Cup of organic prepackaged bone
broth like Kettle & Fire with salt and vegetable powders stirred in, or
ketones and essential amino acids mixed into coconut water•

Lunch: Fasting—black coffee only, sometimes with additional ketones
and amino acids
--- END PAGE 1309 ---

--- PAGE 1310 ---
•

Snack 2 (optional): Clean meat stick, like a Paleovalley fermented
beef stick, or clean energy bar without excess added sugars and
vegetable oils•

Dinner: Smoked salmon and avocado in a seaweed or other wrap, with
a handful of macadamia nuts, Brazil nuts, pistachios, and/or almonds• 
Dessert: Coconut yogurt like GT’s CocoYo with dark chocolate and
blueberries
This approach works quite well on cognitively demanding days when
I’m at home, when I’m traveling, when my wife and children are away, or
when I need to buckle down and tackle a good twelve to sixteen hours of
deep work without spending much time on meal prep.
Finally, I’m often asked about what I eat on a “normal day.” Though I
often travel and immerse myself in the local cuisine wherever I happen to
be, at home my diet tends to be closest to the type of omnivorous, whole-
foods, Weston A. Price approach described in this chapter—along with
one or two yearly cleanses or detoxification protocols, a daily twelve-to-
sixteen-hour intermittent fast, and a once-per-month twenty-four-hour
fast.
THE BOUNDLESS SUPPLEMENT
PROGRAM
In an ideal world, you would be able to fully customize every supplement
you take to your unique physiology—especially based on the information
in chapter 16—rather than follow a cookie-cutter program. But I’ve
included suggestions for supplementation protocols that paint with a
relatively broad brush and cover most bases for beginner, intermediate,
and advanced goals.
--- END PAGE 1310 ---

--- PAGE 1311 ---
Beginner
This protocol is for you if you are on a budget, want the lowest-hanging
fruit to give you 80 percent of the results with 20 percent of the expense
and effort, or need the minimum effective dose of supplementation to
look, feel, and perform as good as possible each day. Include the following:
• A multivitamin-multimineral complex, such as the Thorne Multi
capsules or MaryRuth’s liquid
• A good fish oil, such as Kion Omega—1–2 g per day with a meal
• Creatine—5 g per day, taken with a meal or smoothie or another
beverage, split into two 2.5 g servings (one in the morning, one in the
evening). The brand is not important as long as there are no added
sweeteners or fillers, and basic creatine monohydrate is fine. Kion
Creatine is my recommended option.
• If you are traveling or unable to eat a wide range of plants, an organic
greens powder such as AG1 Greens, Organifi Greens, or PaleoValley
• If you have difficulty sleeping, a sleep stack of magnesium, CBD, a
relaxing cocktail like Kion Sleep or any adaptogenic herbal blend, and,
if traveling, melatonin
• If you have gut issues or are unable to eat a wide variety of fermented
foods, a good probiotic and digestive enzyme blend, such as Seed
Probiotic or Thorne Advanced Digestive Enzymes
Intermediate
This protocol is for you if you have a slightly higher budget and want to
add supplements that can further enhance performance, longevity, and
mental function without breaking the bank.
Follow the beginner protocol and add the following:
--- END PAGE 1311 ---

--- PAGE 1312 ---
• 10–20 g of essential amino acids (EAAs) per day—preferably pre- or
postworkout without a meal
• Exogenous ketones for fasted or longer workouts or busy days
• Prior to your largest meal or largest carb-containing meal of the day,
insulin-stabilizing foods or supplements like bitter melon extract
(Kion Lean is good), Ceylon cinnamon, apple cider vinegar, berberine,
rosemary, turmeric, ginger, fenugreek, Gymnema sylvestre, or cayenne
• On more cognitively demanding days, coffee or green tea blended with
adaptogenic compounds such as L-theanine, tulsi, reishi or astragalus,
or small amounts of nicotine
Advanced
This protocol is for you if you are willing to invest in better living through
science so you can live as long as possible and perform at a high level, and
you desire to incorporate a full-blown Boundless supplement protocol.
Follow the intermediate protocol and add the following:
• Qualia, Nootopia, TianChi, Wukiyo, microdosing, or any other
nootropic stack or adaptogenic herb blend, especially on more
cognitively demanding days (see chapter 5)
• Hydrogen-rich water (dissolve tablets in water, use a hydrogen bottle,
purchase canned hydrogen-rich water, or use a hydrogen water–
generating machine)
• Daily supplementation with a good longevity stack, including some of
the most important recommendations from chapter 19, such as
spermidine, urolithin-A, astaxanthin, curcumin, CoQ10, PQQ,
glutathione or NAC, pterostilbene, MitoQ, astragalus, C60,
nicotinamide riboside (NR), and peptides
--- END PAGE 1312 ---

--- PAGE 1313 ---
Obviously, you may have specific needs for other supplements. For
example, if you have a high risk of cardiovascular disease or are managing
arterial plaque, you can consider red yeast rice, nitric oxide, vitamin K,
extra vitamin D, geranylgeraniol (GG), and some form of vascular support,
such as Calroy Arterosil. If you have slow methylation genetics, you may
benefit from extra methylfolate or a desiccated liver extract. For thyroid
support, you may need added minerals like iodine and selenium, along
with sea vegetable extracts such as kelp and dulse. You get the idea. But
the lists above should give you a very good foundation for setting up your
own supplement protocol. 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 1313 ---

--- PAGE 1314 ---
CONCLUSION
Congratulations. You are now equipped to be boundless.
We began this book asking important questions about how to get the
most out of life, imagining what would be possible if you and I could leap
out of bed each morning and tackle the day with the extreme ferocity of an
electrified tiger; envisioning what we would be capable of if not just our
bodies but also our minds and our spirits were fully optimized and firing
on all cylinders; conceiving the possibility of walking around with the body
of a finely tuned superhero; the mind of a professional poker player, chess
grandmaster, or fighter pilot; and the spirit of an enlightened meditator or
monk—able to learn rapidly, memorize efficiently, verbalize fluently, sleep
deeply, be confident in our clothes, reverse aging, build meaningful
community, eat a fully customized diet, work out with the minimum
effective dose of exercise, and discover more satisfaction, purpose, and
meaning in life.
The ability to look, feel, and perform at the human body’s full capacity
isn’t the stuff of lore—it’s all completely attainable. You really can have
total optimization and holistic balance of body, mind, and spirit. And now
you’re equipped with the road map for exactly how to get there.
Come back and revisit this book regularly. Consider it your cookbook
for looking good naked, performing at peak capacity, upgrading your brain,
living a long time, and discovering—using the ideal blend of ancestral
wisdom and modern science. Not sleeping well? Review the sleep chapter.
Gut suddenly not working right? Dig into the stuff on diets and digestion.
Need to build muscle and burn fat fast, safely, and effectively? Check out
the exercise and workouts section to cut through the confusion and get
results fast.
--- END PAGE 1314 ---

--- PAGE 1315 ---
Connect with that boundless energy, nourish it, feel it, taste it, and
experience it for the rest of your long and fulfilled life, and feel free to
share this book and the strategies you’ve discovered with as many people
as you can. (Use #beboundless if you’d like!)
Finally, let’s face it: the world is constantly changing—new scientific
breakthroughs occur, little-known secrets of our ancestors are unearthed,
and knowledge we once accepted as orthodox and established is replaced
by better research and more up-to-date ideas. To help you keep your finger
on the pulse of everything that it takes to continue your boundless
journey, here are a few resources for you.
BoundlessBook.com
All resources, links, blogs, podcasts, articles, studies, downloads, books,
and hundreds of pages of additional bonus content and scientific
references are available on the official Boundless website.
--- END PAGE 1315 ---

--- PAGE 1316 ---
BenGreenfieldLife.com
Once a week I publish a new long-form article similar to the chapters in
this book, and twice a week I release a podcast in which I answer your
questions and interview top experts in biohacking, nutrition, fitness,
self-improvement, longevity, and beyond. Similarly, to learn more about
working with me as a coach or consultant or to hire me to speak at an
event, you can visit BenGreenfieldCoaching.com and
BenGreenfieldSpeaking.com.
GetKion.com
I co-founded and co-own Kion, a nutrition supplements company with
clean and highly efficacious unique formulas designed by yours truly,
including coffees and functional foods, fat-loss supplements, creatine,
colostrum, fish oil, sleep enhancers, joint support products, and—if I do
say so myself—the tastiest, creamiest, cleanest protein powders you’ll
ever taste.
--- END PAGE 1316 ---

--- PAGE 1317 ---
Facebook.com/BGFitness
Each week, I publish photos, short articles, giveaways, caption contests,
controversial stories, and other items guaranteed to make you a
smarter, more productive, healthier human.
X.com/BenGreenfield
Multiple times per day, I use X to release my thoughts and findings on
new science, research, articles, and any other fascinating snippets or
inspirational bits I discover.
--- END PAGE 1317 ---

--- PAGE 1318 ---
Instagram.com/BenGreenfieldFitness
Entertaining and inspirational photos and videos, along with behind-
the-scenes stories from my family and me. This is where you’ll find raw
live footage of everything from feeding dwarf goats to cooking
newfangled recipes to brewing coffee enemas.
YouTube.com/BenGreenfieldLife
On YouTube, you can find videos on subjects such as ice-cold showers,
quick ways to boost testosterone, and personal tours of my home, office,
and daily routine, along with product reviews, free lectures, video
podcasts, and much more.
--- END PAGE 1318 ---

--- PAGE 1319 ---
Other Books I’ve Written
You can visit my Amazon author page or BenGreenfieldLife.com to see
all my other titles on subjects from cooking and low-carb diets, to
fitness and endurance training, to parenting and education, to
spirituality and purpose.
Leave a Review!
Reviews are an author’s “lifeblood.” So, wherever you purchased this
book, please consider leaving a positive review or rating, which will help
spread the word about Boundless and help many others discover how to
unlock their own boundless energy! You can even say a personal “hello”
to me in your review, because I read them all!
--- END PAGE 1319 ---

--- PAGE 1320 ---
GoLifeNetwork.com
Join my transformation community and expand your Boundless life
with access to my team of experts, coaching, never-before-seen content,
and more! 
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 1320 ---

--- PAGE 1321 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I conceived of the idea for Boundless eight years ago, and I admit: I initially
thought that writing an all-encompassing book on mind, body, and spirit
optimization would be a far easier task than it turned out to be. If you’re
reading this, you know that this book turned out to be a bit of a monster.
It’s big. It’s comprehensive. Heck, it can double as a dumbbell or rucking
weight for your backpack. It required deep steeping in science and
research. As a result, the creation of the original book spanned over three
years, and this fully updated version took an additional two years to
research and revise.
But I never would have finished this book had it not been for an
incredible team of supportive individuals who provided me with advice,
direction, and plenty of heavy lifting throughout the entire process.
First, I’m thankful to my wife, Jessa, and our sons, River and Terran—
the former for graciously smiling and putting up with me when I’d whip
out my laptop on family vacations and slip away to the basement on early
mornings to work on Boundless, and the latter for inspiring me to become
the best version of a human being that I can, so that I’m able to chase
them, play with them, see them grow up, and meet their children and
perhaps, if I practice everything within this book, their children’s children.
I’m also grateful to my entire team at BenGreenfieldLife.com for their
unending support and dedication for publishing, promoting, media,
speaking, the creation of detailed online resource pages for each chapter,
and all the behind-the-scenes operations that go into making sure
somebody other than my mom even finds out about and reads the book.
The publishing team at Victory Belt, including Erich, Lance, Susan, and
Pam, are a dream to work with and played a critical role in design, layout,
--- END PAGE 1321 ---

--- PAGE 1322 ---
editing, and ensuring all my nitty-gritty nerdy specifications got worked
into the book, including all my last-minute edits and annoyingly high page
count requirements.
I’m also thankful to my friend JJ Virgin for conceptualizing the
concept of boundless energy and inspiring the title Boundless. And my
thanks to all those brilliant minds I learn so much from, including brilliant
podcast guests and friends who have fed me through the firehose on
health, longevity, medicine, and beyond, including Dr. Cook, Dr. Koniver,
Dr. Lieurance, Dr. Mercola, Dr. Pompa, Dr. Shah, Dr. Stillman, and so many
others. I’m also grateful for all my podcast listeners and blog readers who
have kept me curious with all those odd questions about biohacking, self-
quantification, trendy diets, confusing studies, crazy workout tools, and
other similar topics that keep me constantly reading, researching, and
finding answers.
To my dear dad and mom, thank you for making me read, write, and
type so darn much when I was a kid. Even though I often despised that
little red pen you always used to mark up my typos and errors, it turns out
that it has molded me into a budding author, and for that I’m eternally
grateful.
Finally, I thank God for breathing the boundless breath of life into me,
and I thank you, my reader, for taking the daring plunge into becoming
boundless yourself. May your journey be blessed.
OceanofPDF.com
--- END PAGE 1322 ---
