
=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "9"
Paragraph 1 (102 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."
Paragraph 2 (191 words): "Zoom out, and the whole city of the cell can change shape and move around, reassembling its internal structures as it does so. From out here, through the lens of a microscope, we can watch the trafficking of goods through the cell, lit up by fluorescent dyes like a town at night, all electric reds a..."
Paragraph 3 (186 words): "Few things are as inscrutable as a cell. In the seventeenth century, when the Dutch microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek unveiled the cosmos hidden in a drop of water, he marvelled at the little ‘animalcules’ that lived out their lives there, all whirring parts and purpose. For all our deep explorat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "10"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour? Do they experience any sort of feelings?"
Paragraph 3 (63 words): "For decades, biology has been dominated by information – the power of genes. The importance of genes is unquestionable, yet there is no difference in the information content of a living protozoon and one that died a moment ago. The difference between being alive or dead lies in energy flow, in the a..."
Paragraph 4 (1 words) [SHORT]: "1"
Paragraph 5 (251 words): "If there is a view from modern biology, it is that genetic information structures the flow of energy and materials. To a first approximation, biology is understood in terms of information networks and control systems. Even the laws of thermodynamics, which govern the behaviour of molecules and their..."
Paragraph 6 (72 words): "Thinking about life only in terms of information is distorting. Seeking new laws of physics to explain the origin of information is to ask the wrong question, which can’t be answered precisely because it is not meaningful. A far better question goes back to the formative years of biology: what proce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "11"
Paragraph 1 (94 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "You and me."
Paragraph 3 (37 words) [SHORT]: "This book will explore how the flow of energy and matter structures the evolution of life and even genetic information, leaving an indelible stamp on our own lives. I want to turn the standard view upside down."
Paragraph 4 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Genes and information do not determine the innermost details of our lives. Rather, the unceasing flow of energy and matter through a world in perpetual disequilibrium conjures the genes themselves into existence and still determines their activity, even in our information-soaked lives."
Paragraph 5 (187 words): "It is the movement that creates the form. I want to capture an extraordinary renaissance that is currently hiding in plain sight: how textbook biochemistry is simultaneously galvanising new paradigms on the origin of life and cancer, to name but two fields. How could such disparate questions, separa..."
Paragraph 6 (52 words) [SHORT]: "The dynamic side To understand this flow of energy and matter and all it portends, we must first look to where biology has turned a blind eye since the ascent of information. The golden age of biochemistry began with a realisation that cells are not made of an amorphous protoplasm composed of"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "12"
Paragraph 1 (135 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."
Paragraph 2 (56 words) [SHORT]: "I’ve used the word flux a few times already, and I’ll use it again throughout the book. Before getting any further, let’s pause for a moment to clarify exactly what I mean by it. Flux is a form of flow, but with one crucial difference. Water can flow in a river, or traffic down a street."
Paragraph 3 (86 words): "What goes in at one end and what comes out at the other is the same thing – water, or cars. In biochemistry, flux is the flow of things that are transformed along the way. Imagine a car entering a street; let’s say it’s a VW Beetle. No sooner has it gone ten yards down than there’s a blinding flash ..."
Paragraph 4 (130 words): "It’s a tractor, which leaves the street. But the strangest thing about this street is that the same thing keeps on happening: only VW Beetles ever enter the street; only tractors ever leave. The same succession of transformations takes place each time. Let’s imagine that sixty VW Beetles enter the s..."
Paragraph 5 (75 words): "This is the strange world of metabolic flux. Even a simple bacterial cell can undergo as many as a billion transformations per second, an incomprehensible number. You might say that there’s a lot of repeat streets in a cell (with the same thing happening in each of them) but there may be several hun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "13"
Paragraph 1 (66 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "18"
Paragraph 3 (77 words): ") nanoseconds-worth of metabolism. No wonder we run down. We can’t actually see any of this happening before our eyes, even now, but we can infer what is going on from some of the ingenious methods I’ll tell you about, methods that go back to those intrepid explorers of the nanocosm, like Hopkins a ..."
Paragraph 4 (24 words) [SHORT]: "That was before the double helix of DNA, before the information revolution in biology, before we knew much at all about how cells work."
Paragraph 5 (58 words) [SHORT]: "It was in fact a glorious hypothesis, based on a handful of findings in the nineteenth century – notably that some molecules of life, such as urea, could be synthesised from scratch by chemists and were in no way magic, rebutting vitalism; this was ‘merely’ biological chemistry, with normal chemical..."
Paragraph 6 (22 words) [SHORT]: "Biochemistry became the study of how these simple molecules were interconverted one into another. Did you just trip over the word ‘simple’?"
Paragraph 7 (99 words): "None of this is simple, but there are levels of complexity. The molecules that I’m talking about are small, containing between one or two and up to about twenty carbon atoms, but most of them have fewer than ten carbons. Think of these as carbon ‘skeletons’, in which the carbon is bound to itself pl..."
Paragraph 8 (33 words) [SHORT]: "The giant ‘macromolecules’ that form the fabric of the cell, notably DNA and proteins, are actually long chains, strings of these building blocks linked together following genetic instructions that (then) remained utterly mysterious."
Paragraph 9 (76 words): "The glorious hypothesis that cells are animated by the continuous directed flow of simple materials and energy turned out to be true for all life. Painstaking experiments showed that the way bacteria respire with oxygen or grow in its absence is remarkably similar to how our own heart cells behave i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "14"
Paragraph 1 (149 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."
Paragraph 2 (116 words): "The digital jungle The dawn of molecular biology! It must have been intoxicating. Darwin had given order to biology a century earlier. The discovery of genes and the laws of heredity made intellectual sense of evolution. But the molecular mechanisms of inheritance remained a black box until Crick an..."
Paragraph 3 (175 words): "The double helix of DNA is perhaps the most meaningful icon in all science. DNA is composed of two long chains of ‘letters’ that snake around each other into the farthest distance, each strand providing an exact template for the other. As soon as you see it, you can grasp in principle how heredity w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "15"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000"
Paragraph 2 (75 words): "million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean scope for interpreting meaning. Just as an actor might confer sympathy or antipathy to a character while declaiming the same lines, s..."
Paragraph 3 (203 words): "Principle is one thing; working out the details took half a century and counting. The first attempts to decipher the code of life were made by physicists, including Crick himself, who sought (and found) a mathematical beauty; but all of them turned out to be utterly wrong. The reality is far messier..."
Paragraph 4 (41 words) [SHORT]: "Genomes are a fantastical jungle of digital patterns, mingling sense and nonsense in a similar way to computer code or the internet – meaning riddled with viruses and gobbledegook. Biology has become the study of information with all its quirky content."
Paragraph 5 (45 words) [SHORT]: "That’s not intended to be critical. The information revolution has transformed everything in biology, from the study of individual cancer cell lines to the development of embryos, to the deepest reaches of evolutionary time, right back to the first stirrings of life on this planet."
Paragraph 6 (68 words): "Sequencing even overturns cherished ideas of behaviour – sparrows for example, turn out to be far less faithful to their partners than their bearing suggests; nearly a third of offspring are fathered by philandering cheats. Nothing in biology has escaped digital scrutiny. But while our exhaustive ex..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "16"
Paragraph 1 (67 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."
Paragraph 2 (129 words): "Molecular machines Biochemistry followed a rather different path, although until recently it too turned its back on the dynamic side. Genes code for the sequence of amino acids in proteins, typically several hundred of them joined together in a string. Yet genes only code for the sequence itself, no..."
Paragraph 3 (134 words): "The greatest advances have drawn on the same recondite technique that Rosalind Franklin brought to bear on DNA in the early 1950s, X-ray crystallography, albeit with an enormous increase in power and resolution since then. Perhaps the consummating achievement of crystallography was Venki Ramakrishna..."
Paragraph 4 (69 words): "Understanding precisely how these molecular machines work has preoccupied some of the best minds in biochemistry for decades. Those of us who don’t solve the structure of proteins for a living look at the pages of journals such as Nature with a mixture of jealousy and admiration, for every issue see..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "17"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale."
Paragraph 2 (145 words): "These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people prone to some condition and those who are resistant. There might be thousands, if not million..."
Paragraph 3 (60 words): "Remember that many proteins are catalysts – enzymes – which convert one molecule into another slightly different form. Vivid as it may be, our earlier metaphor of metabolic flux as traffic transforming in size and shape as it passes down a street fails to emphasise that this doesn’t happen spontaneo..."
Paragraph 4 (249 words): "Each transformation is catalysed by an enzyme. To force the metaphor a bit too far, we have to imagine the street lined with giant machines (we’d better say they’re invisible) that convert one car into another. This succession of giant machines each acts in turn down the street (a metabolic pathway)..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "18"
Paragraph 1 (16 words) [SHORT]: "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic."
Paragraph 2 (263 words): "So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative routes in terms of how a drug acts. Target a particular gene or protein, and the cell redirects metabolic flux to mini..."
Paragraph 3 (161 words): "Satnav metabolism There’s a new name for this that reflects the modern ‘omic’ age: metabolomics. We have known all the steps in the major metabolic pathways for decades – they were laboriously worked out, step by step, from the 1930s onwards, with a leap forward in the post-war years, when radioacti..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "19"
Paragraph 1 (9 words) [SHORT]: "or over a short period of minutes or hours."
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "3"
Paragraph 3 (52 words) [SHORT]: "Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know it keeps the cell alive."
Paragraph 4 (257 words): "But these subtle differences in flux also emphasise one dramatic way in which cells differ from cities. Different cities are similar in that they all have roads, but the actual road map obviously differs from town to town. That’s partly true of cells too, but perhaps the most extraordinary fact is t..."
Paragraph 5 (152 words): "The reason that city street-plans differ but the central metabolic maps of cells do not is quite simple: cells descend from a common ancestor, but cities do not. Cities are similar by analogy, not homology. When we think about inheritance we tend to think about genes, but to leave any descendants a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "20"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead."
Paragraph 2 (172 words): "Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a workable solution to the utter transformation of conditions on Earth, from the suffocating anoxia of the first two bil..."
Paragraph 3 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Elusive, in part, because biochemistry moved on long ago, enchanted by the marvellous mechanics of molecular machines. But elusive most of all because this apparently perfect cycle of energy and matter in fact conceals a strained balance of opposites, a yin and yang, which touches on all aspects of ..."
Paragraph 4 (122 words): "The Krebs cycle Generations of biochemistry and medical students have been obliged to learn the steps of the Krebs cycle by rote. Despite its iconic status it has earned little love or real understanding. That’s partly the problem with visualising biochemistry: this is an invisible and abstruse set ..."
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "The energy released at each step is ingeniously captured and put to use in the cell, while the inert carcasses of water and carbon dioxide are discharged into the outside world. But why is it a cycle at all? Why not just a few simple steps? Krebs himself suggested one plausible answer: burning very ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "21"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea."
Paragraph 2 (196 words): "The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most amino acids are made directly or indirectly from molecules in the Krebs cycle. So are the long-chain lipid molecules needed to make cel..."
Paragraph 3 (151 words): "A decade ago the answer to this question would have seemed too esoteric for most researchers to worry about. Asking ‘why?’ has historically been dismissed as rank speculation by biochemists. But then it turned out that molecules accumulating in the Krebs cycle can signal the state of the cell to the..."
Paragraph 4 (103 words): "Perhaps that should not be surprising. Anything that disturbs the availability of oxygen affects not just respiration but also flux through the Krebs cycle. Breathing is an immediate life-and-death problem, but so too is the turnover of the molecules that make up our bodies. The problem in all these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "22"
Paragraph 1 (264 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."
Paragraph 2 (93 words): "If the Krebs cycle is ordained by thermodynamics, then it should take place spontaneously in some suitably propitious environment, even in the absence of genes. That idea was once dismissed as ‘if pigs could fly’ chemistry, yet revolutionary new work shows that at least some of the cycle can indeed ..."
Paragraph 3 (60 words): "The inner logic of metabolism is beginning to take shape. Much of it is imposed by thermodynamics; some is facilitated by catalysts. Some is refined by genes. And part stems from the vicissitudes of life itself, which forced evolution down improbable paths, while transforming our geologically restle..."
Paragraph 4 (53 words) [SHORT]: "This is the story of our planet from within our cells – what makes us the way we are, and ultimately why we age and die, each of us in our own tantalisingly different ways. I appreciate that biochemistry is for many people an obscure subject, full of runic symbols that suggest a"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "23"
Paragraph 1 (141 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."
Paragraph 2 (175 words): "Setting sail We will start by getting acquainted with the Krebs cycle itself – the basic chemistry you will find in any biochemistry textbook. I will enliven the dry dance of molecules with a tribute to some of the pioneers of biochemistry, men and women who imagined such ingenious, creative ways to..."
Paragraph 3 (139 words): "In Chapter 2, we will begin to deconstruct the textbook view. We will see how dogmas can set back fields by decades, and that we are by no means immune to them today. Still you will read that the Krebs cycle is about the oxidation of foodstuffs, and especially glucose. You will read that photosynthe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "24"
Paragraph 1 (37 words) [SHORT]: "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 2 (105 words): "is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with structures similar to cells. We’ll see that this chemistry can in principle – and recent experimental work shows in practice – drive almost all the core metabolism of cells, giving rise to the building blocks of genes ..."
Paragraph 3 (163 words): "Chapter 4 will ask how this spontaneous chemistry at the origin of life came to be the closed cycle that we know today. The idea of a universal cycle is misleading: even in humans, the cycle is often more of a roundabout, with flow entering and exiting everywhere, even coursing in opposite direction..."
Paragraph 4 (86 words): "Not much is known about how metabolic flux is balanced between different tissues, but we know much more about what goes wrong when cells revert to selfish behaviour in cancer. In Chapter 5, we’ll see that the standard view of cancer as a disease of the genome driven by genetic mutations is not the w..."
Paragraph 5 (72 words): "In fact, age is the biggest risk factor for cancer. We’ll see that cancer emerges from the yin and yang of the Krebs cycle as we get older – the need to use the same pathway for biosynthesis as well as energy generation. As the flux through our Krebs cycle becomes more sluggish with age, intermediat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "25"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer."
Paragraph 2 (22 words) [SHORT]: "In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us."
Paragraph 3 (106 words): "Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with age, which varies with our lifestyle (such as diet or exercise), as well as how effectively our two genomes work together – the genes in the mitochondria alongside those in the nucleus. I’ll give a new take on the fr..."
Paragraph 4 (60 words): "Finally, the Epilogue will touch on the hardest problem of all, the stream of consciousness. By now, it should come as no surprise that the moment-by-moment flux of metabolism that makes us alive should be interwoven with our innermost feelings of self, perhaps going right back to the first stirring..."
Paragraph 5 (78 words): "1 When I talk about energy flow, I’m really referring to what physicists call ‘free energy’, which is to say the energy available to power work (rather than being dissipated as heat). That goes for the whole book. And when I talk about building blocks, I’m referring to small molecules such as amino ..."
Paragraph 6 (128 words): "2 There are all kinds of interactions between ‘regulatory RNAs’ that do not involve any proteins at all. RNA is a working copy of a short section of DNA, where the exact sequence of letters in the DNA is transcribed into the same sequence of letters in the RNA copy. This copy can be read off into a ..."
Paragraph 7 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Cryptographers can get very cross about this."
Paragraph 8 (72 words): "3 Even this can be hard to interpret. A high concentration of some intermediate in the cell does not necessarily imply high flux – it might reflect a high rate of flux, with the intermediate being constantly replenished at high levels, or it could reflect the opposite – almost no downstream flux, so..."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "26"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "28"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right."
Paragraph 2 (244 words): "There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pillar of the establishment. But he always felt an outsider. He had been expelled for truancy (or technically ‘his removal was advised’) from the City of Londo..."
Paragraph 3 (158 words): "Hopkins nurtured a joyously free, productive and non-hierarchical lab environment. He had been backed consistently by the nascent Medical Research Council (MRC), but they were perpetually frustrated by his stubborn refusal to dedicate his time and efforts to applied medical research, neither taking ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "29"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale."
Paragraph 2 (118 words): "But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It was vibrant and fun. The lab’s journal, Brighter Biochemistry , included compilations of verse (Haldane wrote an annual report in rhyming couplets), ..."
Paragraph 3 (116 words): "Hans on board This was the world into which the young Hans Krebs arrived in 1933. He had not intended to leave Freiburg, of course, but had been relieved of his position, like almost all those of Jewish ancestry, after Hitler became Chancellor in January 1933. Krebs soon realised he needed to get as..."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Fisher, Margery Fry, J. S. Haldane (the equally distinguished father of J."
Paragraph 5 (12 words) [SHORT]: "B. S.), A. E. Housman, John Maynard Keynes, Ernest Rutherford and J."
Paragraph 6 (74 words): "J. Thomson – who in May that year had founded the Academic Assistance Council to support scholars who had been obliged to relinquish their posts in Germany. The founders defined their goal as ‘the relief of suffering and the defence of learning and science’. Krebs was the first to be backed by this ..."
Paragraph 7 (42 words) [SHORT]: "You can imagine that Hopkins’s lab was very different to anything that Krebs had known in Germany. Years later, Krebs reflected on what he called ‘the British way of life’, writing that ‘The Cambridge laboratory included people of many dispositions, convictions and"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "30"
Paragraph 1 (84 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."
Paragraph 2 (61 words): "But for Krebs, all this was merely a backdrop to the paramount importance of his work. He was beginning to address the most pressing question in biology at the time (and arguably still a vital question today) – how does respiration work? The broad idea is simple enough: respiration burns food in oxy..."
Paragraph 3 (193 words): "That much had been known since Lavoisier, before the French Revolution, who showed that respiration and combustion are exactly equivalent processes ( exactly ; he weighed everything with obsessive precision). Respiration and combustion both involve the complete oxidation of organic matter by oxygen ..."
Paragraph 4 (64 words): "We now know that respiration takes place in the mitochondria, the so- called ‘powerhouses’ of the cell; but every scrap of knowledge along the way was hard won. And knowledge comes tinged with the stories of how it was won. That’s only human. The harder the discoveries, the better the stories – but ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "31"
Paragraph 1 (111 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."
Paragraph 2 (101 words): "Slices and gases Krebs’s experimental approach derived from that of his mentor, the great German biochemist Otto Warburg (whom we’ll meet again in Chapter 5, on cancer). Meticulous and brilliant, Warburg was also domineering and authoritarian; he gave his tight-knit group little freedom to develop t..."
Paragraph 3 (183 words): "The key method that Warburg had pioneered was to measure the escape of gases from thin slices of tissue, cut using a razor blade. When practised skilfully, the slice was thin enough for oxygen to penetrate fully by diffusion, while the cells in the centre of the slice were undamaged, functioning mor..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "32"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway."
Paragraph 2 (119 words): "This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). Yet this was how biochemistry came to be understood; the bottom line is th..."
Paragraph 3 (295 words): "The experiment for which Warburg won the Nobel Prize in 1931 was just so beautiful I have to tell you about it. Warburg knew he could block respiration by using the gas carbon monoxide (CO), which in cells binds to metal atoms in the catalyst that converts oxygen to water. The binding of CO therefor..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "33"
Paragraph 1 (106 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "Yet even this experiment-as-work-of-art was far from elucidating what actually goes on in respiration. Really, all that it said was that one of the catalysts involved (Warburg characteristically asserted it was the only one of relevance) contained a porphyrin pigment similar to haem."
Paragraph 3 (198 words): "But what about all the other steps going from glucose to oxygen? How many steps were there? What were the intermediates? You can see in my equation above that one glucose molecule, with its six carbon atoms, is converted into six molecules of carbon dioxide and six molecules of water. Was each CO 2 ..."
Paragraph 4 (104 words): "To me, the most amazing thing is that Krebs could modify Warburg’s methods for measuring gases emanating from tissue slices to piece together most of these missing steps. It was not so much a single breath- taking experiment as a magisterial vision of what was possible using a single method, coupled..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "34"
Paragraph 1 (50 words) [SHORT]: "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected."
Paragraph 2 (65 words): "Sometimes that was because the tissue slice hadn’t been washed correctly, or the solution wasn’t fresh enough, or some other problem; but occasionally it was because the working hypothesis was wrong, and then suddenly a new avenue opened up, leading, hopefully, to a real advance in understanding. Kr..."
Paragraph 3 (11 words) [SHORT]: "Even this most measured of men could scarcely contain his excitement."
Paragraph 4 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Science is an emotional roller-coaster no matter how much scientists strive to build an objective and unemotional framework. It’s a wholly human pursuit. And so it was that day after day, week after week, year after year, Krebs slowly pieced together the detailed steps of how food is burned in respi..."
Paragraph 5 (72 words): "Deep breathing The work that had initially made Krebs’s name was on the synthesis of urea, a nitrogen-containing compound that is excreted in urine, and which is formed from the breakdown of amino acids, the building blocks of proteins. Ironically, Krebs had been trying to get away from Warburg’s fo..."
Paragraph 6 (136 words): "Krebs was wondering what happened to amino acids after they had passed on their nitrogen to form urea. By definition, amino acids contain nitrogen in the form of an amino (-NH 2 ) group. 4 Krebs inferred that this amino group was liberated as the gas ammonia (NH 3 ) in the kidneys, eventually to be ..."
Paragraph 7 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs found that adding amino acids increased the rate of respiration in his tissue slices, as did adding carboxylic acids. But adding both of"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "35"
Paragraph 1 (48 words) [SHORT]: "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion."
Paragraph 2 (85 words): "But what did it mean? Presumably, the excess carboxylic acids simply got in the way of amino-acid breakdown. That made sense, because when amino acids lose their nitrogen, they become carboxylic acids, as we’ve just noted. In which case, both types of molecule had to be respired via the same pathway..."
Paragraph 3 (63 words): "That caught Krebs’s attention because the breakdown of glucose also generates carboxylic acids. The first few steps in the breakdown of glucose had been established by the early 1930s. As noted above, a molecule of glucose contains six carbon atoms, with the general formula of C 6 H 12 O 6 . Let’s s..."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "sugar, meaning there are six carbons in the skeleton of the molecule."
Paragraph 5 (97 words): "Glucose is split (through a baroque sequence of steps called glycolysis that we can put aside here) into two three-carbon molecules known as pyruvic acid: a C3 carboxylic acid that is also generated by the breakdown of some amino acids. It seemed that everything was being funnelled into the formatio..."
Paragraph 6 (31 words) [SHORT]: "It is time to get acquainted with the molecular protagonists of this book. What exactly is a carboxylic acid? Let me draw one for you. This is the three-carbon pyruvic acid:"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "36"
Paragraph 1 (147 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."
Paragraph 2 (62 words): "Portraits capture the character of a person, along with a few of their prominent features; a large nose, squinting eyes, laughter lines and greying beard in my own case. It’s harder to read the face of a molecule, but it can be done. Each carbon atom in pyruvic acid has a different character, with i..."
Paragraph 3 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Consider the left-hand carbon atom here for example: it has three hydrogen atoms attached. That’s normally quite stable and inert. Stolid."
Paragraph 4 (51 words) [SHORT]: "But there’s lots of pent-up energy stored in those hydrogen atoms. How easy it is to get at depends on the molecular surroundings. Is this stout- bellied group associated with the molecular equivalent of a pin-striped suit, or a peg-leg and an eye-patch? It’s closer to the pirate in this case."
Paragraph 5 (51 words) [SHORT]: "That’s because the middle carbon atom in pyruvic acid has a double bond to oxygen, which likes nothing better than getting into a fight; the extra bond tends to throw its weight about. That’s what makes pyruvic acid a touch unstable and reactive. Now the middle oxygen in my picture is"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "37"
Paragraph 1 (35 words) [SHORT]: "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen."
Paragraph 2 (51 words) [SHORT]: "This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switched with ammonia to form an amino group, or vice versa, one of the most important transformations in biology (and what Krebs was studying when he was working on the breakdown of amino acids)."
Paragraph 3 (121 words): "What about the third carbon, then, at the right-hand side? That also has a double-bonded oxygen, along with another oxygen bound to a hydrogen, yet this arrangement has a very different character. In fact, it’s this group that defines pyruvic acid as a carboxylic acid. An acid is a molecule that wan..."
Paragraph 4 (121 words): "In this case, I’ve drawn a dotted line next to the carboxylic acid group, which consists of a CO 2 (one carbon and two oxygen atoms) plus a hydrogen atom attached to one of the oxygens. All carboxylic acids have at least one group like this by definition; there can be two or three of them. Now when ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "38"
Paragraph 1 (122 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."
Paragraph 2 (74 words): "The fate of pyruvate Having now familiarised ourselves with the nature of carboxylic acids, let’s return to Krebs, who was wrestling with their fate. We’ve seen that pyruvate itself plays a central role in respiration, yet Krebs knew that other carboxylic acids were involved too. The strange thing w..."
Paragraph 3 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Why would that matter, I hear you say? Recall that respiration converts organic molecules into CO 2 and H 2 O. Glucose starts with six carbons and ends up as six molecules of CO 2 . If each carbon is extracted individually, then the remaining molecule must get progressively shorter."
Paragraph 4 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs knew that the six-carbon glucose is initially split into two three- carbon molecules of pyruvate, so a reasonable working assumption was that the intermediates should be stripped down to two carbons and then one carbon. In other words, the C3 pyruvate should be broken down into"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "39"
Paragraph 1 (47 words) [SHORT]: "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense."
Paragraph 2 (71 words): "The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scientist who had completed his PhD with Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins in 1927. From a family of minor nobility with a scientific bent, Albert Szent-Györgyi was a true original. His mother was an opera singer who had auditioned with Gustav Mahler, then a c..."
Paragraph 3 (164 words): "The young Szent-Györgyi fought in the Great War and became so disgusted after two years that he shot himself through the bone in his arm, claiming that he was wounded by enemy fire – a story he narrates in his short autobiography Lost in the Twentieth Century . He completed his medical degree during..."
Paragraph 4 (1 words) [SHORT]: "5"
Paragraph 5 (163 words): "Krebs and Szent-Györgyi had crossed paths on several occasions when Krebs was still in Germany, and despite some scientific disagreements plainly held each other in high esteem. Indeed, Szent- Györgyi wrote to his old mentor Sir Frederick, bringing Krebs’s plight to his attention. Now back in Hungar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "40"
Paragraph 1 (44 words) [SHORT]: "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst."
Paragraph 2 (6 words) [SHORT]: "But what else could it be?"
Paragraph 3 (127 words): "A catalyst! That comment might not trouble a chemist much, but it was certainly unexpected for most biochemists. Say ‘catalyst’ to a biologist in a word-association game, and they will probably reply ‘enzyme’. An enzyme is a protein, encoded by a gene, typically composed of a chain of several hundre..."
Paragraph 4 (99 words): "The molecule is beautifully symmetrical, as my portrait shows. It has two carboxylate groups, one at each end – two smugly unreactive Cheshire Cat grins. No mad-eye oxygen atoms. A quick personality read-out says that it is more like an extra-smug banker than a pirate. Yet somehow succinate doesn’t ..."
Paragraph 5 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Pulling hydrogen"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "41"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley."
Paragraph 2 (130 words): "Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of which could speed up respiration to a comparable degree, as Szent-Györgyi had shown. All were known to be interchangeable, and none of them..."
Paragraph 3 (102 words): "Szent-Györgyi had seen this pattern before. Vitamin C can pick up 2H, and then pass them onto something else, notably vitamin E. And Szent- Györgyi had been fascinated by the pale-yellow pigment found in cells that he called ‘flave’ (which is now known as flavin adenine dinucleotide, or FAD, and is ..."
Paragraph 4 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Recall that respiration consumes oxygen by reacting it with hydrogen, or more specifically 2H. The product is water, or H 2 O. Warburg had"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "42"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere."
Paragraph 2 (79 words): "Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. It was a beautiful conception, and as it turned out, specifically wrong. Specifically, but not generally – he was correct that 2H carriers are ..."
Paragraph 3 (123 words): "By now, in 1935, Krebs had moved to Sheffield. Hopkins had been unable to raise the funds to keep paying his salary in Cambridge, and although he saw Krebs as his anointed successor, there was little he could do in the short term. Ironically, soon after Krebs had gone, a lectureship became available..."
Paragraph 4 (100 words): "While stimulated by Szent-Györgyi’s findings, Krebs could also see some problems. It boiled down to whether the C4 carboxylic acids were simply hydrogen carriers, as argued by Szent-Györgyi, or were actual intermediates in the breakdown of sugars, as Krebs himself thought. This is such a fine exampl..."
Paragraph 5 (71 words): "It’s also worth noting that, even though Szent-Györgyi’s idea turned out to be wrong in detail, it was valuable nonetheless, because it focused attention on a primary feature of the cycle – the removal of hydrogen (2H) from carboxylic acids. Again, I have to emphasise just how subtle our reasoning n..."
Paragraph 6 (37 words) [SHORT]: "If C4 carboxylic acids were merely hydrogen carriers, then as each 2H was stripped out from the sugar and passed onto a carboxylic acid, then CO 2 should be released from the skeletal remains of the sugar."
Paragraph 7 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that the formula for glucose is C 6 H 12 O 6 . Szent-Györgyi"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "43"
Paragraph 1 (57 words) [SHORT]: "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."
Paragraph 2 (154 words): "That makes a clear prediction: adding an excess of the carboxylic acid shuttle should lead to the complete breakdown of the sugar even in the absence of oxygen. To grasp this, remember that oxygen is normally the final 2H acceptor; it accepts 2H to form water, which is excreted as waste. Now, if the..."
Paragraph 3 (18 words) [SHORT]: "But the experiment showed that in fact very little CO 2 was formed in the absence of oxygen."
Paragraph 4 (33 words) [SHORT]: "While both men agreed that this was the case, Szent-Györgyi ascribed the discrepancy to issues with measurement in a tricky experimental system, while Krebs interpreted the result literally – he saw the C4"
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "carboxylic acids as intermediates in the breakdown of sugars, hence they had not yet had all their CO 2 stripped out, and the final steps to do so required oxygen. Going back to the case in point, if the C3 pyruvate really was an intermediate, as Krebs imagined, then it had to be transformed somehow..."
Paragraph 6 (18 words) [SHORT]: "succinate. That is ostensibly the opposite of breakdown, as the chain length gets longer rather than shorter. Perplexing."
Paragraph 7 (110 words): "But Krebs had a clue, which others may have overlooked as irrelevant. The C6 carboxylic acid citric acid, which is responsible for the tang of citrus fruit, had recently been shown to break down in several steps to give the C4 succinate. That gave quite a long series of apparently interconnected ste..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "44"
Paragraph 1 (148 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."
Paragraph 2 (27 words) [SHORT]: "Circular reasoning Only Krebs was thinking about the cryptic crossword in the right way; even his closest collaborators had little inkling of what was on his mind."
Paragraph 3 (41 words) [SHORT]: "But Krebs had thought about the catalytic effects of small molecules before. His work on the urea cycle was just that. Unlike anyone else in the field, who all had just the same information, Krebs was already thinking about a cycle."
Paragraph 4 (196 words): "The urea cycle starts with a C6 amino acid called arginine. An enzyme splits this into two unequal pieces, the C1 waste product urea, plus a shorter (C5) amino acid called ornithine. What happened to ornithine next was unknown, but Krebs had found that adding more ornithine to his tissue slices some..."
Paragraph 5 (22 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs realised that biochemical cycles are necessarily catalytic. In essence, adding more of any constituent gives rise to more of the next,"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "45"
Paragraph 1 (37 words) [SHORT]: "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely."
Paragraph 2 (288 words): "This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates with 100 per cent efficiency. But of course in reality the cycle must be continuously fed with materials to keep on spinning. If, in the first few steps of a cycle beginning with citrate, two CO 2 molecules and multiple sets..."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "If so, then which organic molecule was being fed into the cycle?"
Paragraph 4 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs focused on pyruvate. Remember that pyruvate is the intermediate breakdown product of sugars and some amino acids. Was it being fed into a cycle and catalytically broken down into CO 2 and 2H?"
Paragraph 5 (103 words): "The crux of the matter was the final C4 carboxylic acid, known as oxaloacetate. Could this be the ‘tractor unit’? Oxaloacetate was the last clear step in the breakdown of citrate, but its metabolic fate was ambiguous, or rather, it frayed into several possible pathways (we’ll come back to these in C..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "46"
Paragraph 1 (71 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."
Paragraph 2 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Could the proposed cycle account for the consumption of oxygen, the release of CO 2 , the loss of pyruvate, the formation of citrate? Yes! Yes!"
Paragraph 3 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Yes! Yes! It did account for each in full! Here is Krebs’s first simple conception of the cycle, more or less as he depicted it in his famous 1937"
Paragraph 4 (127 words): "paper: The overall effect of this cycle is to burn up one molecule of pyruvate, or at least something closely related to it. Exactly what was joined onto oxaloacetate to form citrate was still a mystery. It could not have been the C3 pyruvate itself, as depicted here, because that has one carbon too..."
Paragraph 5 (85 words): "A full decade later, in 1947, Fritz Lipmann discovered that pyruvate was indeed stripped of one CO 2 (and 2H) leaving a C2 carboxylic acid attached to a larger molecule that acted as a kind of molecular handle. He named the overall assemblage acetyl coenzyme A or acetyl CoA for short. This turned ou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "47"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA."
Paragraph 2 (150 words): "Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who would interrupt and ask people to repeat what they had just said, yet he seemed ..."
Paragraph 3 (166 words): "The term ‘acetyl’ refers to the 2C acetic acid – vinegar – which is not very reactive. Look at my portrait of it below and you can see that it has the stout belly and Cheshire Cat grin of pyruvate – but no mad-eye oxygen to stir up trouble. To make it react with oxaloacetate, the acetate needs to be..."
Paragraph 4 (23 words) [SHORT]: "oxaloacetate, to give the C6 citrate. At last, everything added up properly. The process by which glucose is oxidised goes like this. First,"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "48"
Paragraph 1 (75 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."
Paragraph 2 (145 words): "There is some poetry in the parallel lives and eventual convergence of the scientific ideas of Lipmann and Krebs, so it seems only fitting that they shared the Nobel prize in 1953. Yet this was by no means the end of the story. There was another detail (one might call it the whole point) which Krebs..."
Paragraph 3 (121 words): "The living structure of cells Peter Mitchell arrived as an undergraduate in Cambridge several years after Krebs had left, at the outbreak of war in 1939. A sporting injury at school had prevented him joining the army. He had been a mixed student, and his example serves as another reminder of the dan..."
Paragraph 4 (78 words): "Mitchell hardly repaid his trust. He did badly in his degree and initially failed his doctorate. He had written an opaquely philosophical thesis on how bacteria transport molecules in and out of the cell, grounded in his own development of ancient Greek theory on ‘fluctids’ and ‘statids’. The examin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "49"
Paragraph 1 (51 words) [SHORT]: "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Despite these failings, Mitchell certainly impressed those around him."
Paragraph 3 (158 words): "Fred Sanger, a double Nobel laureate, wrote that ‘Peter had an original idea on every subject and we all knew even then that he would possibly change science.’ Just after the war, in 1947, Marjory Stephenson was elected President of the Society for General Microbiology (with strong support from Alex..."
Paragraph 4 (32 words) [SHORT]: "I can hardly begin to imagine what Jennifer Moyle might have accomplished in another age. She had gone to Girton College Cambridge in 1939 where she studied Natural Sciences, specialising in biochemistry."
Paragraph 5 (33 words) [SHORT]: "She was inspired by the lectures of the comparative biochemist Ernest Baldwin, another protégé of Hopkins, while attending many lectures in philosophy. She completed her ‘Title of Bachelor of Arts’ degree in 1942"
Paragraph 6 (67 words): "– sad to say, formal degrees were not awarded to women in Cambridge until 1948, when Girton College was granted full college status by the university. Straight after her ‘title of’ degree, Moyle joined the Auxiliary Territorial Service, the women’s branch of the British Army during the war, and she ..."
Paragraph 7 (84 words): "By the end of the war she was second in command of a unit that analysed intelligence from the breaking of German ciphers, and afterwards spent a year helping prepare servicemen for their return to civilian life. She then joined Marjory Stephenson in Cambridge as a research assistant in 1946, first m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "50"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life."
Paragraph 2 (116 words): "Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- century biology, starting in the free air of Hopkins’s biochemistry department, before moving to E..."
Paragraph 3 (244 words): "For source it was: Mitchell reconceived energy flow, in a way that we are only just beginning to assimilate properly into biology today – a theme I’ll return to later in the book. Krebs had thought beyond linear pathways and discovered cycles, four of them in all. But Mitchell really transcended che..."
Paragraph 4 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg and Krebs had both talked about the ‘living structure of cells’, arguing that some processes were ‘bound to the life of the cells’."
Paragraph 5 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Many biochemists were uncomfortable with this view, as it recalled the discredited idea of vitalism, implying that there was something special about living matter that could not be reduced to mere chemistry; and frankly, this view is still prevalent today. The goal of biochemistry was"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "51"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible."
Paragraph 2 (69 words): "Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better preparation methods were eventually demonstrated in cell-free extracts. So, while Warburg and Krebs contended that respiration could only take place..."
Paragraph 3 (36 words) [SHORT]: "For Mitchell that view was anathema. The integrity of the membrane was indispensable to the life of cells. The membrane is the thin oily layer that surrounds all cells, barely six millionths of a millimetre (6"
Paragraph 4 (178 words): "nanometres) in thickness, enclosing the gel-like cytoplasm inside. Some cells such as plants, fungi and bacteria also have a more robust, mesh- like cell wall, which prevents swelling and protects against mechanical injury, while allowing the movement of small molecules in and out; but it is the fli..."
Paragraph 5 (86 words): "Separating charge I have talked about stripping hydrogen (2H) from molecules and feeding them to oxygen. These 2H are not free in solution, nor are they shuttled by carboxylic acids, as Szent-Györgyi once thought; it turned out they are bound to a large molecule called NAD + (or ‘nicotinamide adenin..."
Paragraph 6 (29 words) [SHORT]: "NADH will figure large later in this book, but for now, when you see the term NADH, just focus on the ‘H’. I hope you will develop a Pavlovian"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "52"
Paragraph 1 (160 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."
Paragraph 2 (182 words): "Mitchell proposed that the 2H (derived from the Krebs cycle, in the form of NADH) are split into their component protons and electrons. The electrons are transferred to oxygen by way of the respiratory chain of carriers embedded in the membrane itself – an electrical current, insulated by the surrou..."
Paragraph 3 (75 words): "All this is now received wisdom, but it was hard won. These ideas were bitterly contested over two decades. Jennifer Moyle’s experiments contributed largely to the eventual acceptance of Mitchell’s ideas, for which he alone was awarded the Nobel prize in 1978. Her essential contribution would surely..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "53"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details)."
Paragraph 2 (126 words): "They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as the pesticide rotenone, partially blocked the acidification of the medium..."
Paragraph 3 (159 words): "A grossly simplified schematic of the respiratory chain. The transfer of electrons from NADH to oxygen is shown by the dotted line. These electrons pass through three great protein complexes embedded in the membrane (complex I, III and IV; we’ll meet complex II in Chapter 4). This current of electro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "54"
Paragraph 1 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped."
Paragraph 2 (92 words): "Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics. In particular, he long opposed the idea that pumping could be accomplished by rapid conformational changes in proteins spanning the membrane (rather than in the order and properties of the carriers themselv..."
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Perhaps Mitchell’s greatest error concerned the iconic ATP synthase."
Paragraph 4 (54 words) [SHORT]: "This extraordinary protein is a rotating motor embedded in the membrane. Dubbed ‘the elementary particles of life’ when first observed by electron microscopy in the early 1960s, there are many thousands of them in every mitochondrion. We now know that the inward flow of protons through these nanosca..."
Paragraph 5 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Their operation is wholly mechanical, utterly different from anything that Mitchell had ever imagined, and yet the ATP synthase has come to represent the essence of his hypothesis – its rotation, up to 500"
Paragraph 6 (16 words) [SHORT]: "revolutions per second, is powered by the proton-motive force, just as he predicted from the beginning."
Paragraph 7 (1 words) [SHORT]: "13"
Paragraph 8 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Regardless of his errors, Mitchell’s conception was just magnificent."
Paragraph 9 (47 words) [SHORT]: "The energy released by the reaction between 2H (extracted from Krebs cycle intermediates) and oxygen is transduced into an electrical charge on the membrane. This charge is awesome. It might not sound like much – just 150–200 millivolts – yet the membrane is extremely thin, only 6"
Paragraph 10 (94 words): "nanometres in thickness as noted earlier. This means that the electrical field strength (what you would experience as a molecule in the membrane) is about 30 million volts per metre, equivalent to a bolt of lightning across every square nanometre of membrane. And the area of electrically charged mem..."
Paragraph 11 (27 words) [SHORT]: "This is how respiration works in our own mitochondria, the ‘powerhouses’ of complex cells. When Mitchell was developing his chemiosmotic hypothesis, in the mid-1960s, Lynn Margulis was"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "55"
Paragraph 1 (194 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."
Paragraph 2 (124 words): "But that’s not the message that others have taken from the extraordinary sophistication of cell respiration. Biochemistry turned away from the philosophical ideas that underpinned Mitchell’s framework, and concerned itself with the marvellous mechanics of proton pumps and nanomotors. We are left wit..."
Paragraph 3 (109 words): "Bizarre contortions Imagine you’re starving. You are beginning to break down the proteins in your own muscles for the energy you need to keep going. Nothing much can be harvested from the proteins themselves; it’s their component amino acids that you need to burn. That’s how it began for Krebs back ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "56"
Paragraph 1 (74 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."
Paragraph 2 (129 words): "Of course we can burn amino acids, but it can be surprisingly complex. Here’s what happens in the case of α-ketoglutarate. It is first broken down by way of the Krebs cycle to one of the C4 carboxylic acids, malate. Malate is then exported out of the mitochondria, across two membranes, into the cyto..."
Paragraph 3 (188 words): "Part of the answer relates to contingency. The Krebs cycle and cellular respiration take place inside the mitochondria, which we’ve noted were once free-living bacteria; they brought along their bacterial metabolism to the ancestor of complex (eukaryotic) cells two billion years ago. To some extent ..."
Paragraph 4 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Adding succinate to pigeon-breast muscle raised the respiratory rate by 600% because that tissue is poised to oxidise glucose as quickly as possible, to provide energy for flying (and the tissue slices were supplied with plenty of glucose needed to form acetyl CoA). But had they"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "57"
Paragraph 1 (97 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."
Paragraph 2 (238 words): "The reason is simple enough but has profound consequences for life, which we will explore in this book. The Krebs cycle supplies precursors for the synthesis of amino acids, fats, sugars and more. If Krebs-cycle intermediates are siphoned off for these syntheses, then fewer intermediates remain to p..."
Paragraph 3 (136 words): "It might seem easier to explain the evolution of a crazy roundabout system than a perfect cycle, but these reflections really just raise the opposite problem. Why did several billion years of evolution come up with such a crazy system, or fail to improve it? Krebs himself grappled with this question..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "58"
Paragraph 1 (122 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."
Paragraph 2 (311 words): "1 For balance it should be said that there were also some protests outside the lab against foreigners taking scarce British jobs during the Great Depression. The parallel with modern times is uncomfortably close. But here is a more edifying modern parallel. Lord John Krebs, the distinguished son of ..."
Paragraph 3 (51 words) [SHORT]: "3 Carbon monoxide poisoning can kill you by binding to the iron in the haemoglobin of your red blood cells and displacing oxygen, but if you survived that, CO would stifle respiration in your cells for the same reasons. The haem protein that Warburg discovered is now called cytochrome oxidase, ‘cyto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "59"
Paragraph 1 (50 words) [SHORT]: "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."
Paragraph 2 (35 words) [SHORT]: "These gases can control the rate of respiration so exquisitely that they alter the local concentration of oxygen. This trick is employed wonderfully by fireflies to generate flashes of light using the oxygen-dependent enzyme luciferase."
Paragraph 3 (113 words): "4 A ‘group’ refers to a few atoms bound together within a molecule, which tend to stick together in the same arrangement even when transferred to another molecule. Groups are chemically semi-stable configurations that are found in multiple molecules, such as the amino group in all amino acids. While..."
Paragraph 4 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Some are more reactive than others. We’ll consider the diverse chemical properties of the different groups in a simple molecule in a moment."
Paragraph 5 (114 words): "5 Szent-Györgyi had a way with words. Some of the most arresting aphorisms in biochemistry trace back to him. One of my favourites is ‘Life is nothing but an electron looking for a place to rest.’ Szent-Györgyi wrote a number of books, ranging widely across science and life, including a collection o..."
Paragraph 6 (234 words): "He begins: ‘Every biologist has at some time asked “What is life?” and none has ever given a satisfactory answer.’ That’s still true today. He continues: ‘Life, as such, does not exist. What we can see and measure are material systems which have the wonderful quality of “being alive”. What we can as..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "60"
Paragraph 1 (107 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."
Paragraph 2 (108 words): "7 He married Margaret Fieldhouse in 1938. She taught in a Catholic convent school near the university, having been instructed in the Montessori teaching method by the inspirational Maria Montessori herself. When Hans asked Margaret’s father for her hand in marriage, Mr Fieldhouse said to Margaret ‘I..."
Paragraph 3 (26 words) [SHORT]: "He was ennobled in 2007 as Lord Krebs and – as mentioned earlier – founded the Sir Hans Krebs Trust in 2015, to support refugee scientists."
Paragraph 4 (96 words): "8 For the more astute accountants among you, some of the hydrogens burnt in fact derive from water, which is added at two separate steps onto Krebs-cycle intermediates (see figure on page 286 for one of them). Recall that stripping the 2H from glucose would give you six sets of 2H, whereas the Krebs..."
Paragraph 5 (48 words) [SHORT]: "9 Mitchell had some wealth through his uncle, Sir Godfrey Mitchell, a construction engineer who had bought a small, insolvent construction company, George Wimpey, in 1919. Under Godfrey’s dynamic direction, Wimpey went on to build some 300,000 homes in England by the time of his death in 1982."
Paragraph 6 (32 words) [SHORT]: "During the Second World War, the Wimpey Construction Company built hundreds of airfields, balloon stations, docks and army camps, for which Godfrey was knighted in 1948; it built Heathrow Airport soon afterwards."
Paragraph 7 (52 words) [SHORT]: "During the war years, the success of Wimpey allowed Peter Mitchell to cut a flamboyant figure around Cambridge, driving a silver Rolls-Royce, with his flowing mane of hair. Later on, periodic gifts of shares allowed him to purchase and renovate Glynn House, and helped him to maintain the institute t..."
Paragraph 8 (63 words): "10 NADH was also discovered by Warburg, but he failed to appreciate its full significance. It fell to the great US biochemist Albert Lehninger (author of a famous textbook) to show that the oxidation of NADH by oxygen was linked to ATP synthesis, in two classic papers in the late 1940s. Lehninger’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "61"
Paragraph 1 (42 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "11 A much-loved figure, with a faintly owlish look, Keilin headed the Molteno Institute in Cambridge, just across the lawn from Hopkins’s biochemistry department. He had welcomed Krebs into his home a decade earlier, despite a long and acrimonious dispute with Warburg about the nature of respiration..."
Paragraph 3 (146 words): "12 There’s an irony here because Krebs and R. E. Davies came up with a similar idea a decade before Mitchell, in 1951, in which they proposed that ‘It is feasible that ionic concentration differences form the link between the free energy of respiration on the one hand and ATP synthesis on the other...."
Paragraph 4 (194 words): "13 Although Mitchell had himself proposed conformational changes in proteins in his early work on bacteria, he stubbornly resisted the idea in later years, in a long-running dispute with Paul Boyer (who eventually received the Nobel prize alongside Sir John Walker for their work on the structure and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "63"
Paragraph 1 (55 words) [SHORT]: "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "1"
Paragraph 3 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Rubisco is sometimes semi- capitalised as a rather fussy acronym, RuBisCO, which if you insist stands for ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase. Each of those terms has a story to tell, but let’s not rush ahead."
Paragraph 4 (294 words): "Rubisco is so abundant because it is unusually bad at its job, for an enzyme. Enzymes normally rattle along at incomprehensible rates, catalysing exactly the same reaction hundreds or thousands of times every second. Rubisco, in contrast, has a turnover rate of less than ten reactions per second, me..."
Paragraph 5 (68 words): "Not surprisingly, there has been commercial interest in replacing rubisco with a substitute of ostensibly more rational design, with the carrot of improved yields dangling distractingly overhead. Yet rubisco – which swiftly came to be seen as the enzyme for carbon fixation – is emblematic of a more ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "64"
Paragraph 1 (159 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."
Paragraph 2 (277 words): "The simplistic dichotomy between plants and animals – the notion that plants make sugars by photosynthesis, while animals respire those sugars via the Krebs cycle – is of course partly true, but also profoundly misleading, making little sense of the structure of metabolism, and therefore little sens..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "65"
Paragraph 1 (165 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."
Paragraph 2 (144 words): "To see why that’s the case, we first need to follow the path of carbon in photosynthesis, to put rubisco in its proper place. Our winding path will start to straighten out the circular logic of the Krebs cycle – how it came to be the conflicted engine of biosynthesis today. We’ll set out with the ex..."
Paragraph 3 (104 words): "The advent of radioisotopes The story of rubisco goes back to the development of cyclotrons in the 1930s by Ernest Lawrence and Stanley Livingstone at the ‘Rad Lab’ (radiation laboratory) in Berkeley, California. A cyclotron accelerates charged particles, typically protons, into a high-energy beam t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "66"
Paragraph 1 (70 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."
Paragraph 2 (183 words): "By bombarding the nuclei of target atoms, a high-energy proton beam disrupts their atomic structure, producing isotopes – atoms with differing numbers of neutrons in the nucleus, giving each one a slightly different atomic weight. The chemical properties of an atom depend on the number of protons an..."
Paragraph 3 (43 words) [SHORT]: "But it was the fundamental applications in biology that made the biggest difference, with the advent of radioactive carbon isotopes, initially carbon-11 in the late 1930s. Carbon normally has an atomic weight of 12, with six protons and six neutrons in its nucleus."
Paragraph 4 (138 words): "Bombarding crystals of boron – carbon’s neighbour in the periodic table – with deuterons (heavy hydrogen nuclei, composed of a neutron as well as a proton) transmutes some of the boron into carbon-11, usually notated 11 C, as it picks up an additional proton. This conversion of one element into anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "67"
Paragraph 1 (50 words) [SHORT]: "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20"
Paragraph 2 (8 words) [SHORT]: "minutes. After two hours, nearly 99% of 11"
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "C will have decayed back to boron, with its radioactivity accordingly declining to a hundredth of the starting point. Before much longer, the residual radioactivity will have dwindled to undetectable levels. That didn’t give researchers long to do much with it, but it was a start. And it certainly a..."
Paragraph 4 (76 words): "The pioneers of carbon isotopes were chemists caught between physics and biology. Their story is the stuff of scientific mythology, even if it is less widely known to the general public, and it is worth recounting not only because it explains our focus on sugars at the heart of metabolism, but also ..."
Paragraph 5 (188 words): "The ‘Big Problem’ Enter stage left: Martin Kamen and Sam Ruben. This pair of isotope chemists joined Ernest Lawrence’s Rad Lab in the mid-1930s. Kamen sets the scene in a charming autobiography. Lawrence himself and Robert Oppenheimer, affectionately known as Oppie (who goes on to lead the Manhattan..."
Paragraph 6 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Luckily, this embarrassing mishap doesn’t stop Lawrence from receiving the Nobel prize for his pioneering work on cyclotrons in 1939. 3"
Paragraph 7 (19 words) [SHORT]: "This bonding experience cemented a strong friendship between Kamen and Ruben, but also made clear the importance of proper"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "68"
Paragraph 1 (110 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."
Paragraph 2 (58 words) [SHORT]: "C, and not surprisingly ended in dejection. Hardly any of the 11 C ended up in glucose or related carbohydrates. It was hard to take, but it also opened up a window on other possibilities ... what if plants didn’t make sugars such as glucose by photosynthesis at all? What if they were barking up the..."
Paragraph 3 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Then Ruben had a brainwave. ‘Why are we bothering with rats at all?"
Paragraph 4 (64 words): "Hell, with you and me together we could solve photosynthesis in no time!’ The pair became obsessed with what Kamen called the ‘Big Problem’: finding the first product of CO 2 fixation in plants. If it wasn’t glucose, then what was it? Earlier that year, Krebs had spelled out the individual steps in ..."
Paragraph 5 (62 words): "Photosynthesis was supposed to do more or less the reverse, yet it remained a black box. What were the steps by which thin air was transformed into the substance of life, starlight into matter? This was the ‘Big Problem’, no less than the anatomy of a miracle, to be played out against the hubristic ..."
Paragraph 6 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Their idea was simple, even if the execution turned out to be fraught with difficulty. Feed the plant with CO 2 enriched in 11"
Paragraph 7 (19 words) [SHORT]: "C, give it a little time to fix the CO 2 to form new organic molecules incorporating the 11"
Paragraph 8 (101 words): "C, then stop the biochemistry dead in its tracks by dropping a leaf into boiling alcohol. If the reactions of photosynthesis are stopped quickly, after a few minutes, then most of the 11 C should be incorporated into the earliest products of CO 2 fixation. Stopping the reactions after longer periods..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "69"
Paragraph 1 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron."
Paragraph 2 (167 words): "When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO 2 from the boron oxides that he had been bombarding with deuterons, no easy task in itself. The precious sample was then dashed across to the lab in the ‘rat house’, where Ruben and Zev Hassid were at the ready..."
Paragraph 3 (20 words) [SHORT]: "They were, after all, physical chemists in a physics lab, not biochemists, and hardly trained for this line of work."
Paragraph 4 (143 words): "But their work was raising the curtain on a new era, and the photosynthesis community could see the raw potential despite all the setbacks. Kamen and Ruben made real progress (though Zev Hassid was obliged to quit for health reasons). The prevailing idea in the late 1930s was that CO 2 bound directl..."
Paragraph 5 (1 words) [SHORT]: "4"
Paragraph 6 (81 words): "Even so, while successfully disproving these earlier ideas of photosynthesis, Kamen and Ruben could only make one positive step towards identifying the actual path of carbon fixation: they showed that the first product was a carboxylic acid, with the same kind of chemistry as Krebs-cycle intermediat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "70"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such."
Paragraph 2 (51 words) [SHORT]: "That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note that the ‘R’ here refers to a (then) unidentified chemical group."
Paragraph 3 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Ruben got so far as suggesting that R was actually a sugar phosphate (correct as it turned out), but soon afterwards history took a tragic turn."
Paragraph 4 (85 words): "Slow disintegration 1940. The war had begun in Europe, but the United States had not yet entered the fray. In that year of loaded tension, Kamen and Ruben made their most momentous discovery of all – ironically, nothing to do with either the war or photosynthesis directly, but a discovery that was t..."
Paragraph 5 (1 words) [SHORT]: "years."
Paragraph 6 (221 words): "In many respects, 14 C was more of an invention than a discovery, although it later turned out to exist naturally, albeit at very low abundance. The first hints that a relatively stable radioisotope of carbon existed came from cloud chamber work with nitrogen gas. A cloud chamber is a mesmerising de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "71"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails."
Paragraph 2 (166 words): "What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to protons, plus some short, stubby trails that had to be formed by much heavier charged particles. As nitrogen normal..."
Paragraph 3 (16 words) [SHORT]: "He knew it could only be 14 C and the theory had to be wrong (again)."
Paragraph 4 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Kamen tried all kinds of ways of making 14"
Paragraph 5 (73 words): "C on a larger scale and Lawrence for once gave him as much time as he needed on the largest cyclotrons to do so. Eventually he succeeded. By bombarding ammonium nitrate with neutrons spinning off from the cyclotron, Kamen succeeded beyond his wildest dreams. Working with Ruben to isolate radioactive..."
Paragraph 6 (181 words): "It had been far from straightforward. For months, Kamen had been bombarding boron with deuterons, then 13 C-enriched graphite, eventually succeeding in producing a small amount of 14 C. After working around the clock for weeks, Kamen finally finished in the middle of the night, and left his sample o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "72"
Paragraph 1 (34 words) [SHORT]: "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car."
Paragraph 2 (82 words): "Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch of liquid phosgene in the lab, one arm in a sling, a cracked glass tube exploded in some fiercely boiling liquid air, spraying Ruben’s jumper with the deadly gas. Knowing he may have exceeded the lethal d..."
Paragraph 3 (19 words) [SHORT]: "He’d never found the time to fill out the forms that would make them eligible for a federal pension."
Paragraph 4 (158 words): "Kamen was forced to abandon his work on photosynthesis too. An accomplished viola player, he was close friends with the virtuoso violinist Isaac Stern. Kamen had unsuspectingly gone along to a party hosted by the violinist that was also attended by some Russian attachés, with whom he remained briefl..."
Paragraph 5 (158 words): "He was smeared by the press as ‘Atomic Scientist Fired from Army Project after Talking to Reds’, before finally clearing his name more than a decade later. While he did successfully return to science, Kamen never resumed his pioneering work on the path of carbon in photosynthesis, and never put his ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "73"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14"
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "C to do the job. The dice were loaded."
Paragraph 3 (205 words): "The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of the Japanese surrender Lawrence told Calvin that ‘Now is the time to do something useful with radioactiv..."
Paragraph 4 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin and Benson decided to work on the alga Chlorella , which could photosynthesise much faster than land plants at high light intensity."
Paragraph 5 (162 words): "This was facilitated by Benson’s famous ‘lollipops’, flattened glass flasks that could be illuminated from both sides, with a tap in the base to allow samples to be run off into boiling alcohol, killing the cells for analysis. Perhaps Benson’s most decisive change was to adopt a new method of analys..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "74"
Paragraph 1 (85 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."
Paragraph 2 (100 words): "With this experimental setup, stopping photosynthesis after as little as one minute already produced as many as fifteen spots, giving plenty of scope for confusion. Killing the algae after just ten seconds gave a much cleaner signal – just one spot, meaning that only one product gave rise to all the..."
Paragraph 3 (118 words): "2– ), as anticipated by Ruben and Kamen. It’s hard to convey the excitement that one dark smudge signifying this unprepossessing little molecule must have caused. Think about it for a moment: what is more mysterious than the everyday miracle of photosynthesis, in which plants turn thin air into wood..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "75"
Paragraph 1 (95 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."
Paragraph 2 (120 words): "acceptor picked up a CO 2 , giving a C3 acid. If cells were not to run out of C2 acceptors they would need to regenerate them, or everything would grind to a halt – hence the cycle. They knew that later products included at least two C4 carboxylic acids. So presumably there was another step, in whic..."
Paragraph 3 (60 words): "none of it was true. Starting in 1948 with a paper in Science entitled ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis’, Calvin, Benson and their colleagues published a stream of papers, each one with the same title numbered with a Roman numeral. By 1952, they had got up to number XX, though frankly they were..."
Paragraph 4 (1 words) [SHORT]: "6"
Paragraph 5 (38 words) [SHORT]: "The problem was that they were befuddled by the Krebs-cycle intermediates which kept on cropping up. In the end, it turned out that none of these lay on the one true path of photosynthesis as we know it."
Paragraph 6 (25 words) [SHORT]: "Those Krebs-cycle intermediates appeared so often because they are so central to all metabolism – a salient point that we’ll return to in a while."
Paragraph 7 (6 words) [SHORT]: "But here they were just misleading."
Paragraph 8 (62 words): "The key turned out to be Benson’s personal discovery of a five-carbon sugar-phosphate called ribulose bisphosphate (found while Calvin was away, recuperating from a heart attack that he’d had during a budget meeting 7 ). This sugar accumulated when the algae were starved of CO 2 – exactly what a CO ..."
Paragraph 9 (74 words): "molecule at all, but a C5 molecule that split in half when CO 2 was added on, giving two C3 phosphoglycerate molecules. The rest was mostly arithmetic, albeit a strange numbers game. Three complete turns of the cycle produce six C3 molecules. One of these could be siphoned off to be used anywhere in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "76"
Paragraph 1 (11 words) [SHORT]: "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle."
Paragraph 2 (51 words) [SHORT]: "The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence of the cycle: The details needn’t concern us. Suffice to say this is sugar..."
Paragraph 3 (61 words): "Phosphoglycerate is fed hydrogen, derived from the solar-powered splitting of water (which we’ll come to in Chapter 4) to form a three- carbon sugar called glyceraldehyde phosphate. That is converted, by way of other sugary intermediates (let’s just follow Calvin and Benson and call them A and B her..."
Paragraph 4 (88 words): "Does that name ring a bell? Remember the enzyme rubisco, the most abundant breakfast cereal in the world, which technically stands for ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase. What we see here is the carboxylation of ribulose bisphosphate (meaning that CO 2 is added onto it) to form two molecule..."
Paragraph 5 (68 words): "That seminal 1954 paper was the culmination of more than just the cycle. For reasons that were never made explicit, Calvin abruptly dismissed Benson with the words ‘It is time to go.’ Benson had no place to go, and Calvin made no obvious effort on his behalf. What went wrong? Calvin’s own cherished ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "77"
Paragraph 1 (299 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "My point here is not about fairness but personal myth. Calvin was an unusually persuasive and charismatic man. He even featured on a 2011"
Paragraph 3 (117 words): "series of US postage stamps dedicated to great American scientists, alongside Richard Feynman, Barbara McClintock, Linus Pauling and Edwin Hubble. Calvin’s claim to fame was the one true path of carbon in photosynthesis – this was the pathway of autotrophy, and Calvin was king. It was all about suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "78"
Paragraph 1 (55 words) [SHORT]: "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life."
Paragraph 2 (219 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle Berkeley casts a long shadow over the photosynthesis world. Five years after Calvin’s Nobel lecture, another luminary of photosynthesis research, also at Berkeley, published a paper that might as well have come from a parallel universe. Daniel Arnon was Polish. He was drawn t..."
Paragraph 3 (126 words): "With fitting symmetry, the discovery that made Arnon’s name was published in 1954, the same year as the Calvin–Benson cycle – and even in the same journal. Arnon had shown that photosynthesis does more than make new organic molecules: it also provides the energy that’s needed to power their synthesi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "79"
Paragraph 1 (91 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Given that background, picture the reception for Arnon’s 1966 paper."
Paragraph 3 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Working with Mike Evans and Bob Buchanan, Arnon showed that the Calvin–Benson cycle was not the only pathway of CO 2 fixation after all."
Paragraph 4 (187 words): "In fact, they made it look decidedly second rate. Because one turn of the Calvin–Benson cycle incorporates just one molecule of CO 2 , they wrote, ‘One complete turn gives, on balance, a net synthesis of 1/3 molecule of triose phosphate.’ In contrast, they introduced the green sulfur bacterium Chlor..."
Paragraph 5 (29 words) [SHORT]: "It could drive growth like a ... well, like a bacterium. Here’s what they had in mind (I’m just slightly simplifying their original diagram to highlight the key points):"

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "80"
Paragraph 1 (225 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "81"
Paragraph 1 (49 words) [SHORT]: "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else."
Paragraph 2 (134 words): "The idea that the Krebs cycle running in reverse could drive growth through carbon fixation was not new; it had been suggested in the late 1930s, and certainly influenced Ruben and Kamen’s thinking. The ubiquitous appearance of Krebs-cycle intermediates in the autoradiographs of Calvin and Benson al..."
Paragraph 3 (37 words) [SHORT]: "‘I hesitate to say this’, she replied, ‘I am working with an autotrophic, photosynthetic bacterium, which fixes CO 2 but not by the Calvin cycle.’ ‘I don’t believe it’, Calvin retorted with a grin, ending the conversation."
Paragraph 4 (52 words) [SHORT]: "It’s no coincidence that the 1966 paper was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA , of which Arnon was a member. That honour meant he could publish in the Academy’s journal without the normal formality of peer review, which might well have killed it in embryo."
Paragraph 5 (1 words) [SHORT]: "10"
Paragraph 6 (180 words): "In the end, the wider field did not come to accept the reverse Krebs cycle until the 1980s (a quarter of a century later) when gene sequences corroborated that Chlorobium really doesn’t possess the Calvin–Benson cycle, but it does have all the requisite genes for the reverse Krebs cycle. Just how di..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "82"
Paragraph 1 (121 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."
Paragraph 2 (111 words): "In any case, Chlorobium restored the Krebs cycle to its rightful place, at the metabolic heart of the cell. I admit that to most people, anaerobic sulfur bacteria may seem a little esoteric, even if they do organise their metabolism in an exemplary way. But that’s exactly the problem. They will neve..."
Paragraph 3 (72 words): "How to power growth The problem facing Arnon and Buchanan was not only the unity of biochemistry and the dominating personality of Calvin; the idea of a reverse cycle also seemed to go against thermodynamics. Szent-Györgyi and Krebs knew well that parts of the Krebs cycle could run backwards, even i..."
Paragraph 4 (120 words): "(the C3 to C4 step in the scheme on page 101), which was confirmed in 1940. In 1945 the great Spanish biochemist Severo Ochoa, working in New York, showed that animal cells could carboxylate α-ketoglutarate to make citrate (the C5 to C6 step above). This radical finding was hard to comprehend, as it..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "83"
Paragraph 1 (64 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "This marvellous, mysterious adaptor was named ferredoxin."
Paragraph 3 (180 words): "Ferredoxin is red because it contains iron. Specifically, it binds to itself one or two tiny mineral lattices, each one just a few atoms in size, known as iron–sulfur clusters. When bound to ferredoxin, these clusters have a potent ability to transfer electrons. It’s not easy to force electrons onto..."
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "The basic chemistry is similar for both acetate and succinate, requiring CO 2 to be joined onto a virtually inert carboxylate group."
Paragraph 5 (73 words): "Remember that the carboxylate group has a structure of -CO 2 , so the CO 2 has to be bound onto something very like itself. Ferredoxin (Fd) takes the electrons from the 2H and transfers them onto CO 2 , enabling it to form a carbon-to-carbon bond: Let’s not worry about exactly how that works here (i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "84"
Paragraph 1 (43 words) [SHORT]: "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas."
Paragraph 2 (104 words): "So in the presence of oxygen the reverse Krebs cycle usually grinds to a halt. It’s even worse than that, because when oxygen picks up single electrons from ferredoxin it is itself transformed into a reactive ‘free radical’ (a molecule with one or more unpaired electrons, typically making it more re..."
Paragraph 3 (67 words): "That fact explains a lot. We’ll look into how rising oxygen levels play havoc with the reverse Krebs cycle later. For now, let’s note that the bacteria that use it today are normally restricted to environments with very low oxygen levels. Their sensitivity to oxygen probably explains why the Calvin–..."
Paragraph 4 (97 words): "Plants still depend on ferredoxin, but keep its levels to a strict minimum, transferring its electrons straight to NADP + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) to form NADPH like this: Transfer of electrons from 2H to CO 2 to form organics, C(H 2 O), in photosynthesis, powered by sunlight. T..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "85"
Paragraph 1 (32 words) [SHORT]: "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 ."
Paragraph 2 (199 words): "Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive with oxygen, while retaining just enough power to push its electrons onto other molecules. 11 NADPH doesn’t have the potency to drive the Krebs cycle backwards, but it can p..."
Paragraph 3 (194 words): "The need to prevent ferredoxin reacting with oxygen might also explain the propensity of rubisco to fix O 2 through the apparently futile process of photorespiration. Very little in evolution is genuinely futile; if it survives natural selection there is usually a reason. In the case of rubisco, thi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "86"
Paragraph 1 (11 words) [SHORT]: "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death."
Paragraph 2 (8 words) [SHORT]: "No doubt we’ll find out in due course."
Paragraph 3 (175 words): "All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread on the early Earth before the rise of oxygen. It has even been linked to the origin of life itself, as we’ll s..."
Paragraph 4 (183 words): "Two recent discoveries hint at the antiquity of the reverse Krebs cycle. The first relates to the need for a supply of ATP and ferredoxin for the cycle to spin at all. As a rule, these derive from photosynthesis. None of the most ancient bacteria (or their cousins, known as archaea) are thought to h..."
Paragraph 5 (82 words): "The second critical discovery relates to the purportedly patchy distribution of the reverse Krebs cycle. Look again at the scheme on page 101. The top step that splits citrate into oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA is not catalysed by the familiar ‘citrate synthase’ enzyme from our own Krebs cycle running..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "87"
Paragraph 1 (147 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."
Paragraph 2 (138 words): "Could it be that the origin of life structured metabolism through the reactions of H 2 and CO 2 , to form Krebs-cycle intermediates? That this biosynthetic engine was hard-wired into life from the beginning, the driving force that gave rise to genes and proteins? That billions of years later, as the..."
Paragraph 3 (98 words): "1 The venture failed because in the late 1970s, when Wildman set up a pilot plant in North Carolina to extract large amounts of rubisco from tobacco leaves, the dangers of smoking were becoming universally recognised. Unsurprisingly, the idea of adding a tobacco protein to food gained little commerc..."
Paragraph 4 (93 words): "2 This is sufficiently below the speed of light not to require correction for the effects of relativity. Because E = mc 2 , as particles are accelerated closer to the speed of light their mass and behaviour in electromagnetic fields changes, which has to be taken into consideration in synchronising ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "88"
Paragraph 1 (107 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."
Paragraph 2 (83 words): "4 This unexpected finding took biologists some time to accept, yet CO 2 fixation in the dark had already been shown to occur in autotrophic bacteria. Indeed, Krebs himself had made the bold claim (based on manometry) that even animal tissues could fix CO 2 , but he was unable to prove it using 11 C ..."
Paragraph 3 (162 words): "5 Neutrons? Yes, you heard right. Neutrons are produced from a high-energy beam of protons or deuterons hitting almost any target. They are also produced directly from the cyclotron itself, as particles are accelerated up to higher speeds and energies. At energies above ~10 million electron volts, d..."
Paragraph 4 (151 words): "6 It is worth reflecting that paper after paper published in top journals can be essentially wrong. Please don’t think that these papers were especially bad. Far from it. Science is hard and we are all wrong a lot. The harder the problem, the more wrongness there will be. If you want to take a moral..."
Paragraph 5 (40 words) [SHORT]: "7 Calvin’s wife Genevieve took matters in hand: under her strict dietary regime, Calvin lost 30 kg in weight and quit smoking. It would be unfair to blame the budget meeting for anything but the timing of his heart attack."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "89"
Paragraph 1 (186 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."
Paragraph 2 (187 words): "9 Science is almost always a team effort, frequently with large groups of people, all of whom contribute in important ways, albeit to varying degrees, just as large teams do in making movies. To what extent does one individual’s stamp make a movie or a scientific discovery? We can recognise the crea..."
Paragraph 3 (76 words): "10 Peer review is often lionised as the ‘gold standard’, and at its best can indeed work extremely well. But it is also intrinsically conservative, as long argued by Don Braben (I would strongly recommend his books, notably Scientific Freedom ). The problem is twofold. First, peers are frequently an..."
Paragraph 4 (118 words): "Second, any revolutionary ideas, by definition, overturn the applecart, meaning the lifetime achievements of peers are diminished, even disproved. The greatest of scientists – the greatest human beings – will put their own emotions aside, stand on a soapbox, and proclaim their errors and misinterpre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "90"
Paragraph 1 (126 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "92"
Paragraph 1 (34 words) [SHORT]: "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves."
Paragraph 2 (330 words): "Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on the origin of life. Working with the oceanographers John Baross and Sarah Hoffman, Corliss published a classic paper in 1981, entitled ‘An Hypothesis Concerning the Relationship between Submarine Hot Springs and the Origin o..."
Paragraph 3 (73 words): "Yet by the same token, the absence of oxygen should have made the fixation of CO 2 much easier. By the late 1980s the reverse Krebs cycle was finally gaining credence, as gene sequences made it clear that not all autotrophic bacteria depend on the Calvin–Benson cycle. The time was ripe for a new con..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "93"
Paragraph 1 (70 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."
Paragraph 2 (37 words) [SHORT]: "Two trailblazing scientists, the chemist Günter Wächtershäuser and the geochemist Mike Russell, independently put forward detailed and contrasting ideas on how iron sulfide minerals in vents might catalyse the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to form carboxylic acids."
Paragraph 3 (242 words): "Wächtershäuser conceived an elaborate scheme that he termed ‘pyrites pulling’, which linked the synthesis of iron pyrites (fool’s gold) to the reverse Krebs cycle. While ingenious, it bore only a cursory resemblance to the pathway in bacteria. Russell, in contrast, thought in terms of the topology o..."
Paragraph 4 (65 words): "These ideas are opposed in virtually every respect: deep oceans versus warm ponds, light energy or chemical disequilibria, metabolism first or genes first, autotrophy or heterotrophy, fast chemistry or slow accumulation, local or planetary scales, and biology or chemistry as the ultimate guide to li..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "94"
Paragraph 1 (224 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."
Paragraph 2 (132 words): "Whatever the answer, these disparate views are far from sterile, but inform practical decisions about where to search for life in the solar system, or further afield. Should NASA and other space agencies back missions to Mars, or to the icy moons of Saturn and Jupiter, Enceladus and Europa? If light..."
Paragraph 3 (92 words): "Arguably even more important are the practical connotations for metabolism and our own health today. Is the Krebs cycle at the heart of metabolism because life was forced into existence that way, by thermodynamics – fate! – or was this chemistry invented later by genes, just a trivial outcome of inf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "95"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first?"
Paragraph 2 (37 words) [SHORT]: "The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning."
Paragraph 3 (17 words) [SHORT]: "In this chapter we’ll explore the evidence for this view, stemming from the origin of life itself."
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "How old is old?"
Paragraph 5 (156 words): "There is little doubt that the reverse Krebs cycle is ancient, but merely being ancient is far removed from extending right back to the very origin of life. What evidence is there? Simply arguing that the Krebs cycle spins at the heart of biochemistry is not enough. There are two reasons why that mi..."
Paragraph 6 (150 words): "The first question is geological plausibility. The reverse Krebs cycle requires the gases CO 2 and H 2 as well as catalysts containing iron–sulfur clusters. Here, we are on relatively safe ground. There was almost certainly a great deal more CO 2 in the atmosphere and oceans around four billion year..."
Paragraph 7 (50 words) [SHORT]: "There was also much less limestone on the early Earth, for this tends to form in relatively alkaline oceans. We know from the geological record that barely any limestone was laid down beneath the acidic oceans of the early Earth. Now, if all the carbon in organic matter plus limestone"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "96"
Paragraph 1 (41 words) [SHORT]: "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level)."
Paragraph 2 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and so be absorbed into the Earth’s crust, but geologists have a hard time accounting for the last 10 bars or so. If only 1 bar lingered, that’s still 25,000 times more than today: there was surely no shortage of CO 2 ."
Paragraph 3 (64 words): "Even when drawn down into the mantle, CO 2 does not remain below for long, but is degassed back into the atmosphere through volcanic eruptions, over a cycle of a few tens of millions of years. The Earth is far from unusual – CO 2 makes up around 95% of the atmospheres of Mars and Venus and is common..."
Paragraph 4 (245 words): "Hydrogen, too, bubbles from the oceans through the hydro-thermal vents advocated by Mike Russell and Bill Martin, which were probably far more common back then. These vents are produced not by volcanic activity, but chemistry – ocean water reacting with minerals such as olivine. Olivine comprises ab..."
Paragraph 5 (36 words) [SHORT]: "That certainly can’t be said for the alternative theories based on gases such as cyanide. While relatively stable forms such as ferricyanide might have accumulated in warm ponds on land, there is little evidence for that"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "97"
Paragraph 1 (16 words) [SHORT]: "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 ."
Paragraph 2 (277 words): "Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty acids from cyanide and related molecules. In contrast, until recently, the exponent..."
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "are ubiquitous, and can react to form Krebs-cycle intermediates."
Paragraph 4 (88 words): "But other factors are more equivocal. Phylogenetics clearly indicates that the earliest cells in the tree of life were auto-trophic, growing from gases such as H 2 and CO 2 (rather than ‘eating’ food) but do not really support the contention that the reverse Krebs cycle is ancestral to life, as woul..."
Paragraph 5 (47 words) [SHORT]: "fixation across the living world. Just one of these, the acetyl CoA pathway, is found in both bacteria and archaea, the two great prokaryotic domains of life, implying that this was the only pathway present in their common ancestor, the last universal common ancestor of all life"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "98"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2"
Paragraph 2 (96 words): "and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway draws on the power of ancient iron–sulfur proteins, including..."
Paragraph 3 (52 words) [SHORT]: "On the other hand, the end product of the acetyl CoA pathway is acetyl CoA itself – a C2 molecule that is also part of the reverse Krebs cycle. While acetyl CoA is a lynchpin of metabolism, it isn’t the direct source for most other molecules containing more than two carbon atoms."
Paragraph 4 (141 words): "Most amino acids, for example, contain three to six carbon atoms. These are not made (as they could be in theory) by joining C2 units together and chopping bits off as necessary, but from Krebs-cycle intermediates by way of more CO 2 fixation, using more H 2 . Likewise sugars. These are formed from ..."
Paragraph 5 (138 words): "There are two possible resolutions to the conundrum. The first is that the reverse Krebs cycle is not ancestral, but a few of the constituent carboxylic acid intermediates are. In particular, five of them are universally conserved across life – acetate (C2), pyruvate (C3), oxaloacetate (C4), succina..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "99"
Paragraph 1 (149 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Thankfully not. There are other ways to approach the question."
Paragraph 3 (171 words): "The cycling law ‘Energy flows, matter cycles.’ This axiom from the legendary biophysicist Harold Morowitz might one day be elevated to a fourth law of thermodynamics, but in the meantime it is more informally known as Morowitz’s cycling law. Born in Poughkeepsie, New York, Morowitz was a child prodi..."
Paragraph 4 (101 words): "Hard work is almost never vice. Hopefulness is a moral imperative. And, a sense of humour helps.’ Biologists can be grateful that Morowitz made the switch: he was one of the most profound and delightful of thinkers, combining a physicist’s rigour with a biologist’s eclecticism. He came to the attent..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "100"
Paragraph 1 (167 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."
Paragraph 2 (243 words): "Morowitz had laid out his cycling theorem in a 1968 book, Energy Flow in Biology : ‘In steady state systems, the flow of energy through the system from a source to a sink will lead to at least one cycle in the system.’ The idea made a pleasing link between living systems (where an organism remains i..."
Paragraph 3 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Always an admirer of the iconic metabolic charts of biochemistry, Morowitz could not help but see the Krebs cycle as the perfect cyclone"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "101"
Paragraph 1 (101 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."
Paragraph 2 (66 words): "Even better than that. As noted in the last chapter, the reverse Krebs cycle is autocatalytic. Starting with one molecule of the C4 oxaloacetate, one spin of the reverse cycle generates two molecules of oxaloacetate; the next spin generates four molecules, then eight, sixteen and so on. Not only is ..."
Paragraph 3 (1 words) [SHORT]: "5"
Paragraph 4 (111 words): "No wonder Morowitz was entranced. And it just kept on getting better. The idea of an autocatalytic cycle that turns CO 2 into organic molecules, dictated by the laws of thermodynamics, was lent even more force by the repetition of simple, almost mundane, chemistry in the reverse Krebs cycle. This re..."
Paragraph 5 (101 words): "Inevitable versus implausible Morowitz’s conception is beautiful and full of meaning. It suggests that life can’t help but emerge on any wet, rocky planet flooded with light from a nearby star. He even wrote a book, The Emergence of Everything , which explores the limits of inevitability – where doe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "102"
Paragraph 1 (100 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."
Paragraph 2 (136 words): "Orgel had trained as an inorganic chemist at Oxford in the 1940s. He was among the first to see the molecular model of DNA constructed by Crick and Watson in 1953, when the great crystallographer Dorothy Hodgkin told a group of her colleagues that they had to cram into two cars to make the trip to C..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "103"
Paragraph 1 (47 words) [SHORT]: "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others."
Paragraph 2 (30 words) [SHORT]: "This hypothesis argues that RNA can act as both a template and a catalyst, and so could have given rise to both heredity and metabolism at the origin of life."
Paragraph 3 (68 words): "Never shy of confronting the difficulties implicit in his own ideas, Orgel observed that if metabolism were indeed invented by an RNA world, then the structure of biochemistry could give no insight into the origin of life. That’s because metabolism would be a product of genetic information – written..."
Paragraph 4 (53 words) [SHORT]: "Information rules biology, and whatever form of prebiotic chemistry came before genes (said Orgel) could not be read by looking at the products of genes. That would include the reverse Krebs cycle, which Orgel argued had to be a product of genes and selection, and so could give no insight into prebi..."
Paragraph 5 (1 words) [SHORT]: "6"
Paragraph 6 (240 words): "Famous for pithy remarks such as his eponymous Second Law, ‘Evolution is cleverer than you are’, Orgel memorably dismissed self- organising biochemical cycles as ‘an appeal to magic’. He returned to the theme in a final testament, published posthumously, entitled ‘The Implausibility of Metabolic Cyc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "104"
Paragraph 1 (250 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "7"
Paragraph 3 (85 words): "My point here is more specific. The last thing that prebiotic chemistry needs is the perfect autocatalytic cycle, which makes copies of itself at the expense of all the side reactions that make up living cells. But a cycle that bleeds off material with every spin ceases to be autocatalytic, and so b..."
Paragraph 4 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Where does this leave us? Compromise can be a dirty word in science, but it seems to me that there really is a pattern of mundane, repetitious reactions that form Krebs-cycle intermediates in the right order, but initially just the first few steps, perhaps up to the C3 or C4"
Paragraph 5 (14 words) [SHORT]: "intermediates. Not a cycle, but a straight line, let’s call it the Krebs line."
Paragraph 6 (58 words) [SHORT]: "We’ve seen that there’s strong experimental evidence, from the last few years, that these Krebs line intermediates do indeed form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 . That’s a big deal, because it substantiates a hypothesis that already has unique explanatory power in connecting an omnipresent geologic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "105"
Paragraph 1 (38 words) [SHORT]: "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions."
Paragraph 2 (81 words): "In principle, this means that the sustained disequilibrium in hydrothermal vents – the non-stop replenishment of both H 2 and CO 2 – could drive a continuous reactivity, in which the core components of biochemistry are continually formed and react together to form more complex networks of reactions...."
Paragraph 3 (31 words) [SHORT]: "and CO 2 relative to the rate at which they dissipate – get washed away or diluted or break back down. And that rests, first and foremost, on the chemistry itself."
Paragraph 4 (211 words): "The likelihood of any reaction taking place depends in part on the stability of the products, but most of all on the proclivity of molecules to react at all – the kinetics. In chemistry, the proverb ‘Where there’s a will there’s a way’ is mistaken, because sometimes there just isn’t a way. Not all c..."
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "Magic surfaces Consider what happens close to a charged surface, let’s say a mineral containing iron and sulfur (such as greigite), shown below as a wavy line to keep things simple. Imagine that a CO 2 molecule comes into close apposition with the surface and is held in place by electrical attractio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "106"
Paragraph 1 (100 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."
Paragraph 2 (170 words): "What just happened here? Look at the curly arrows again. A pair of electrons passes directly from the surface onto the carbon atom, which promotes the transfer of a bonding pair of electrons onto the oxygen, giving it a negative charge. Because one of those electrons belonged to oxygen in the first ..."
Paragraph 3 (71 words): "The structure above is stabilised by the transfer of electrons from the mineral surface, in much the same way that ferredoxin stabilises the transfer of electrons onto CO 2 in cells today (see Appendix 1). The parallel between mineral surfaces and enzymes such as ferredoxin is remarkable: the lattic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "107"
Paragraph 1 (53 words) [SHORT]: "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."
Paragraph 2 (70 words): "Now another electron jiggle splits the bound CO 2 into carbon monoxide (CO) and a charged oxygen atom, both still attached to the surface. Knowing exactly how electrons behave during these jiggles is a quantum artform in itself, uncertain in detail even today – electrons ‘tunnel’ (hop) across these ..."
Paragraph 3 (72 words): "binding to a surface is reduced to CO, roughly as depicted here: All this chemistry is promoted by electrons passing from the surface of the mineral onto CO 2 . But as in respiration, protons and electrons can unite to form hydrogen atoms. This happens much more readily in mildly acidic environments..."
Paragraph 4 (13 words) [SHORT]: "They can then follow the electrons onto CO 2 attached to the surface."
Paragraph 5 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Overall, the transfer of electrons and protons onto CO 2 equates to the transfer of hydrogen, even in the absence of hydrogen itself. Here’s a sequence showing roughly what happens:"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "108"
Paragraph 1 (143 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."
Paragraph 2 (75 words): "Rather, it means the electron pair is shared with the proton, while remaining firmly attached to the carbon. If you prefer, you could imagine the electrons crossing to the H + to form H – (a ‘hydride’ ion) leaving a positively charged carbon behind. What would happen next? The H – would immediately ..."
Paragraph 3 (112 words): "There’s an even more important general principle here, which we will return to in a while: it’s much easier to pass electrons onto carbon atoms in an acidic environment, where protons are abundant, than it is in an alkaline environment, where there are hardly any around. Because a proton plus an ele..."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "109"
Paragraph 1 (237 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "110"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP."
Paragraph 2 (76 words): "A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independently to other molecules such as phosphate. The key point here is that the t..."
Paragraph 3 (208 words): "And now for the most startling step. I have to admit I’m amazed that this happens, but it certainly does, as has been known since the 1920s when Franz Fischer and Hans Tropsch pioneered a method for generating synthetic gasoline from coal. This ‘Fischer–Tropsch synthesis’ later fuelled the German wa..."
Paragraph 4 (37 words) [SHORT]: "But now look at the product. This bound molecule is a prebiotic equivalent to acetyl CoA – discovered, if you recall, by Fritz Lipmann, and one of the most important molecules in all metabolism. We have just"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "111"
Paragraph 1 (89 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."
Paragraph 2 (118 words): "Iron–sulfide minerals are semiconducting, which is to say they can transfer electrons across themselves. This means that electrons transferred from the surface onto CO 2 can be replenished, so the process can happen over and over again without any permanent change in the surface – the surface is cat..."
Paragraph 3 (117 words): "Conversely, if the electrons are replenished from elsewhere, then this chemistry can go on and on in remarkably similar steps. If you don’t believe me, look at Appendix 2, where I’ve drawn out the first half of the reverse Krebs cycle step by step, following the same ground rules. As Morowitz observ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "112"
Paragraph 1 (82 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."
Paragraph 2 (245 words): "The driving force Why has it been so difficult, experimentally, to persuade H 2 to react with CO 2 , at least until recently? There are three aspects to this problem: catalysts, pressure and pH (proton concentration). We’ve already discussed catalysts. Iron–sulfide minerals and other surfaces promot..."
Paragraph 3 (26 words) [SHORT]: "But living cells can thrive on H 2 in surface environments at low pressure. Life doesn’t work miracles, so how do cells pull off that trick?"
Paragraph 4 (15 words) [SHORT]: "The explicit problem for cells is: how do they coax trace amounts of H 2"
Paragraph 5 (45 words) [SHORT]: "to transfer their electrons onto ferredoxin, which then passes them onto CO 2 ? There are several ways of doing that, but most of them are complex, and involve multiple enzymes, so don’t seem relevant to prebiotic chemistry. The most intriguing possibility, which connects cells"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "113"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 2 (14 words) [SHORT]: "depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH."
Paragraph 3 (201 words): "We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the charge of electrons and promote dehydration reactions in water. Paradoxically, just the opposite holds true for H 2 gas. H 2 is more reactive in ..."
Paragraph 4 (68 words): "So the dilemma here is that H 2 will push its electrons onto the catalyst in alkaline conditions, but CO 2 will only accept them from the catalyst in acidic conditions. That’s why the reaction doesn’t happen easily at any uniform pH, and instead requires high pressure to ramp up the reactivity of H ..."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Far from it. Virtually all cells pump H + out, making the outside about three pH units more acidic than the inside – which is to say, there’s a thousand-fold difference in H + concentration."
Paragraph 6 (120 words): "In ancient cells such as methanogens, the influx of H + through iron– sulfur proteins associated with the membrane promotes the transfer of electrons from H 2 to CO 2 to form organics. The deepest requirement for the proton-motive force might therefore be CO 2 fixation. The prime example is the ‘ene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "114"
Paragraph 1 (106 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."
Paragraph 2 (76 words): "Here’s how. Alkaline hydrothermal vents are riddled with interconnected pores that have a similar topology to cells – alkaline inside, acid outside. H 2 gas is delivered in alkaline hydrothermal fluids, making it more reactive, whereas CO 2 comes dissolved in acidic ocean water, making it more willi..."
Paragraph 3 (206 words): "on one side to CO 2 on the other. The theory is soundly grounded, but that’s not enough. This is an experimental question, which my lab and others have been struggling to address for years now. We’ve had limited success, because H 2 is difficult to work with under continuous flow at high pressure. B..."
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Small steps, giant leaps"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "115"
Paragraph 1 (116 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Together, these products can take on amazingly life-like properties."
Paragraph 3 (66 words): "Simple mixtures of fatty acids form spontaneously into what can be called ‘protocells’, with a thin bilayer membrane similar to modern cell membranes enclosing a watery internal volume. These are mesmerising entities that fuse together and divide in two, with every appearance of bustling purpose, dr..."
Paragraph 4 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Working in my lab, Sean Jordan and Hanadi Rammu have shown that these protocells self-assemble even more readily under hydrothermal conditions, such as pH 11, 70°C and ocean salinity. In just a few small steps of quite repetitive chemistry, we’ve leapt from strictly inorganic pores to organic protoc..."
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "do what exactly?"
Paragraph 6 (142 words): "The next step is just as pleasing. How could these protocells grow and divide? To do so, they would need to make more organic molecules inside themselves (more fatty acids, more amino acids) using the proton gradient. The million-dollar question is: could a prebiotic version of Ech operate in protoc..."
Paragraph 7 (39 words) [SHORT]: "If you are unusually alert, you may have noticed a discrepancy between organic synthesis in inorganic pores (where I talked about electrons crossing inorganic barriers) and organic synthesis in protocells (where I talked about protons crossing cell membranes). The"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "116"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2"
Paragraph 2 (77 words): "is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two million times faster than hydroxide ions going the other way. That discrep..."
Paragraph 3 (58 words) [SHORT]: "millionths of a millimetre (25 nanometres) in diameter. If so, then inorganic pores and protocells are potentially homologous. Because protocells stick to iron-sulfide barriers on the alkaline side, protons could flow straight across the barriers and into the protocells lining the barrier, before be..."
Paragraph 4 (91 words): "Transfer of protons across an inorganic barrier (left) or the same barrier enclosing a protocell (right) could drive the formation of organics (CH 2 O) within the pore or the protocell. The triangles in the membrane of the protocell (on the arrows) symbolise iron– sulfur clusters bound to amino acid..."
Paragraph 5 (25 words) [SHORT]: "Perhaps the most important property of this system is that it can in principle make copies of itself, and over time can become more complex."
Paragraph 6 (23 words) [SHORT]: "For reasons of physical chemistry, new fatty acids will go straight into the membrane, whereas a proportion of amino acids should interact with"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "117"
Paragraph 1 (125 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."
Paragraph 2 (22 words) [SHORT]: "Positive feedbacks can take us further. We’ve already seen that much of core metabolism just springs into existence in the right conditions."
Paragraph 3 (47 words) [SHORT]: "The first ‘biological’ catalysts must have sped up ‘helpful’ aspects of geochemical flux. But helpful to what? Helpful to whatever is being replicated – protocells in this case. So the first biological catalysts sped up protocell growth, meaning ultimately the conversion of H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 4 (115 words): "into the fabric of new protocells. For my money, the first nucleotides, and eventually RNA and DNA, emerged inside such replicating protocells through positive feedbacks. Nucleotides still function alongside enzymes today, and can catalyse important reactions, notably CO 2 fixation, and the transfer..."
Paragraph 5 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Raquel Nunes Palmeira, Stuart Harrison and Aaron Halpern, three PhD students in my lab, are modelling how the genetic code might have emerged in this setting."
Paragraph 6 (1 words) [SHORT]: "8"
Paragraph 7 (81 words): "Assuming that replicating protocells do indeed make nucleotides, the next step is to polymerise them into random sequences of RNA. These have zero information content. You might think that means zero utility too, but that’s not so. Think about random genetic sequences in terms of protocell growth. O..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "118"
Paragraph 1 (79 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."
Paragraph 2 (45 words) [SHORT]: "All this implies that genes arose in protocells, and their initial value was promoting growth from H 2 and CO 2 by way of Krebs-cycle intermediates. This requirement for growth at the heart of metabolism meant that genes could never replace those core biochemical pathways."
Paragraph 3 (102 words): "Information came into being in the context of growing protocells, and to this day genes recreate the ancestral chemistry of their host cells. Far from inventing metabolism, genes built on these deep pathways, ultimately freeing cells from their physical cradle, recreating the same ancestral chemistr..."
Paragraph 4 (82 words): "How to go forwards This book is not about the origin of the genetic heredity but the Krebs cycle. So let’s leave the dense thickets between replicating protocells and the origins of the genetic code for another day, another book. Right now, there are some broad themes that we need to pull out for ou..."
Paragraph 5 (14 words) [SHORT]: "is favoured thermodynamically. In other words, a mixture of H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 6 (103 words): "has a higher overall energy state than cellular biomass, meaning that CO 2 and H 2 will release energy when they react together to form biomass. But some molecules are easier to make than others. If carboxylic acids, amino acids and fatty acids all form spontaneously, RNA synthesis is more difficult..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "119"
Paragraph 1 (31 words) [SHORT]: "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase?"
Paragraph 2 (162 words): "The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl CoA, or simpler prebiotic equivalents. Going back to the reaction steps I outlined earlier, recall that I finished by depicting an acetyl group (as in acetyl CoA), bound to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "120"
Paragraph 1 (156 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."
Paragraph 2 (19 words) [SHORT]: "In terms of reactivity, the difference is about three orders of magnitude, so it’s not to be sneezed at."
Paragraph 3 (149 words): "The bigger picture that emerges is this. Vents provide a steady supply of H 2 and CO 2 , in just the right conditions needed to promote their reaction to make carboxylic acids. These form through chemical mechanisms that resemble steps of the reverse Krebs cycle, implying that this chemistry really ..."
Paragraph 4 (59 words) [SHORT]: "available, the more organic products will be produced, and the further these reactions will be driven from the starting point. You could think of this as gentle waves spreading up a beach; how far up the water travels varies locally with the lie of the land, but ultimately depends on the driving for..."
Paragraph 5 (41 words) [SHORT]: "The beauty of vents is that hydrothermal flow is continuous. If only a tiny proportion of H 2 reacts at any one moment, in the next moment that H 2 is replenished, and the same reaction can happen all over again."
Paragraph 6 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Growth is the non-stop formation of new organics from the continuous flow and reaction of gases in the environment. The inorganic pores within vents are the perfect homes for protocells that nestle in the"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "121"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing."
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "Growing."
Paragraph 3 (272 words): "Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over time, though this could be repeated simultaneously in millions of vents spread acro..."
Paragraph 4 (115 words): "1 A veteran of many expeditions on the Alvin , typically lasting a full day at a time, John Baross touched a chord with me in this disarmingly human observation: ‘We have to watch what we eat and drink because there is no bathroom on board.’ 2 In fact, we now know that deep-sea vents produce enough ..."
Paragraph 5 (24 words) [SHORT]: "3 The tradition of synthetic chemistry aims to make the products of interest, such as nucleotides, at high yield, ideally uncontaminated by unwanted products."
Paragraph 6 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Synthetic chemists tend to have little interest in the pathways that biochemistry"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "122"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t)."
Paragraph 2 (53 words) [SHORT]: "Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research programme that specifically aimed for low selectivity and low yield would bring mo..."
Paragraph 3 (177 words): "4 Being by then something of a scientific celebrity (and by no means unsympathetic to religion), Morowitz wrote a monthly essay for Hospital Practice for twenty-two years. These eclectic essays range widely across science and society, and were published as five collections with playful titles such a..."
Paragraph 4 (30 words) [SHORT]: "5 Just in case you are confused ... the normal ‘forwards’ Krebs cycle is catalytic, which is to say one complete spin of the cycle will regenerate the starting point."
Paragraph 5 (102 words): "If you add succinate, you will regenerate exactly the same amount of succinate after a turn of the cycle, while making more of the end products CO 2 and 2H. In contrast, the reverse Krebs cycle is autocatalytic. This means that a complete spin of the cycle regenerates the starting point in two copie..."
Paragraph 6 (77 words): "6 That of course raises its own questions about just how RNA acquires information, a problem so severe that thinkers of the calibre of Paul Davies and Sara Walker have argued we need a new law of physics to explain the origin of information. It seems to me that this is less of a knotty problem if en..."
Paragraph 7 (100 words): "7 The picture emerging is reminiscent of the anthropic principle – the idea that the cosmological constants (such as the strength of gravity) had to be very similar to their measured values for the universe we know to exist at all – for stars, planets, organic chemistry and life as we know it to be ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "123"
Paragraph 1 (75 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."
Paragraph 2 (22 words) [SHORT]: "8 That wasn’t the original plan, but cracking the code is exciting and we’re on a roll. How could I stop them?"
Paragraph 3 (207 words): "9 You might be wondering how a random string of RNA could affect protocell growth. The answer depends on biophysical interactions between RNA and amino acids. There is an intriguing ‘code within the codons’, which suggests, for example, that hydrophobic amino acids will preferentially interact with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "125"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself."
Paragraph 2 (243 words): "How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard shells as evidence? The mystery is deepened by their abrupt appearance in the fossil record, in what is called the ‘Cambrian explosion’, when the first rec..."
Paragraph 3 (21 words) [SHORT]: "If the fossils themselves are enigmatic, the context established by geology, physiology and ecology point to part of the answer: oxygen."
Paragraph 4 (152 words): "Remember that O 2 accumulated as a waste product from photosynthesis, and was virtually absent from the atmosphere for life’s first two billion years. That’s no accident. The chances of life starting on an oxygenated planet is arguably close to zero: hydrogen must react with CO 2 to form organic mol..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "126"
Paragraph 1 (150 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."
Paragraph 2 (124 words): "The reason for this balance between stability and reactivity stems from the rules of quantum mechanics, which oblige oxygen to react only with molecules that offer up single electrons, such as rusting iron, and not with molecules that have more stable pairs of electrons. Organic molecules don’t usua..."
Paragraph 3 (124 words): "Respiration is a controlled form of combustion. The energy released is exactly equivalent, but it is released in tiny steps to power the synthesis of ATP. Cell respiration goes to great lengths to extract electrons one at a time from ‘2H’, feeding them individually to the fastidious dragon oxygen (s..."
Paragraph 4 (33 words) [SHORT]: "It’s sobering to realise that without the quantum rules that govern the predominantly two-electron chemistry of carbon, versus the one-electron behaviour of oxygen, the world that we know and love could not exist."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "127"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 2 (157 words): "It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy, such as ATP. In the absence of oxygen (and ‘bystander’ molecules such as nitrate, which only accumulate when oxygen is available) th..."
Paragraph 3 (64 words): "would have 40, 16, 6.4, 2.6 and 1.02 per cent of the energy available in fixed carbon, respectively). Without oxygen, only two trophic levels are possible before we reach 1 per cent. Of course this is a rule of thumb and the reality would depend on the total amount of fixed carbon available, the siz..."
Paragraph 4 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Nonetheless, complex food webs are only likely to exist in a well- oxygenated world. More than anything else, the Cambrian explosion marked the beginning of our modern world, with complex ecosystems, multiple trophic levels, competition between predators and prey, the whole shebang. None of that exi..."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "And in animals, aerobic respiration always spins the Krebs cycle; it is universal. We all descend from those Cambrian beasts, so we can infer that they used the Krebs cycle, linked to aerobic respiration, too."
Paragraph 6 (148 words): "But an older idea that rising oxygen drove the change (as opposed to permitting it) is far from the mark. The fact that animals and plants each arose on just one occasion in the Earth’s long history already hints that developmental constraints, such as a genetic framework, also stood in the way of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "128"
Paragraph 1 (112 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."
Paragraph 2 (204 words): "I confess I was befuddled by this question too until a simple thought crossed my mind. Perhaps bacteria and single-celled protists are indeed obliged to do one thing or another: they switch on and off genes in different environmental contexts to focus on either growth or energy generation. Serial pr..."
Paragraph 3 (126 words): "Plugging into the planet Let’s cast our minds back to the emergence of life in deep-sea hydrothermal vents. With a steady supply of H 2 and free proton gradients, everything that’s needed is already in place. Growth can be continuous, and there are at least no thermodynamic impediments to the emerge..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "129"
Paragraph 1 (113 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "The single biggest problem facing the first cells was the need to generate their own proton gradients, to drive the reaction between H 2"
Paragraph 3 (163 words): "and CO 2 . The topological structure of cells – reduced and alkaline inside, oxidised and acidic outside – is strictly analogous to a vent, nay, to the Earth itself. Cells are mini-batteries that recapitulate the Earth. We saw in the previous chapter that the flow of protons across membranes (the pr..."
Paragraph 4 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Proton pumping is costly; but worse, it draws on the same hydrogen emanating from exactly the same hellish sources."
Paragraph 5 (116 words): "The details of how this works needn’t concern us. 2 What matters is that H 2 is consumed in generating a proton gradient, which powers the synthesis of the ATP and ferredoxin needed for fixing CO 2 . For many bacteria, even proton pumping requires ferredoxin. The enzyme captures electrons from H 2 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "130"
Paragraph 1 (35 words) [SHORT]: "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2"
Paragraph 2 (117 words): "fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens, make 40 times as much waste, by mass, as new cell biomass. In other words, of all the H 2 that a methanogen consumes, only a fortieth is converted into biomass and the rest is used to power pumping. That’s a not a ..."
Paragraph 3 (34 words) [SHORT]: "(We will come to another reason why they might need to pump in the Epilogue.) All this puts a premium on every last drop of hydrogen, and especially that most valuable biological currency, ferredoxin."
Paragraph 4 (34 words) [SHORT]: "We keep coming round to ferredoxin, the red protein, so central to all metabolism. Its deep antiquity and central role in life was most clearly appreciated by the great pioneer of bioinformatics, Margaret Dayhoff."
Paragraph 5 (222 words): "The very same year that Daniel Arnon and colleagues first reported the reverse Krebs cycle, 1966, Margaret Dayhoff (working with Richard Eck) published a paper that launched a thousand ships in the journal Science . Dayhoff had done her degree in maths at New York University before taking a PhD in q..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "131"
Paragraph 1 (234 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."
Paragraph 2 (50 words) [SHORT]: "As more bacterial proteins were sequenced, Dayhoff was able to use ferredoxin and other bioenergetic proteins such as cytochrome c to lay out the history of life. The most ancient cells, her trees indicated, were bacteria such as Clostridium , some of which live from H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 3 (75 words): "through exactly the mechanisms we have discussed here (in much the same way as methanogens). She also called attention to the antiquity of ancient forms of photosynthesis in bacteria such as Chromatium and Chlorobium , which use H 2 S as an electron donor rather than water. This trick freed them fro..."
Paragraph 4 (99 words): "In anoxygenic photosynthesis, chlorophyll is used to strip electrons from H 2 S (much easier than stripping them from water) which are then passed onto ferredoxin directly. The waste product is not oxygen but sulfur. The huge advantage here is that the sun now powers the transfer of electrons from a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "132"
Paragraph 1 (30 words) [SHORT]: "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce ferredoxin, but it can’t do both at the same time. That’s because bacteria capable of anoxygenic photosynthesis have a single photosystem, which is capable of either ATP synthesis (via a cyclic flow of..."
Paragraph 3 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Combining both processes together requires wiring the two photosystems in series, which is what happened in oxygenic photosynthesis (we’ll come onto this later). The bottom line is that the early photosynthesisers found only partial freedom from the costs of pumping."
Paragraph 4 (180 words): "Dayhoff went on to show that oxygenic photosynthesis arose before two billion years ago, albeit probably after the evolution of respiration, as had been suggested by Otto Warburg decades earlier. Presumably these ancient forms of respiration either used traces of oxygen generated by physical process..."
Paragraph 5 (94 words): "But I’m getting ahead of myself. The point I want to make here is that before the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis, the living world was extremely constrained energetically, dominated by the availability of gases such as H 2 and H 2 S emanating from volcanoes or hydrothermal systems, which were ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "133"
Paragraph 1 (16 words) [SHORT]: "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion."
Paragraph 2 (244 words): "Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathways can run in either direction. The reason flux goes one way rather than the other reflects the environmenta..."
Paragraph 3 (145 words): "This reversibility of metabolic flux applies to ecosystems rather than single cells. If you are a single cell, the last thing you need is for your metabolic pathways to keep switching direction at the whim of the environment. The first thing you’d want to do is get with the flow; ideally live in a v..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "134"
Paragraph 1 (16 words) [SHORT]: "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location."
Paragraph 2 (276 words): "But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory enzymes to work in only one direction, preventing ‘reflux’ in much the same way as a valve. Plainly, suc..."
Paragraph 3 (147 words): "I had a revelatory insight into how far this principle dominates microbial ecosystems a few years ago, when visiting Shawn McGlynn, then working in Victoria Orphan’s lab at Caltech. He was using a clever technique called nano-SIMS to image the precise location, within a muddy methane seep (where met..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "135"
Paragraph 1 (193 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."
Paragraph 2 (119 words): "I suspect that this reasoning applies to the Krebs cycle itself, which the biochemist Erich Gnaiger has compared to that ancient Egyptian (and later alchemical) symbol, the Oroboros, a serpent or dragon consuming its own tail. 3 This mythical beast is usually interpreted as a symbol of eternal cycli..."
Paragraph 3 (90 words): "But it does speak to thermodynamic efficiency nonetheless. We have been talking about the driving force for metabolic pathways. We’ve seen that optimising the driving force means raising the levels of the substrates that enter the pathway while removing the end products. So the direction of a reacti..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "136"
Paragraph 1 (206 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."
Paragraph 2 (23 words) [SHORT]: "The dawn of photosynthesis Set against the tight constraints of this anaerobic world, imagine the freedom offered by that everyday miracle, oxygenic photosynthesis."
Paragraph 3 (119 words): "Silently humming in trees and algae and cyanobacteria, all use virtually the same machinery to fix CO 2 and generate ATP. Oxygen is the waste product, cast away, the first great pollutant. Please remember that oxygen does not come from CO 2 – it comes from water, which is split apart to extract the ..."
Paragraph 4 (31 words) [SHORT]: "Transiently angry, chlorophyll snatches a replacement from the sacrificial gift offered by the trembling priestly protein. This sacrifice is not some virgin to placate a medieval dragon, but water. Zap. Repeat."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "137"
Paragraph 1 (63 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."
Paragraph 2 (250 words): "So where do all these electrons go? Ultimately the electrons and protons – the 2H – are united on CO 2 , to form organic molecules. We can do better than that: the Calvin–Benson cycle cobbles them onto the C3 molecule phosphoglycerate, to generate the C3 sugar glyceraldehyde phosphate (you can doubl..."
Paragraph 3 (117 words): "This is another Earth-changing instance where small steps produce a giant leap. Think about what has changed here. No longer must cells use a small pool of electrons extracted from H 2 , H 2 S or Fe 2+ (all derived from hydrothermal processes) to power pumping. And no longer must the proton gradient..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "138"
Paragraph 1 (71 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Yet that expansion took two billion years, an unfathomable time."
Paragraph 3 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Oxygenic photosynthesis first arose in cyanobacteria or their predecessors, but exactly when remains uncertain. The first unequivocal evidence is the Great Oxidation Event (familiarly called the ‘GOE’) around 2.3 billion years ago, when the planet turned rusty red and froze."
Paragraph 4 (83 words): "We can attribute both these changes to oxygen, beginning to accumulate in the air. The rusty rocks are mostly composed of iron oxides – red beds and banded iron formations – but other metals became oxidised too, leaching from rocks and accumulating in the environment in colossal ore deposits such as..."
Paragraph 5 (70 words): "Methane reacts with oxygen (either spontaneously or through the auspices of methanotrophs) and methane is a greenhouse gas. Strip it from the air and the planet cools. As oxygen levels rose, more methane was oxidised. So the fine balance tipped, and the Earth plunged into a global glaciation, the fi..."
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "eventually warmed it up again."
Paragraph 7 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Setting aside the drama of the GOE and the Snowball Earth, reconstructing the history of photosynthesis is a dastardly business. Just how long before the GOE did the first photosynthetic bacteria arise?"
Paragraph 8 (128 words): "Molecular clocks based on gene sequences are fraught with difficulties, as there are few calibration points (such as microfossils that everybody can agree are cyanobacteria) and few constraints on the speed at which genes evolved in deep time. There are purportedly ‘whiffs’ of oxygen (slightly oxidi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "139"
Paragraph 1 (211 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."
Paragraph 2 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Luckily, there’s a get-out-of-jail-free card that gives us a proxy: carbon isotopes. We met two of these previously, in Chapter 2: 11 C and 14 C."
Paragraph 3 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Here, we’re concerned with a third isotope, 13"
Paragraph 4 (62 words): "C, which happens to be stable. The nucleus of 13 C has six protons and seven neutrons. The fact that it’s stable means that the 12 C to 13 C ratio in the environment does not change over time, or at least not as a result of radioactive decay; but 13 C is not common, barely a hundredth as abundant of..."
Paragraph 5 (1 words) [SHORT]: "C."
Paragraph 6 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Remember rubisco, the world’s most abundant protein, responsible for fixing CO 2 in the Calvin–Benson cycle. Rubisco has a slight bias towards the lighter of the two stable forms of carbon, 12"
Paragraph 7 (61 words): "C. I think of these molecules as ping-pong balls, bouncing around and occasionally bumping into enzymes such as rubisco. Lighter molecules bounce around a touch faster, so encounter enzymes more frequently. In the case of rubisco, the outcome is that organic carbon becomes slightly enriched in 12 C ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "140"
Paragraph 1 (70 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."
Paragraph 2 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Variations over time in the 13 C content of limestone therefore give a global indication of how much organic carbon got buried – the more 12 C buried, the greater the 13"
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "C abundance in limestone sedimented at the same time."
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "The soaring 13"
Paragraph 5 (58 words) [SHORT]: "C peak in the GOE therefore speaks of carbon burial and rising oxygen levels. Converting this trace into an estimate of atmospheric composition is tricky and we don’t need to go there; we can just note that high 13 C corresponds to the many other signs of oxygen, from red beds to manganese fields. B..."
Paragraph 6 (163 words): "C trace flat-lines for around a billion years, sometimes called the ‘boring billion’, even though that is when complex (‘eukaryotic’) cells evolved, along with traits such as sex, which are biologically anything but boring. I’ve dwelt on that theme in other books, but it is less relevant here. 5 Two..."
Paragraph 7 (61 words): "The Shuram conundrum Named after the Shuram Formation in Oman, this carbonate-rich sedimentary rock contains the single largest ‘negative isotope excursion’ in Earth’s history. Beginning in strata dated to 560 million years ago, the 13 C trace falls abruptly from around 5 per mille above the global ..."
Paragraph 8 (38 words) [SHORT]: "C content), recovering slowly over ten million years. Does that sound uninterestingly dry and technical? It’s actually shocking! Just think what it means. A fall in 13 C relative to 12 C implies that far more carbon was"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "141"
Paragraph 1 (184 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."
Paragraph 2 (11 words) [SHORT]: "My colleague at UCL, Graham Shields, thinks he’s solved the puzzle."
Paragraph 3 (80 words): "If he’s right (and I think he is) then it has a great deal to say about the evolution of animals. To understand, we need to adjust our view in two ways. First, physical burial in the Earth’s crust is not the only way to sequester organic carbon. It can also simply clog up the water column, giving wh..."
Paragraph 4 (72 words): "When oxygen levels are as low as they were in the deep oceans until the late Precambrian, this material could take long ages to decay. Oxidising it en masse would then simultaneously clear the water column and reintroduce a vast amount of 12 CO 2 back into the system, certainly enough to account for..."
Paragraph 5 (121 words): "The answer, says Shields, lies in geology, not biology. The oxidant was not oxygen at all, or at least not directly, but sulfate . Ever since oxygen levels began to rise, from the GOE onwards, evaporitic sulfate deposits gradually accumulated on land. By the time of the Shuram excursion, sulfate had..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "142"
Paragraph 1 (52 words) [SHORT]: "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."
Paragraph 2 (96 words): "Like oxygen, sulfate is an electron acceptor, albeit feeble in comparison. Whilst bacteria first learnt to use sulfate in the ancient anaerobic days before the dawn of photosynthesis, its abundance increased massively in an oxygenated world. Sulfate-reducing bacteria are heterotrophs, which gain the..."
Paragraph 3 (41 words) [SHORT]: "And that settles down to the bottom of the oceans, where it is buried, along with its electrons stripped from dissolved organic carbon. In other words, the peat-bog oceans were oxidised by sulfate, not oxygen, liberating a vast amount of 12"
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "CO 2 back into the system, while burying its long-lost electrons not as fossil fuels but fool’s gold. Who’s laughing now. 6"
Paragraph 5 (216 words): "What does this say about the early evolution of animals? It suggests that the oceans were reeking with hydrogen sulfide for the best part of ten million years, until all the organic carbon clogging up the water column had been oxidised. This wholesale oxidation consumed little if any oxygen, so the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "143"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems."
Paragraph 2 (2 words) [SHORT]: "They died."
Paragraph 3 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550"
Paragraph 4 (245 words): "million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sulfidic seas, unable to breathe. The writing was not on the wall, but in the mud. The first ‘trace fossils’ (literally, the traces of burrowing animals, like those worm casts you still see on beaches) date to around the time..."
Paragraph 5 (133 words): "The view from inside our cells We left the Krebs cycle as an Oroboros, consuming its own tail whilst transforming the gases CO 2 and H 2 into the molecules of life. Just how common the full cycle might be among bacteria and archaea remains uncertain, but one thing is clear – most bacteria and archae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "144"
Paragraph 1 (67 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."
Paragraph 2 (62 words): "So what’s the point of prongs, you may wonder? The answer is they bring balance to the force, Padawan – balance to growth. If oxygen levels are low, one prong consumes NADH (shown here as 2H) while the other generates it. Together, they maintain a poise between the donors and acceptors of 2H, while ..."
Paragraph 3 (48 words) [SHORT]: "The two prongs of the Krebs non-cycle, a common flux pattern in microbes. The prongs balance the formation of 2H against its consumption when oxygen levels are low, allowing metabolism and ATP synthesis to keep going without a large accumulation of NADH or waste products such as lactate."
Paragraph 4 (13 words) [SHORT]: "The two prongs of this pathway meet in the vicinity of the C4"
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "succinate. In the reverse Krebs cycle, the enzyme that converts fumarate into succinate is called fumarate reductase. This is unique in being the only enzyme in the cycle that is still embedded in the mitochondrial membrane, and it can capture electrons from the respiratory chain. In the absence of ..."
Paragraph 6 (39 words) [SHORT]: "Accumulation of succinate is a powerful signal for physiological adaptation to low-oxygen (hypoxic) conditions, switching many genes on and off. Conversely, when oxygen is available fumarate reductase is switched off, and an alternative enzyme is expressed instead – succinate"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "145"
Paragraph 1 (64 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."
Paragraph 2 (143 words): "The idea that oxygen levels rose swiftly (we’ve seen they didn’t) forcing the Krebs cycle into reverse (or rather, our own forwards direction) is far from the mark in every respect. Oxygen levels rose around the time of the GOE, 2.3 billion years ago, but then remained low (in the deep oceans close ..."
Paragraph 3 (94 words): "The prongs point to another interesting balance. Microbes are at the mercy of a changing environment. They must switch genes on and off, adjusting their metabolic state to survive. Each metabolic state equates to a particular flux pattern, and so microbes change states in series, over time, from one..."
Paragraph 4 (91 words): "Cancer cells are sometimes claimed to have ‘reverted’ to a more primitive energy phenotype but that’s misleading. They certainly don’t have a ‘textbook’ Krebs cycle, although not many cells do. The critical point to appreciate now is that while the complete oxidative Krebs cycle might be the most ef..."
Paragraph 5 (53 words) [SHORT]: "So why do textbooks still cling to the oxidative Krebs cycle and ATP synthesis? What is the difference between microbes and multicellular organisms? And what happened in that traumatic age before the Cambrian explosion? Crawling around in the mud, snuffling through the sulfide, growing and reproduci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "146"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too."
Paragraph 2 (196 words): "The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be released slowly when needed, which is just what myoglobin and haemoglobin do. The genes encoding both globins were duplicated r..."
Paragraph 3 (107 words): "Yet the complete oxidative cycle, by its very nature, cannot generate the precursors for biosynthesis. To do so requires flux in and out of the cycle, turning it into a roundabout, and perhaps even calling for reverse flux through some parts of the cycle. Of course, biosynthesis still needs ATP. Tis..."
Paragraph 4 (28 words) [SHORT]: "Different tissues have different needs, some with high ATP demands, others with specific biosynthetic requirements. Each of these states comes with optimal flux patterns through the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 5 (45 words) [SHORT]: "The multicellular organisation of animals allows tissues to change their metabolic states in parallel , with the flux pattern in one tissue balancing that in another. This is the most delicate balance of all, and it could underpin the evolution of complex multicellularity in animals."
Paragraph 6 (32 words) [SHORT]: "We’ve seen that bacteria and archaea often benefit from company, living symbiotically, with a precise stoichiometry in which one cell type consumes the waste products of another. That helps them to stabilise"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "147"
Paragraph 1 (127 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."
Paragraph 2 (76 words): "For them, it was the dead zone. But the burrowing bilaterian ancestors of the vertebrates and invertebrates were already experimenting with a high-wire metabolic balance. By the dawn of the Cambrian they had perfected the art. When the seas cleared to reveal sparkling oxygenated waters, these animal..."
Paragraph 3 (158 words): "We saw in Chapter 1 that Krebs had been lucky in his choice of pigeon-breast muscle in conceptualising his cycle. Other tissues exhibit more complex behaviour. Yet the idea of a simple cycle burning glucose persists as textbook knowledge. So it came as a shock to discover that the regulation of the ..."
Paragraph 4 (63 words): "Hypoxia, infections, inflammation, mutations – all can alter flux patterns through the Krebs cycle, with a knock-on effect that switches on or off hundreds or thousands of genes, changing the stable (epigenetic) state of cells and tissues. Tissue function eventually becomes strained, biosynthetic pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "148"
Paragraph 1 (151 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."
Paragraph 2 (252 words): "2 But I can’t resist telling you anyway. In some of the most important and beautiful work in bioenergetics in the last decade, Rolf Thauer and Wolfgang Buckel finally uncovered a clever sleight of hand whose very name conjures up subterfuge: bifurcation. The two electrons from H 2 are separated deep..."
Paragraph 3 (71 words): "3 Erich Gnaiger is a larger-than-life character, practically a legend in the world of respirometry, who is steeped in the biophysical tradition of Schrödinger and Mitchell, and who formed his own company producing high-resolution fluorespirometers (descendants of the manometers used by Warburg and K..."
Paragraph 4 (37 words) [SHORT]: "4 The eagle-eyed will notice that statement is slightly ambiguous. Citrate is broken down into acetyl CoA plus oxaloacetate, both of which can regenerate citrate. The trouble here is that high levels of oxaloacetate could interfere with"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "149"
Paragraph 1 (101 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "5 But here is a taster, in light of the driving forces we have been discussing in this chapter. There is a startling difference in the NAD + to NADH ratio within the mitochondria compared with the cytosol, which was brought to my attention by Wayne Willis at the University of Arizona. This is possib..."
Paragraph 3 (183 words): "When the first steps of glucose breakdown (glycolysis) take place in the cytosol, lots of spare NAD + is needed to accept electrons, enabling extremely fast ATP synthesis through glycolysis. The ratio of NAD + to NADH is therefore kept at about 1,000:1. In contrast, the optimal ratio within the mito..."
Paragraph 4 (79 words): "6 Certainly not Shields. He has the bit between his teeth. The Shuram anomaly is not the only conundrum in the carbon isotope record. Several others might well have been confounded by sulfate oxidation too, or even the opposite – sulfate deposition. If the large Shuram negative 13 C excursion can be..."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "That could explain why the 13 C signal is so large, yet soon afterwards oxygen levels plummeted to nearly zero. The idea that 13 C variations only reflect carbon burial and oxygenation is clearly misguided."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "151"
Paragraph 1 (102 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."
Paragraph 2 (171 words): "I hardly need to say that this new understanding was developing at a time when it was becoming feasible to sequence genes and pinpoint the mutations involved. Exposing the precise mutation often made it clear exactly how the harm was done. The stars were aligning – the powerful methodology of gene s..."
Paragraph 3 (10 words) [SHORT]: "The idea that mutations cause cancer remains the dominant paradigm."
Paragraph 4 (176 words): "A special issue of Nature from 2020 wrote: ‘Cancer is a disease of the genome, caused by a cell’s acquisition of somatic mutations in key cancer genes.’ Yet over the last decade it has looked as if the juggernaut has rolled too far. It has certainly failed to deliver on its promise in terms of thera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "152"
Paragraph 1 (84 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Yet the evidence against this dismal genetic determinism is startling."
Paragraph 3 (54 words) [SHORT]: "If a cancer is a clone deriving from one rogue cell, then the mutations that caused it to go awry should be written into all its descendants: all the cells in the tumour. That’s not always the case. Different mutations are found in different parts of many tumours, often with little if any overlap."
Paragraph 4 (125 words): "This implies that the mutations accumulated during the growth of the tumour, rather than triggering its inception. In fact, later accumulation is quite plausible, as cancer cells are well known to develop genetic instability, meaning that they accrue new mutations much faster than normal cells. Thes..."
Paragraph 5 (97 words): "It’s quite encouraging that cancer cells can be rewired in this way: the same genetic mutations are not invariably associated with the same cell fate. This view is consistent with older work which shows that transplanting the nucleus from one cell type to another does not alter the phenotype of the ..."
Paragraph 6 (91 words): "I could go on. Many carcinogens do not cause immediate mutations but may take many years to induce cancer, long after they vanished from the body. Perhaps one-third of cancers world-wide are associated with chronic infections such as hepatitis B and C, and schistosomiasis, which can mutate genes (as..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "153"
Paragraph 1 (45 words) [SHORT]: "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects."
Paragraph 2 (166 words): "You might think this risk profile is explained by the steady accumulation of mutations with age, some of which just tragically happen to be in the wrong genes, causing cancer. Yet the build-up of mutations with age seems to be too slow to explain either cancer or ageing as a process. Nor can it expl..."
Paragraph 3 (206 words): "An alternative, and historically controversial, take on the prime cause of cancer has been lurking in the background for nearly a century, going back to Krebs’s own mentor, the great biochemist Otto Warburg. It has risen to prominence in the last decade, in part through the unexpected discovery that..."
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "The Warburg effect"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "154"
Paragraph 1 (163 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."
Paragraph 2 (201 words): "Yet Warburg also illustrates the problem with a simplistic notion of right and wrong in science. He was forceful in his views, and his dogmatism meant that he would argue rather than listen, sometimes for decades. His haughtiness was no doubt attributable in part to his extraordinary upbringing in I..."
Paragraph 3 (48 words) [SHORT]: "It’s striking how many great scientists are also culturally rounded people, though I can’t help calling to mind a quip from the great violinist Fritz Kreisler to his friend Einstein – the two played together in string quartets: ‘You know Albert, your trouble is that you can’t count!’"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "155"
Paragraph 1 (63 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "2"
Paragraph 3 (173 words): "This irresistible company of physicists surely influenced Otto Warburg’s vision of biology. While not a physicist himself, his perspective on biology always sought the luminous simplicity of a physicist. Biology is rarely so law-abiding. Warburg sustained at least three prolonged arguments about fun..."
Paragraph 4 (217 words): "The same attitude coloured Warburg’s view of photo-synthesis, forming the basis of a long-running dispute with Robert Emerson about the number of photons of light needed to produce one molecule of oxygen. Emerson did his PhD with Warburg before moving to Illinois and assembling the ‘Mid-West gang’ o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "156"
Paragraph 1 (35 words) [SHORT]: "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life."
Paragraph 2 (71 words): "Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yielded an estimate of twelve photons too, yet he never admitted to any error. The problem, as in his prolonged dispute with Keilin, was that Warburg’s vision of nature was coupled to a sense of his own infallibility and ..."
Paragraph 3 (227 words): "We need to interpret Warburg’s forceful pronouncements on cancer in this light. His first experiments were indeed striking, and set the scene for decades. In the early 1920s, Warburg showed that cancer cells produced seventy times as much lactic acid as ‘normal’ cells, even in the presence of oxygen..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "157"
Paragraph 1 (162 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."
Paragraph 2 (234 words): "Warburg was instrumental in piecing together the key reactions of glycolysis, yet cancer was already becoming his obsession. Why on earth would cancer cells switch to a profligate strategy of generating a tenth as much ATP as normal, while throwing away a three-carbon molecule that could be used for..."
Paragraph 3 (38 words) [SHORT]: "But he was swiftly reinstated, under Göring’s declaration ‘I will decide who is a Jew.’ The reasons are shrouded in mystery, but Hitler apparently had a deep-seated fear of cancer. His mother, said to be the only person"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "158"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen."
Paragraph 2 (104 words): "Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as Adolf Hitler’. For some years, Hitler wrote postcards to Dr Bloch, and ..."
Paragraph 3 (164 words): "This context no doubt contributed to the Nazis’ tolerance of Warburg, who was never shy of promising salvation. In 1940 he expressed his hope for a third Nobel nomination, when he predicted the problem of cancer ‘will be resolved within two years’. During the Nazi period, Warburg kept his head down;..."
Paragraph 4 (161 words): "Rewiring metabolism Warburg’s position on cancer owed more to his philosophy than it did to his experiments, just as it did with photosynthesis. The basic problem with the Warburg effect – the propensity of cancers to ferment glucose in the presence of oxygen, or in the conventional shorthand, ‘aero..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "159"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing."
Paragraph 2 (143 words): "Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science paper in 1956. It’s worth spending a moment on this because it shows how truth can lose its way through alienation in science, just as i..."
Paragraph 3 (27 words) [SHORT]: "Yet to dismiss Warburg as a monomaniac, which is what came to pass, overlooks the fact that his vision was coherent, even if it was partly misconstrued."
Paragraph 4 (175 words): "Warburg continued in similar vein: ‘If the explanation of a vital process is its reduction to physics and chemistry, there is today no other explanation for the origin of cancer cells, either special or general.’ This oblique reference to relativity seems intended to call upon physics as the only tr..."
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "Mutations, carcinogens and cancer viruses do indeed all converge on the metabolic machinery. Of course, we wouldn’t know that if thousands of researchers had not dedicated their lives to studying the very details that Warburg dismissed as obscuring the underlying phenomena. But now we know that many..."
Paragraph 6 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg was arguably right that cancer is fundamentally a metabolic rather than a genetic disease, but his focus on cell respiration missed the"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "160"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP."
Paragraph 2 (131 words): "Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all of a cell’s contents, which means new sugars and new amino acids to..."
Paragraph 3 (318 words): "Let me give a single revealing example, from the pioneering cancer biologist Craig Thompson, who has done as much as anyone over the last decades to reinterpret the Warburg effect in terms of metabolic reprogramming. Thompson gives the example of the sixteen-carbon fatty acid palmitate, which is a m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "161"
Paragraph 1 (97 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."
Paragraph 2 (56 words) [SHORT]: "Three molecules of glucose are needed to provide the sixteen carbons for palmitate, which offsets this asymmetry a little, as only four of seven glucose molecules could be completely oxidised in respiration. But even after taking that into consideration, the seven molecules of glucose needed to make..."
Paragraph 3 (39 words) [SHORT]: "ATPs, after siphoning off the carbons and NADPH needed for synthesising palmitate. Recall that just seven of these ATPs are actually needed, so respiring all the glucose not needed for biosynthesis would make twenty-eight times more ATP than needed."
Paragraph 4 (185 words): "Great, you might think, what’s not to like? But in fact, there’s a serious cost. Having excess ATP sloshing around actually switches off the glycolytic breakdown of glucose to form the NADPH and acetyl CoA needed to make palmitate at all. Likewise, flux through the Krebs cycle has to slow down if AT..."
Paragraph 5 (75 words): "This picture is a little exaggerated, because fatty-acid synthesis is especially demanding of NADPH, but the synthesis of amino acids and nucleotides also consumes more NADPH and carbon equivalents than ATP. The synthesis of RNA, DNA and especially proteins has higher ATP demands (joining monomers t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "162"
Paragraph 1 (32 words) [SHORT]: "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all."
Paragraph 2 (150 words): "Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reasons, once cells become differentiated to carry out specific tasks in tissues, they typically switch over to aerobic respiration to provide the ATP necessary. 4 But cancer cells cut back on these costs – they lose their di..."
Paragraph 3 (162 words): "If that were all there was to it, I could stop here. We would have solved cancer long ago. Why would I even write about it in a book on the Krebs cycle, when we’ve seen that metabolic flux diverts towards glycolysis in cancer cells? I hope you’ll guess the answer by now. From the very origins of lif..."
Paragraph 4 (87 words): "An ancient switch The first mutations in genes encoding Krebs-cycle enzymes to be linked with cancer were found in succinate dehydrogenase and fumarate hydratase. Both these mutations block Krebs-cycle flow in the vicinity of the C4 intermediate succinate. I’ve never forgotten hearing about this for..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "163"
Paragraph 1 (26 words) [SHORT]: "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer."
Paragraph 2 (126 words): "Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian explosion. These early worms had to deal with low oxygen and excess hydrogen sulfide in their environment. Think what happens to the Krebs cycle un..."
Paragraph 3 (172 words): "In many animals that need to deal with low oxygen levels, a slight excess of NADH can allow for a little ATP synthesis. This partially explains, for example, how turtles can survive underwater for hours without breathing. When oxygen is not available, fumarate is used as an alternative electron acce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "164"
Paragraph 1 (130 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."
Paragraph 2 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Succinate is therefore far more than a waste product – it is an active signal that switches genes on or off."
Paragraph 3 (281 words): "Once in the cytosol, succinate binds to a class of proteins called prolyl hydroxylases, which blocks their normal action. The most interesting normal action of these prolyl hydroxylases targets another protein, ‘hypoxia-inducible factor’, or HIF 1α , causing it to be degraded. Here’s a fact to conju..."
Paragraph 4 (29 words) [SHORT]: "So how does HIF 1α making it to the nucleus in time save the cell from certain death? Look at the genes that it targets. They include genes for"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "165"
Paragraph 1 (214 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "How could such conditions persist? Let’s return to succinate itself."
Paragraph 3 (211 words): "Our own cells can’t make ATP from the transfer of electrons to form succinate, as the first animals did, because our ancestors lost the gene for fumarate reductase. Presumably they no longer needed to deal with high levels of hydrogen sulfide in their environment. We abandoned those stagnant muds an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "166"
Paragraph 1 (19 words) [SHORT]: "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia."
Paragraph 2 (11 words) [SHORT]: "Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5"
Paragraph 3 (191 words): "You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hydratase will cause an accumulation of succinate in cells that are otherwise perfectly healthy. Plainly, damming metabolic flow will form a reservoir behind the dam: You might call this fake news. The mutation make..."
Paragraph 4 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Increasing the risk ... but nothing is set in stone. More is needed."
Paragraph 5 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Mutations in succinate dehydrogenase promote the switch to aerobic glycolysis, but that’s only half the story. Let’s keep following the money."
Paragraph 6 (64 words): "Cell replication is not only about ATP, NADPH and carbon. There’s also an imperious need for nitrogen to make new amino acids for proteins, and nucleotides for RNA and DNA. While there’s some nitrogen turnover in cells, for the most part, nitrogen is delivered around the body in the form of the amin..."
Paragraph 7 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Another reversal Most cancers need no more than glucose and glutamine to grow. These substrates serve all of their needs. And of the two of them ... give the cancers glutamine. I have a vivid memory of discussing glutamine and"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "167"
Paragraph 1 (120 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."
Paragraph 2 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Cancer cells growing in culture can be checked in their mad career through the cell cycle by depriving them of glucose or glutamine."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Around the time we were talking, Moncada had just shown that depriving cells of glucose did not pause their growth for long, but depriving them of glutamine put paid to their prospects permanently."
Paragraph 4 (106 words): "And now here he was, chalk in hand, eyes sparkling, drawing arrows spiralling out from the Krebs cycle into the cytosol. Flux in reverse to citrate. Export, then break down to acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate. Thence pyruvate and lactate. Not from glucose at all, but glutamine. And on. It was dizzying, a..."
Paragraph 5 (22 words) [SHORT]: "The first wave of the storm came from Navdeep Chandel, Ralph DeBerardinis and colleagues in 2012. They reported in Nature that cells"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "168"
Paragraph 1 (85 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."
Paragraph 2 (64 words): "This reverse flux is the dominant pattern in cancer cells with mutations in fumarate hydratase, or more widely in cells with damaged respiration, caused by mutations or drugs that impair electron transfer. Make a mental note of that: damaged respiration ... roughly as predicted by Warburg. That will..."
Paragraph 3 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Once again, cancer cells take advantage of existing machinery, and in this case subvert a marvellous mechanism, a mechanism that showcases both the glory of natural selection and the cleverness of cancer. For good measure, it also relates to NADPH, the ‘power’ form of hydrogen, which I hope you’ll r..."
Paragraph 4 (49 words) [SHORT]: "The enzyme that catalyses the interconversion of isocitrate into α- ketoglutarate is known as isocitrate dehydrogenase. This comes in two main forms, each of them encoded by a different gene. The standard form does what it says on the tin – it removes 2H, in the form of NADH."
Paragraph 5 (111 words): "The NADH is then fed into the furnace of respiration at complex I; this is the conventional Krebs cycle (see page 286). More intriguingly, the second form of the enzyme does the opposite. But going in this reverse (reductive) direction is more difficult, and so requires the powerful NADPH to cobble ..."
Paragraph 6 (86 words): "What’s the point of that, you may be wondering? Well, it works as both a release valve and a spring-loading mechanism, allowing us to leap into explosive action. Imagine that you’re resting (OK, you’re sitting around reading this book), so demand for ATP is low. What’s going on inside your cells rig..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "169"
Paragraph 1 (55 words) [SHORT]: "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."
Paragraph 2 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Reading, eh!"
Paragraph 3 (83 words): "This combination of high levels of NADH with super-charged membrane potential raises the threat that electrons will escape from the respiratory chain and react directly with oxygen, forming reactive oxygen species (ROS). These can damage lipids, proteins or DNA. I can hear the threatening buzz of el..."
Paragraph 4 (141 words): "Under these conditions, the supercharged membrane potential powers the conversion of NADH into NADPH, through a ‘transhydrogenase’ enzyme sitting in the membrane (which takes its power, like the ATP synthase, from a flow of protons). The transhydrogenase transfers 2H from the excess NADH onto NADP +..."
Paragraph 5 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that high NADPH levels drive this enzyme backwards, meaning it converts α-ketoglutarate to isocitrate and onwards to citrate."
Paragraph 6 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Reverse flow through the Krebs cycle keeps the right balance between NADP + and NADPH. We’ll come back to what happens to the citrate soon, but for now let’s just appreciate that it can be exported out to the cytosol and used for making fats. Reading, eh!"
Paragraph 7 (81 words): "First, let’s consider what happens if there’s now a renewed demand for ATP, a sudden call to action. You decided to go for a run. As ATP is spent, the ATP synthase springs into action, with protons flooding though its rotary motor. As protons flow back inside, membrane potential falls. Now NADH can ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "170"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels."
Paragraph 2 (87 words): "Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase flips direction too, so both forms now work in concert to conve..."
Paragraph 3 (129 words): "But hold on! This magnificent spring-loaded power driver has a weakness that cancer cells exploit – our Bond villain has a final dastardly trick up his sleeve. Think about the problem faced by cancer cells with a mutation in Krebs-cycle enzymes such as fumarate hydratase. The mutation blocks the Kre..."
Paragraph 4 (56 words) [SHORT]: "You can probably see where I’m going with this. When forwards flux through the Krebs cycle is impaired, cancer cells can make citrate by converting α-ketoglutarate into isocitrate, then citrate, through reverse flux. You may be wondering where the α-ketoglutarate comes from, and the answer brings us..."
Paragraph 5 (36 words) [SHORT]: "Glutamine – the amino acid essential for cancer cells to grow. When the nitrogen is transferred from this five-carbon amino acid to make other amino acids and nucleotides, the carbon skeleton that remains is the C5"
Paragraph 6 (51 words) [SHORT]: "α-ketoglutarate. High levels of glutamine push the Krebs cycle into reverse by increasing the concentration of α-ketoglutarate. Mutations in the NADPH-linked form of the enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase reinforce this shift in cancer cells, but these mutations are selected because they lock in a flux..."
Paragraph 7 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Mutations keep the enzyme jammed in reverse mode, so it keeps on making citrate, supporting cancer cell growth. Overall, the flux from glutamine looks something like the diagram on the next page:"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "171"
Paragraph 1 (39 words) [SHORT]: "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect)."
Paragraph 2 (22 words) [SHORT]: "The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhydrogenase, which regenerates NADPH from NADH, so long as there is a membrane potential."
Paragraph 3 (79 words): "We are left with a peculiar situation, in which Krebs-cycle flux is running backwards through large parts of the cycle; nothing like the canonical picture in textbooks. Far from being geared to ATP synthesis, the cycle is now exporting succinate and citrate from the mitochondria out to the cytosol. ..."
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "Turn left (or right) at Krebs junction Once citrate is exported out to the cytosol, it is broken down into the C2"
Paragraph 5 (84 words): "acetyl CoA, plus the C4 oxaloacetate. Acetyl CoA is used for fatty acid synthesis, but it also binds to proteins that control access to DNA, called histones. This enables many genes to be switched on: an ‘epigenetic switch’ known as acetylation. The genes switched on drive cell growth and proliferat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "172"
Paragraph 1 (99 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."
Paragraph 2 (46 words) [SHORT]: "How export of citrate from the mitochondria can drive growth through an epigenetic switch. When NADH is plentiful, the sirtuins are suppressed. Because they would normally switch off the growth signal by deacetylating histones, the combined effect of acetyl CoA and NADH is to promote growth."
Paragraph 3 (46 words) [SHORT]: "The other breakdown product from citrate, oxaloacetate, is equally important. It stands at a unique crossroads in metabolism, where almost every direction is good for cancer, which means the more you make, the better it gets. The choice is a bit overwhelming (see the figure opposite)."
Paragraph 4 (40 words) [SHORT]: "You can pick up nitrogen to become an amino acid called aspartate, needed for nucleotide synthesis and to form urea (via the urea cycle that first brought Krebs to fame in 1932). Or you can be converted to the C4"
Paragraph 5 (74 words): "malate, then stripped of CO 2 and 2H by the malic enzyme, to form the C3 pyruvate, plus (worth its weight in gold) the powerful NADPH, needed for biosynthesis. From pyruvate, you can form lactate and be washed out as waste. Much of the lactate excreted by cancer cells comes from glutamine in this wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "173"
Paragraph 1 (113 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."
Paragraph 2 (27 words) [SHORT]: "That’s the starting point for making glycerol phosphate, which binds to fatty acids to form the main phospholipid components of cell membranes. You can’t grow without membranes."
Paragraph 3 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs junction – oxaloacetate is at a crossroads in metabolism, with paths leading to nitrogen or sugar metabolism, or generating NADPH for biosynthesis and antioxidant defences. This is a key crossroads in energy metabolism; you see why Krebs was uncertain about the fate of oxaloacetate."
Paragraph 4 (63 words): "Glycerol phosphate has another equally important use. It can be used to generate electrical membrane potential in mitochondria, without involving the Krebs cycle. It works like this. Glycerol phosphate is stripped of 2H, which is fed into complex III of the respiratory chain from outside the mitocho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "174"
Paragraph 1 (142 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "No wonder cancer cells are addicted to glutamine! Anything glucose can do, glutamine can do too, and it also brings nitrogen to the table."
Paragraph 3 (41 words) [SHORT]: "Glutamine even works as a self-fulfilling prophecy. I mentioned that one of the uses of oxaloacetate is to make aspartate for the urea cycle. In fact, the urea cycle is the only pathway here that is no use to cancer cells."
Paragraph 4 (204 words): "Quite the opposite. It’s long been puzzling that much of the nitrogen from glutamine is not bound into amino acids or nucleotides in cancer cells, nor is it safely incorporated into urea as a waste product, but rather it bubbles away as toxic ammonia. In a chilling scenario, it seems that the releas..."
Paragraph 5 (60 words): "From the cancer’s point of view, always in the here and now, cachexia maintains a copious supply of free glutamine. It’s as if a state provides free fossil fuels for the filthiest polluters. Cancer cells often acquire mutations in genes for the urea cycle. That way, excess nitrogen is splurged as am..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "175"
Paragraph 1 (26 words) [SHORT]: "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it."
Paragraph 2 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine, comes directly from ammonia."
Paragraph 3 (58 words) [SHORT]: "There are many other ways in which cancer cells can evade textbook metabolic flux. There is no common pattern, although what I’ve described here is arguably as close to an ‘archetypal’ cancer metabolism as one could get. How cancer cells grow depends on what they’re fed and whereabouts they are, eve..."
Paragraph 4 (118 words): "For example, some cancer cells release lactate as a waste product, while others take it up. From lactate you can make pyruvate, then oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA. Everything I’ve just described is now possible, except that these cells must still get their nitrogen from somewhere (and are more likely ..."
Paragraph 5 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Because our physiology links ketone bodies with starvation, their presence tends to switch off growth signals. It’s also notoriously tricky to make sugars from fats (although it can be done via the C3 intermediary acetone). Yet even these metabolic hurdles are not insurmountable for cancer cells."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "176"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous?"
Paragraph 2 (42 words) [SHORT]: "You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can be induced by mutations, infections, low oxygen levels ... or the decline in metabolism associated with ageing itself."
Paragraph 3 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that ageing is the single greatest risk factor for cancer. That’s the main reason why I’ve talked so much about reverse flux through the Krebs cycle. I’m not trying to explain every case of cancer, but why our risk increases with age. Because age hits us all in the end."
Paragraph 4 (138 words): "The rising tide Why, then, are we more likely to get cancer as we get older? I said at the beginning of this chapter that the answer does not lie in the accumulation of mutations with age. We’ve known for decades that they do not accumulate fast enough, nor do they account for the known patterns of ..."
Paragraph 5 (127 words): "How old are you? Can you still run down the street and back as well as you did when you were sixteen? Age catches up even with Olympic athletes. This is not a book about ageing, though we’ll touch on a few of the mechanisms in the next chapter. But for now, let’s just think about one thing – energy ..."
Paragraph 6 (60 words): "We’ll see in the next chapter that the rise in ROS flux can be compensated somewhat through suppression of complex I. That brings us to the second problem. Complex I is the beginning of the longest route through the respiratory chain, and the only entry point for NADH deriving from the Krebs cycle. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "177"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way."
Paragraph 2 (33 words) [SHORT]: "We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH."
Paragraph 3 (115 words): "Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondria. The Krebs cycle must slow down, and there will be a tendency for sections of it to run backwards: if the NADH is not oxidised fast enough, then it will tend to push the reactions that produce it in the opposite direction. What ha..."
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Ferment glucose. Do a Warburg."
Paragraph 5 (111 words): "Meanwhile, forward flux from citrate to α-ketoglutarate and succinyl CoA has to slow down too. Unable to get much further through the forward cycle, citrate dissipates to the cytosol, where it is broken down into acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate. Histones, the gatekeepers to DNA in the nucleus, become ac..."
Paragraph 6 (29 words) [SHORT]: "and other parts of your Krebs cycle will flip backwards. Ironically, you will put on weight by absorbing CO 2 and turning it into fats. Life’s really not fair."
Paragraph 7 (148 words): "I might be in this state now, but to the best of my knowledge, I don’t have cancer yet. Who knows. I worry about it in part because my dear friend Ian Ackland-Snow died from cancer in 2019, at the age of fifty- six, a year or two older than me. We sat together in the garden of the Royal Marsden Hosp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "178"
Paragraph 1 (48 words) [SHORT]: "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes."
Paragraph 2 (26 words) [SHORT]: "But why Ian? Why not others, who may smoke for decades, spurn their greens and yet live to ninety? I can do no better than statistics."
Paragraph 3 (84 words): "Ageing itself raises our risk, by switching metabolism towards aerobic glycolysis, promoting cellular growth. But clearly this state is stable over decades. We are then at the mercy of our own lives – unfortunate genes, one cigarette too many, poor diet, bad sunburn, exhaust fumes, viral infection: ..."
Paragraph 4 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Eat carefully. Don’t fall back on fermentation but oxidise NADH in your mitochondria as far as possible. Keep your Krebs cycle moving forwards. Nothing is failsafe, but there’s no doubt that regular aerobic exercise and a healthy diet will help to protect you against cancer."
Paragraph 5 (167 words): "There’s irony in my advice, for I am asking you to nurture your mitochondria. Don’t let cell respiration run down, which is the underlying cause of cancer as we age. Not because our cells revert to some degenerate state, but because declining respiration perturbs the Krebs cycle. It may not have bee..."
Paragraph 6 (86 words): "2 Warburg actively enjoyed the war, which reminds me of J. B. S. Haldane, who also relished the First World War. Haldane reputedly took a bet that he could cycle safely across no-man’s land, because the Germans would be too surprised to shoot at him – which he duly demonstrated. It would be interest..."
Paragraph 7 (31 words) [SHORT]: "3 The reason NAD P H has more power than NADH has nothing to do with the structure, which is functionally identical, but relates to how far each one has been"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "179"
Paragraph 1 (107 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "4 Conversely, stem cells, which give rise to most new cells in tissues, are typically not differentiated, meaning there’s little to see inside, and they tend to rely on aerobic glycolysis (fermentation) for energy, rather than respiration. In that respect, they are similar to cancer cells. As new ce..."
Paragraph 3 (174 words): "5 My own PhD, back in the 1990s, addressed problems with oxygen delivery in organ transplantation. I found that when a kidney was transplanted after a few days of storage, the reintroduction of oxygen caused the mitochondria to go haywire. NADH was oxidised very slowly, and its electrons didn’t seem..."
Paragraph 4 (68 words): "6 The enzyme that breaks down citrate in the cytosol (in animals) is an ATP citrate lyase – which is related to the enzyme found in bacteria that drives the classic reverse Krebs cycle. There’s nothing new under the sun. Curiously, plants don’t do this – they generate the acetyl CoA needed for fatty..."
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "Picking up endosymbionts such as cyanobacteria (which evolved into chloroplasts) gives the host cell an extra set of metabolic genes, with greater flexibility for compartmentalisation. Some algal cells with chloroplasts lost the ability to photosynthesise altogether, but retained their chloroplast a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "180"
Paragraph 1 (24 words) [SHORT]: "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects)."
Paragraph 2 (15 words) [SHORT]: "7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author."
Paragraph 3 (278 words): "I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in this chapter, but sadly it only made it into this footnote. Probably only a tenth of the material I wanted to write about actually made it into the book. Sweetlove’s 2010 paper ‘Not just a circle: Flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’ opened my eyes ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "182"
Paragraph 1 (161 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."
Paragraph 2 (188 words): "All of this is true, and if there is a picture from evolutionary biology that underpins modern medicine, then this is it. Different alleles predispose us to diverse age-related diseases. They cause their effects primarily in specific organ systems, hence the tendency of one system or another to let ..."
Paragraph 3 (122 words): "But (there’s always a but) there are some serious problems with this view too. Think about ‘our allotted time’. In the most general terms, this is a measure of chronological time. Our lifespan is determined by our likelihood of surviving a certain number of years – a statistical risk determined by o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "183"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable."
Paragraph 2 (236 words): "So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the place to go into detail, but I want to call attention to a few general points here. First, ageing as a phenomenon..."
Paragraph 3 (109 words): "There’s another sense in which a genetically deterministic view of ageing falls short: the problem known as ‘missing heritability’. The term ‘heritability’ refers to the proportion of physical differences (known as the ‘phenotype’) between individuals that can be explained by genetic factors. If the..."
Paragraph 4 (69 words): "That’s not strictly true, as we’ll see, but many complex conditions that run in families, such as epilepsy, might have a heritability in the range of 0.4 to 0.6, perhaps surprisingly low. Even so, if one twin has the condition, then the other twin has about a 50 per cent chance of having it too, reg..."
Paragraph 5 (20 words) [SHORT]: "The problem of missing heritability is more startling in this age of genomics. Genome-wide association studies assign additive risk to"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "184"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5"
Paragraph 2 (78 words): "(from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent of the known risk. Nearly all the known heritability of the disease is ‘mi..."
Paragraph 3 (102 words): "There could be thousands of additional genetic variants, each of which, alone, makes such a trivial contribution to the overall risk that it can be missed altogether in smaller genetic studies; but add them all up and they might account for most of the missing heritability. That may be so. But it’s ..."
Paragraph 4 (46 words) [SHORT]: "The idea is not absurd, for a handful of genes are almost always missing from genome-wide association studies, literally binned on the grounds that they cause more trouble than they’re worth. Because there are so few of them, the assumption is that they are statistically trivial."
Paragraph 5 (39 words) [SHORT]: "That’s a very poor assumption, as these genes have a greater impact on flux state – on our biological age – than any others. What’s more, they interact in elusive and unpredictable ways with the rest of the genome."
Paragraph 6 (17 words) [SHORT]: "And they alone account for why identical twins are not necessarily genetically identical. They are mitochondrial genes."
Paragraph 7 (138 words): "Twin pillars of medicine One voice above all has sung the importance of mitochondria in human health for nearly half a century: Doug Wallace. Wallace trained as a geneticist, completing his PhD in microbiology and human genetics at Yale in 1975. This was already a bold beginning, exploring the resis..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "185"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster."
Paragraph 2 (220 words): "Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the antibiotic resistance worked well; but if they came from distantly related species, such as mice and hamsters, t..."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Taking a cue from physics, Wallace considered ‘energy to be the most important thing’. For any young researcher, setting out in science, choosing your question is perhaps the most important decision of all."
Paragraph 4 (97 words): "What will you do with your life? What do you want to know? Where can you make a real difference? Recalling his own decision, decades later, Wallace’s reasoning was exemplary: ‘And the thing that made the most energy was mitochondrial; it couldn’t be trivial. And if it had its own DNA, it must mutate..."
Paragraph 5 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Touching on his discoveries is to relive some of the highlights of mitochondrial research. In 1980, Wallace was the first to show that, in humans, mitochondrial DNA is inherited strictly from the mother. 1"
Paragraph 6 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Others had already established the idea of ‘uniparental inheritance’ of mitochondrial genes (the father’s mitochondrial genes are usually not passed on) but Wallace used a spanking new method (cutting up mitochondrial DNA into diagnostic chunks using ‘restriction enzymes’,"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "186"
Paragraph 1 (88 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."
Paragraph 2 (194 words): "Most mitochondrial mutations are not obviously detrimental. It can be hard to tell. Unlike nuclear genes, which normally come in two copies (one from each parent), mitochondrial genes come in packs, typically hundreds or thousands of copies per cell. A mature oocyte (egg cell) has nearly half a mill..."
Paragraph 3 (11 words) [SHORT]: "That’s why mitochondrial diseases directly affect only about 1 in 5,000"
Paragraph 4 (62 words): "of us. It’s also why mitochondrial genes tend to evolve much faster than nuclear genes; at least tenfold, and perhaps as much as fifty-fold faster in most animals, including us. Mitochondrial genes are copied far more than nuclear genes, and so they accumulate more mutations. While the most detrimen..."
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "The fact that most mitochondrial variation is not obviously detrimental offered some simplified glimpses into human origins and prehistory. By the 1990s, Wallace was tracking the tell-tale trail of mitochondrial variations in human populations back to an ancestral female, now known as ‘mitochondrial..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "187"
Paragraph 1 (116 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."
Paragraph 2 (48 words) [SHORT]: "These give rise to individuals, each of us with our own slightly different mitochondrial DNA, set against our diverse nuclear genomes. Wallace has argued that this mitochondrial variation could aid adaptation to different climates and diets. That makes a great deal of sense, although the evidence re..."
Paragraph 3 (58 words) [SHORT]: "All of these ideas see mitochondria as somehow different from the rest of the organism, befitting their origin from free-living bacteria two billion years ago. But of course mitochondria are now wholly integrated into their host cells, and their function is central to everything that cells do: not o..."
Paragraph 4 (104 words): "Because energy and biosynthesis necessarily generate a tension at the heart of metabolism, what I’ve called the yin and yang of the Krebs cycle, mitochondria are barometers of physiological stress, coordinating signalling and even programmed cell death. When should a cell kill itself, if not when it..."
Paragraph 5 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Wallace points to Vesalius and Mendel as twin intellectual pillars of medicine. In De Humani Corporis Fabrica , the sixteenth-century Flemish physician Vesalius wrote the foundational tome of anatomy, replete with unforgettable plates depicting dramatically posturing figures in various states of mus..."
Paragraph 6 (39 words) [SHORT]: "Vesalius did not fear to pick a fight with the ancients on points of anatomy. Galen had been undisputed for 1,400 years, but Vesalius not only dared to disagree; he was usually right. His legacy can be seen in"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "188"
Paragraph 1 (67 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."
Paragraph 2 (357 words): "The second pillar of medicine is Mendel, the Augustinian monk who founded genetics – albeit only when his work was rediscovered two decades after his death. Mendelian genetics is textbook stuff. Genes come in pairs, one from each parent. They line up on chromosomes in the nucleus. We inherit differe..."
Paragraph 3 (10 words) [SHORT]: "That signals directly to the nucleus, through succinate and citrate,"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "189"
Paragraph 1 (56 words) [SHORT]: "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."
Paragraph 2 (51 words) [SHORT]: "In praise of inbreeding (in flies) How can we distinguish between the genetic contribution of the nucleus and the mitochondria? Just as studies with identical twins have given an indication of the heritability of complex diseases, so too ‘genetically identical’ flies give a profound insight into the..."
Paragraph 3 (211 words): "I’m talking about Drosophila melanogaster , the tiny fruit fly (or technically, vinegar fly) that has been the source of grand insights into genetics, going back to the earliest days of the discipline when Hermann Muller first showed that X-rays can induce mutations in Drosophila genes. Muller also ..."
Paragraph 4 (73 words): "Ethical regulations don’t even classify flies as animals, though those who work with them become fond of their antics. Male flies will dance the conga in chasing females, mostly at dawn or dusk, and then sleep it off during the day. And fruit flies love to get drunk; they live on rotting fruit, gain..."
Paragraph 5 (38 words) [SHORT]: "I knew little of this until Flo Camus arrived in the lab next door to mine at University College London. She had done her PhD in fly genetics and mitochondrial function in Melbourne and was now full of"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "190"
Paragraph 1 (285 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."
Paragraph 2 (103 words): "Yet mitochondrial diseases are uncommon, and the difference between the sexes is real but not stark. Selection has found a way to compensate: genes in the nucleus can improve male performance. These have been tailored over many generations to ‘fix’ problems with mitochondrial DNA in males. For this ..."
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "But where should we draw the line? Crosses between species do indeed cause ‘hybrid breakdown’, attributed to incompatibilities between mitochondrial and nuclear genes. So what about crosses between divergent populations within the same species? Falling in love with people from other cultures is as h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "191"
Paragraph 1 (26 words) [SHORT]: "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so."
Paragraph 2 (8 words) [SHORT]: "But there’s plenty else to ponder on here."
Paragraph 3 (174 words): "This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer chromosomes. Each of these fly lines has a particular mitochondrial genome, derived from natural populations around the world (it’s important to emphasise these are not detrimental mutations, ..."
Paragraph 4 (183 words): "You may be wondering what all this has to do with ageing. We hadn’t set out to study ageing at all, but we were taken aback by our initial findings – always a good sign in science. Isaac Asimov (a biochemist, by the way) once said that new discoveries are not accompanied by ‘Eureka!’, but ‘That’s fu..."
Paragraph 5 (38 words) [SHORT]: "The cure seemed obvious: lower the stress. Give the flies an antioxidant. We tried one called NAC (for N -acetylcysteine), but it didn’t affect the males much. Yet it killed most of the females in one fly line!"
Paragraph 6 (14 words) [SHORT]: "Just one line. The other lines looked a bit ropey but seemed OK. We"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "192"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking."
Paragraph 2 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science."
Paragraph 3 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others."
Paragraph 4 (20 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that these were all genetically identical flies, except for the mitochondrial DNA, which differed in just a few SNPs."
Paragraph 5 (229 words): "To generalise: the response to drugs (an antioxidant in this case) can vary dramatically, depending on a few tiny differences in mitochondrial DNA, with big differences in outcome between males and females. Flies have exactly the same mitochondrial genes that we do, and these are inherited in the sa..."
Paragraph 6 (90 words): "Bringing balance to the force So what was killing the female flies? We don’t know for sure, but we did measure one big difference between the males and females, and between the female line that died versus those that seemed fine. The antioxidant NAC suppressed respiration, especially at complex I of..."
Paragraph 7 (50 words) [SHORT]: "The answer seems to be linked to the flux of ROS. A really striking finding was that ROS flux hardly changed, least of all in the powerful flight muscles of the thorax – it remained more or less constant, despite the suppression of respiration by NAC. That’s surprising, because ROS"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "193"
Paragraph 1 (57 words) [SHORT]: "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."
Paragraph 2 (129 words): "If the electrical potential on the mitochondrial membrane is a high- energy force-field, then that ominous electrical crackle is ROS flux. As a rule of thumb, the higher the potential, the greater the ROS flux, the more scope for damage to the surrounding materials. Balancing the force means prevent..."
Paragraph 3 (82 words): "But it’s not out of the question that keeping ROS flux within normal bounds could be more important than respiration specifically through complex I. There are other ways of generating ATP, as we saw in relation to cancer. And the male flies weren’t doing so badly, despite having the same mitochondri..."
Paragraph 4 (200 words): "NAC has a specific effect as an antioxidant, which is to raise the levels of a critical antioxidant molecule, the sulfurous little peptide glutathione. Supplementing the diet of fruit flies with NAC raised glutathione levels in all tissues, which is usually taken to be a good thing. Yet those rising..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "194"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on."
Paragraph 2 (147 words): "The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving water plus oxidised glutathione. When oxidised, glutathione can bind to itself through a di..."
Paragraph 3 (138 words): "To recycle the GSSG back into two GSH requires 2H. These 2H come from the powerful reducing agent NADPH (you might remember that in Chapter 5, I suggested you think of the P as standing for ‘power’, to discriminate it from the weaker NADH). So now there’s a second factor to consider here: if a cell ..."
Paragraph 4 (83 words): "The glutathione pool is therefore a sensitive indicator of the health of the cell. If it becomes more oxidised (so there is more GSSG relative to GSH), that sends a powerful signal: all is not well with the basic metabolism which underpins everything that cells do. There’s a sickness at heart. We we..."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "There are more layers. GSH can also regenerate thiols in proteins. As with GSSG, oxidised thiols in proteins tend to form disulfide bridges. By linking together different bits of a protein, disulfide bridges change the"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "195"
Paragraph 1 (135 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."
Paragraph 2 (186 words): "There’s a final nuance I need to mention. Oxidised glutathione doesn’t only take the form GSSG; there can be a combination of the two processes I’ve mentioned, whereby an oxidised thiol from glutathione binds to an oxidised thiol in a protein, forming a disulfide bridge that binds glutathione itself..."
Paragraph 3 (37 words) [SHORT]: "And that’s what S-glutathionylation seems to do. 4 The price is serious: it suppresses the most efficient form of respiration, the form that pumps ten protons for every 2H, instead of just six. That’s quite a hit."
Paragraph 4 (120 words): "Let’s take stock with our fruit flies. We know that NAC suppressed respiration in some fly lines, but not others. We know that glutathione levels increased in all fly tissues, so NAC was doing what it is supposed to do – promoting the synthesis of glutathione. We know that the glutathione pool was m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "196"
Paragraph 1 (91 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."
Paragraph 2 (127 words): "In sum: tiny differences in respiration between fly lines were amplified by the antioxidant NAC. The flies kept ROS flux within normal bounds by suppressing respiration at complex I, in some cases to the point of death. In the most vulnerable fly line, the males seemed fine, but most females died. W..."
Paragraph 3 (29 words) [SHORT]: "The age-old problem I suggested at the beginning of this chapter that ageing is not linked to chronological time, but to some sort of biological time measured in flux."
Paragraph 4 (52 words) [SHORT]: "You may be familiar with the simplest version of this idea, that our lives are measured in heartbeats, with all animals having roughly the same number of heartbeats in their life, around a billion for both the pygmy shew (squeezed into a year and a half, at an extraordinary rate of 1,300"
Paragraph 5 (51 words) [SHORT]: "beats per minute) and the elephant, with its ponderous twenty-eight beats per minute for around seventy years. You’ll be pleased to know that humans are a modest exception to this rule of thumb, clocking up more than two billion heartbeats at a rate of about sixty per minute over seventy years."
Paragraph 6 (81 words): "There’s at least a grain of truth in this idea, although it won’t bear out the wag who quipped ‘If we have a finite number of heartbeats, I don’t intend to use up any of mine running around doing exercises.’ If they had done so, they would likely have lived a little longer (albeit their heart rate w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "197"
Paragraph 1 (112 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."
Paragraph 2 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Mutations certainly do accumulate, but as we saw with cancer in the previous chapter, not quickly enough to drive ageing. A variant of the mutation accumulation idea relates to mutations specifically in mitochondrial DNA, but they too do not correlate meaningfully with the rate of ageing. 6 The ‘fre..."
Paragraph 3 (14 words) [SHORT]: "The idea is simple enough, but the evidence is equivocal, to put it mildly."
Paragraph 4 (31 words) [SHORT]: "Free radicals (the same ROS escaping from respiration that we’ve been talking about) attack nearby membranes, proteins and DNA, the theory goes, so antioxidants should hinder that damage and prolong lifespan."
Paragraph 5 (42 words) [SHORT]: "But there’s zero evidence that antioxidants can prolong lifespan, and in many studies the very opposite happens: they turn out to shorten lifespan, whereas pro-oxidants (which supposedly exacerbate damage) actually prolong lifespan. As originally formulated, the free-radical theory of ageing is wron..."
Paragraph 6 (128 words): "But there may be truth in more subtle interpretations, which consider the role of signalling and endogenous antioxidant enzymes. While ROS can cause damage, the lurid devastation often attributed to them is exaggerated, while their more subtle physiological role has been harder to understand. Damage..."
Paragraph 7 (76 words): "The answer depends a great deal on the context. How long do you expect to live anyway? What proportion of your resources do you need to invest in reproduction or competing for a mate? How much do you want to spend on cleaning up the mess or preventing the mess from building up in the first place? Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "198"
Paragraph 1 (82 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."
Paragraph 2 (46 words) [SHORT]: "The problem is that we have focused too much on the colourful chemical reactivity of free radicals, and too little on their essential physiological role. ROS are such vital physiological signals that cells go out of their way to keep ROS flux within tight physiological limits."
Paragraph 3 (105 words): "Redox tone – the balance of electron sources and sinks in a cell – is as critical to homeostasis (our normal chemical balance) as temperature or acidity. These limits may be temporarily exceeded in infections or illness, as part of the stress response linked to inflammation and immune activation, ju..."
Paragraph 4 (138 words): "We saw in Chapter 5 that suppression of respiration at complex I slows down the oxidation of NADH, promoting reverse flux through much of the Krebs cycle. Krebs-cycle intermediates such as succinate and citrate begin to leak from the mitochondria into the cytosol, where they can stabilise transcript..."
Paragraph 5 (64 words): "The most reasonable broad-brushstroke answer is surely some level of damage, whether that damage is caused by protein unfolding or cross- linking, oxidation by ROS or glycation (the tendency of sugars such as glucose to react with proteins and lipids, decorating them with ‘sticky’ tails). Presumably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "199"
Paragraph 1 (212 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."
Paragraph 2 (184 words): "Forward flux also depends on the concentration of other reactants, most notably NAD + and NADH. To go from citrate to α-ketoglutarate requires 2H being stripped out and passed to NAD + , to form NADH. So long as there is plenty of NAD + available, and not too much NADH, then everything is fine – flu..."
Paragraph 3 (80 words): "I suspect this difficult trade-off explains in part the ‘handicap principle’ – the idea that sexual ornaments such as the peacock’s tail or the amazing eyes-on-stalks of the imaginatively named stalk-eye fly rests on the relative allocation of resources to growth or energy: the fittest individuals h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "200"
Paragraph 1 (52 words) [SHORT]: "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."
Paragraph 2 (208 words): "Any damage to the respiratory chain will tend to increase ROS flux, most of which derives from the iron–sulfur clusters of complex I. And ultimately, the only way for animals to get this back under control is to suppress complex I. 8 The problem is that suppressing complex I slows down the oxidation..."
Paragraph 3 (138 words): "We’re all individuals Ageing reminds me of that absurd scene in Monty Python’s Life of Brian , where Brian admonishes the crowd that they don’t need to follow anyone – they’re all individuals. The crowd chants back, ‘Yes, we’re all individuals!’ apart from one lone, doleful voice who says ‘I’m not.’..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "201"
Paragraph 1 (160 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."
Paragraph 2 (84 words): "Subtle mitonuclear mismatches probably have little effect in youth but can be amplified by damage or stress as we age. The common denominator is suppressed respiration, altered Krebs-cycle flux and an epigenetic shift, accelerating ageing. What really happens depends on many other factors, including..."
Paragraph 3 (97 words): "Overeating is not good for our mitochondria either. Remember that the biochemical pathways promoting growth, in cancer or sexual maturation, are closed down by too much ATP – instead, we need carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle, and that powerful driver of biosynthesis, NADPH (what I called ‘power..."
Paragraph 4 (81 words): "But however well we live, we can still be undone by unlucky genetic variants. Those variants do not depend on our chronological age, but rather our biological age, and specifically on how these variants respond to the dwindling availability of ATP and the shifting pattern of gene activation in the n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "202"
Paragraph 1 (147 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."
Paragraph 2 (133 words): "Just think about the brain’s addiction to glucose. Although the brain can make do, or even thrive, on other substrates (such as ketones) it much prefers glucose. Positron emission tomography can be used to study metabolic processes. Brightly coloured PET scans depict regions of the brain ‘lighting u..."
Paragraph 3 (167 words): "To understand why membrane potential matters, consider another tissue with an equivalent addiction to glucose: the beta cells in the islets of the pancreas. They’re addicted to glucose because their job is to detect high blood glucose levels (usually after a meal) and secrete the hormone insulin in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "203"
Paragraph 1 (83 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."
Paragraph 2 (91 words): "In a pioneering reconception of the pathology underlying Alzheimer’s disease, Estela Area-Gomez and Eric Schon at Columbia University, New York, have linked neuronal degeneration with the damage accruing to cellular compartments known as mitochondria-associated membranes or MAMs. 9 Perhaps first amo..."
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Here’s how it works."
Paragraph 4 (190 words): "Neurons need to accelerate from zero to sixty in a split second when called upon to fire. Burning glucose maximises the speed and efficiency of ATP synthesis through the classic textbook pathway. Glucose is swiftly broken down to form pyruvate, which is then clipped of CO 2 and 2H by pyruvate dehydr..."
Paragraph 5 (22 words) [SHORT]: "We’ll consider how this relates to consciousness in the Epilogue, but for now let’s just see what goes wrong in Alzheimer’s disease."
Paragraph 6 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Think about the problem here. To fire normally, neurons must take up glucose, but insulin resistance means that they struggle to do so. 10 The MAMs attempt to compensate for this deficit by pumping more Ca 2+ into the mitochondria, activating pyruvate dehydrogenase further and"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "204"
Paragraph 1 (147 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."
Paragraph 2 (86 words): "The brain can’t easily switch to some other fuel or flux pattern when neurons or their ‘symbiotic’ tissues are damaged. The bottom line is that our risk of Alzheimer’s disease depends in part on factors such as diet and exercise, which influence our lifelong exposure to high blood glucose. But under..."
Paragraph 3 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Know thyself The portrait of ageing I have drawn here is fundamentally epigenetic."
Paragraph 4 (183 words): "Ageing is not driven by mutations in genes accumulating over time, but by changes in gene activity – epigenetics. But this word is misleading in two respects. First, ‘epigenetics’ sounds intrinsically reversible, but plainly that’s hardly true with ageing – we might be able to improve our lifestyle ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "205"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10"
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "32"
Paragraph 3 (60 words): "reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve been talking about, second by second, day by day, year by year – a..."
Paragraph 4 (156 words): "At the very heart of this metabolic whirl is the Krebs cycle, inextricably intwined with the fabric of our mitochondria. Their electrical membrane potential is bound to the flux of reactive oxygen species, and to our capacity for burning 2H to power a hundred billion trillion reactions each second. ..."
Paragraph 5 (149 words): "In cells, some of these whirling reactions go wrong and damage molecular machinery such as proteins. Not all proteins are replaced effectively, and repairing or replacing them is a drain in itself – one of the most energy-sapping tasks that cells face. Eventually the respiratory machinery itself is ..."
Paragraph 6 (32 words) [SHORT]: "I mentioned that metabolic rate and lifespan only correlate loosely, because organisms can vary how much they invest in restricting or repairing damage. Perhaps the most striking examples are bats and birds."
Paragraph 7 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Animals with the power of flight live as much as ten times longer than their land-lubber cousins with a similar body size or resting metabolic rate. Recent work from Gustavo Barja in Madrid suggests that these longer-lived animals restrict ROS flux from complex I, simply by down-"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "206"
Paragraph 1 (9 words) [SHORT]: "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster."
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "12"
Paragraph 3 (80 words): "Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burning NADH with a Krebs cycle in full forward mode for much longer. That in tu..."
Paragraph 4 (43 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that ROS are less damaging than the lurid language used to label them would have you believe. Even so, a faster pace of living entails more turnover of molecular machinery, and therefore more damage. Longer-lived animals must invest more in damage limitation."
Paragraph 5 (17 words) [SHORT]: "The cost is ultimately fewer offspring per unit time, and we are back into standard evolutionary biology."
Paragraph 6 (224 words): "These changes are the work of selection, even if they are relatively simple and can occur over just a few generations. Our own lifespan is harder to modify, because our physiological limits are set by the genes that we inherited – we can’t mix and match over generations to improve our performance. B..."
Paragraph 7 (72 words): "Over the entrance to the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, the Greeks inscribed three maxims. The first was ‘Know thyself’. They might never have imagined the invisible metabolic flux dancing through genes that defines us as individuals and humans, but they knew well how to live and die. We each need to l..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "207"
Paragraph 1 (38 words) [SHORT]: "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence."
Paragraph 2 (68 words): "Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mitochondria. If you want to make yourself more youthful, if not young again; if you want to trim your biological age and shift your epigenetic state to a more aerobic setting; if you want to live well and die well –..."
Paragraph 3 (22 words) [SHORT]: "You will need to sustain your lifestyle over decades to invigorate your health with age and add good years to your life."
Paragraph 4 (37 words) [SHORT]: "The third Delphic maxim is a little more ambiguous. It is usually translated as ‘Surety brings ruin’. I imagine this to mean that we should never crave certainty, for nothing is certain, least of all in science."
Paragraph 5 (152 words): "Science is not a collection of dusty facts, but a way of exploring the unknown, of making out the contours of a long mysterious coast. I have tried to write this book in that spirit, connecting the first stirrings of life on a geologically restless planet with the glorious pinnacles of evolution, an..."
Paragraph 6 (34 words) [SHORT]: "1 There are occasional examples of mitochondrial DNA inherited from the father too, very rarely in humans but more commonly in some other species. But these examples are really a footnote to the rule."
Paragraph 7 (148 words): "2 In his PhD with me and Andrew Pomiankowski, Marco Colnaghi has done some beautiful mathematical modelling on how the female germline selects for the best mitochondria, a process that involves their transfer from multiple germ cells into a single immature oocyte, followed by the programmed death of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "208"
Paragraph 1 (47 words) [SHORT]: "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all."
Paragraph 2 (108 words): "3 This is a fine example of how solving one evolutionary problem leads to another. Uniparental inheritance made it possible to select for mitochondrial genes: they are always inherited in populations, so it is important to make this population as clonal as possible. In animals, that requires careful..."
Paragraph 3 (78 words): "4 Biology is always more complex than you’d like it to be. It took me a long time to see this relationship, because I already had a hypothesis in mind, which I have written about in previous books, and which has some experimental backing: increased ROS flux signals locally (to the mitochondrial gene..."
Paragraph 4 (159 words): "Here I’m saying the opposite. Can they both be true? Yes, I now realise; it’s just a matter of timing. Increasing respiratory capacity will only fix the problem if the problem is strictly one of capacity. If respiration is in fact partly broken – for example, because of mitochondrial mutations – the..."
Paragraph 5 (130 words): "5 Quite why larger animals usually have a lower metabolic rate is surprisingly abstruse. In part, it relates to the rate of heat loss, which scales with the surface area of animals. An elephant-sized pile of mice produces about twenty-one times more heat than an elephant does; if the elephant produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "209"
Paragraph 1 (85 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."
Paragraph 2 (144 words): "7 It might seem that this problem could be solved by upregulating ‘anaplerotic’ pathways – adding in specific intermediates, modifying them through part of the Krebs cycle, and then removing them again. In other words, the cycle is acting as a roundabout rather than a full cycle, with flux coming in..."
Paragraph 3 (70 words): "8 Plants and simple (tiny) animals don’t need to suppress complex I, as they can short-circuit the respiratory chain (using an alternative oxidase or uncoupling proteins) to generate heat, rather than ATP. Dissipation of heat in this way swiftly oxidises NADH and lowers ROS flux, speeding Krebs-cycl..."
Paragraph 4 (112 words): "9 These are part of an extensive internal membrane system in cells called the endoplasmic reticulum, which is responsible for synthesising, packaging, folding and transporting proteins and other molecules such as lipids around the cell. The endoplasmic reticulum also plays an important role in seque..."
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "10 High glucose in the blood (hyperglycaemia) suppresses the uptake of glucose by neurons, via mechanisms that are not well understood (though glucose can be directly toxic to proteins). For a long time, it was thought that insulin does not affect the uptake of glucose by the brain, hence the brain ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "210"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’."
Paragraph 2 (94 words): "11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who has recently joined us at UCL. Her estimate of one billion metabolic reactions per second is actually for a bacterial cell, not on..."
Paragraph 3 (119 words): "12 Barja argues that this is linked to a programme of ageing: that ROS flux from complex I is deliberate. I agree that it is deliberate, but find the evidence for programmed ageing unpersuasive. To my mind, ROS flux signals respiratory capacity relative to demand, facilitating swift changes in respi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "212"
Paragraph 1 (163 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."
Paragraph 2 (154 words): "The idea is pleasing, but I wouldn’t have given it any more thought but for a visit from a scientific seer. Luca Turin is a biophysicist interested in quantum biology. He has led an unusual life, working for many years on scent and smell, and the possibility that we may be able to detect quantum vib..."
Paragraph 3 (129 words): "Rarely have I met someone who thinks in such clear lines. His papers convey this clarity, coupled with wry amusement. ‘Almost the only thing we know for sure about consciousness is that it is, so to speak, soluble in ether, chloroform and a variety of other solvents.’ Intriguingly, anaesthetics can ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "213"
Paragraph 1 (191 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "One of the few things that general anaesthetics do have in common is that they are lipid soluble – they accumulate in membranes, and the strength of anaesthesia depends on their concentration more than their structure. Anaesthetics accumulate in the mitochondrial membranes too."
Paragraph 3 (11 words) [SHORT]: "So, could they facilitate electron transfer to oxygen in cell respiration?"
Paragraph 4 (171 words): "Turin’s work shows that this might be the case. Electron spin resonance gives a signal associated with oxygen, which shifts under anaesthesia (it’s the only signal that does), but not in mutant flies resistant to anaesthesia. Even more intriguingly, Turin has detected a radiowave signal associated w..."
Paragraph 5 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Let’s get back to xenon. All this suggests that xenon concentrates in the hydrophobic pockets of proteins sitting within the mitochondrial"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "214"
Paragraph 1 (127 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."
Paragraph 2 (129 words): "I mentioned electromagnetic fields. We have long known that the brain generates electrical fields, which we measure in the EEG (electroencephalogram). As with general anaesthetics, we know far more about how to interpret patterns in the EEG associated with epilepsy or sleep than we do about what gen..."
Paragraph 3 (75 words): "The glib assumption is that charges on the cell membrane (or action potentials) are responsible. But if Turin is right, then a big part of the answer might be mitochondrial membrane potentials. Not only is electron transfer to oxygen implicated in consciousness, but the mitochondrial membrane potent..."
Paragraph 4 (102 words): "Moving charge necessarily generates an electromagnetic field, and the mitochondria clearly do so – not only with the transfer of electrons to oxygen but even more dramatically in the circuit of protons across the membrane, looping from the respiratory complexes to the ATP synthase and back round. Do..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "215"
Paragraph 1 (172 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."
Paragraph 2 (238 words): "This kind of statement might have pushed the boundaries of respectable science until recently, but the extraordinary work of the developmental biologist Michael Levin and others shows that electric fields can control the development of small animals such as the flat worms known as planarians. I susp..."
Paragraph 3 (39 words) [SHORT]: "Let’s put aside multicellular organisms with their nervous systems and think about protists such as paramecium, which also generate electrical fields on their mitochondrial membranes. Just watch their amazing behaviour under the microscope, the way they move around, explore,"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "216"
Paragraph 1 (88 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."
Paragraph 2 (74 words): "As with our own nervous systems, I’m arguing that the electrical fields in protists are mostly generated by mitochondria, deep within the cell. So why would these internal electrical fields become associated with the self, the life, the potentialities, of an organism as a whole? They’re only a bit o..."
Paragraph 3 (122 words): "To understand why – why the language of mitochondrial electrical fields became bound to the ephemeral states of cells – you need to know that mitochondria were bacteria once. They were engulfed by other cells nearly two billion years ago. I explored the extraordinary ramifications of that relationsh..."
Paragraph 4 (163 words): "Let me give you an example of how important this membrane potential is to bacteria. In the ocean there are about ten times as many viruses that attack bacteria (phages) as there are bacteria. You might have seen pictures of these viruses attaching themselves in droves to bacteria. Phages are remarka..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "217"
Paragraph 1 (96 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."
Paragraph 2 (67 words): "I have long wondered if that collapsing membrane potential ‘feels’ like something to a bacterium. More than anything else, the humming electrical potential on the membrane betokens the living force. And if it feels like something for a bacterium to die, its living force sucked away, what about other..."
Paragraph 3 (219 words): "They can die by wear and tear too – damage caused by overexposure to bright light, or too little iron for the photosynthetic systems to work properly, or toxins squirted out by neighbouring cells. Each of these can trigger waves of death through marine blooms of cyanobacteria. All operate through mu..."
Paragraph 4 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Shrink yourself down to the size of a molecule in the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 5 (81 words): "Succinate. The cell you’re part of is the size of a city, a metropolis on the scale of London, Tokyo or New York. What connects you with another molecule of succinate across the city, twenty miles away? In what sense are you part of the same entity, the same self? You won’t even be succinate for lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "218"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you."
Paragraph 2 (65 words): "Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there is of you compared with the next molecule. You are bound to the flow of electrons, to the pumping of protons, to the electrical charge on th..."
Paragraph 3 (116 words): "Protons scuttle instantaneously around the membrane, equalising the charge at each location, cohering an electromagnetic field that exerts its force everywhere in the cell. The water bound to surfaces inside the cell oscillates in phase, uniting the molecules of metabolism in the symphony. Changes i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "219"
Paragraph 1 (88 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."
Paragraph 2 (16 words) [SHORT]: "Were we mistaken? What does it matter if it is the movement that negates the form?"
Paragraph 3 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Even though we give (give up) ourselves to this mortal process of continuing, it is the movement that creates the form."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "220"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "221"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "222"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "A PPENDIX 1"
Paragraph 2 (203 words): "RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon in photosyn..."
Paragraph 3 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Let’s think about a specific example – how acetate (a C2 molecule) is activated to react with CO 2 , to form the C3 pyruvate. In other words, the ‘R’ depicted in the example above corresponds to a methyl group (- CH 3 ). The first step goes like this:"

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "223"
Paragraph 1 (249 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "224"
Paragraph 1 (86 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."
Paragraph 2 (113 words): "But that leaves the carbon short of electrons, which it must pick up from somewhere else instantaneously or the reaction won’t happen at all: The curly black arrow shown here denotes the movement of a pair of electrons, in this case the pair of electrons that form the C–S bond. The electrons move wh..."
Paragraph 3 (97 words): "Short of an immediate back-reaction (which would just revert to the starting point), where could the positively charged carbon atom pick up the pair of electrons it needs to regain stability? Not from CO 2 , because that faces a similar problem. CO 2 is not very reactive, as it has a stable bond str..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "225"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below."
Paragraph 2 (44 words) [SHORT]: "This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure depicted at the right in the reaction on the previous page."
Paragraph 3 (145 words): "You can imagine that the positive charges on the acetate shown above and the CO 2 shown here would not go anywhere near each other; but the pair of electrons transferred from ferredoxin makes a new C–C bond possible, joining the two positively charged carbon atoms together, by giving each one a sing..."
Paragraph 4 (27 words) [SHORT]: "There’s only one other thing to notice here. In the first scheme above, water is shown as a product. Yet that seems to have gone missing in"

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "226"
Paragraph 1 (140 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Biology magics water away."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "227"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "A PPENDIX 2"
Paragraph 2 (117 words): "THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA pathway. The ste..."
Paragraph 3 (142 words): "Acetyl CoA is not only the end-product of the acetyl CoA pathway; it’s also a key constituent of the reverse Krebs cycle. Rather than a closed cycle, I talked about a Krebs line in Chapter 3, which is to say, a linear pathway that continues the same repetitive chemistry as the acetyl CoA pathway, ex..."
Paragraph 4 (68 words): "This really is more of the same. Here’s what happens if an acetyl group is bound on near to another CO (check back to Chapter 3 if you can’t recall where the CO comes from). Once again, the acetyl group hops across to join the CO (the same Fischer–Tropsch-type chemistry), this time giving pyruvate (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "228"
Paragraph 1 (145 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "The next few steps build on what we’ve already seen, but alter the pattern slightly, because pyruvate possesses an extra double-bonded oxygen on the first carbon atom next to the carboxylate group, a so- called ‘alpha carbon’. This arrangement is unusually reactive. Here’s"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "229"
Paragraph 1 (14 words) [SHORT]: "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry."
Paragraph 2 (141 words): "Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that branching point in metabolism. In effect, the voracious, electron-hungry oxygen atom dra..."
Paragraph 3 (85 words): "In the absence of a phosphate, the likelihood of a stable enol form persisting is greater if a neighbouring molecule (be it an enzyme or mineral surface) can abstract a proton from the methyl group, as shown here. In this case, I’m not going to draw the pyruvate with its normal Cheshire Cat smile, b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "230"
Paragraph 1 (97 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."
Paragraph 2 (138 words): "The reactivity of the enol stems from its shape-changing behaviour, specifically the tendency of the carbon–carbon double bond to react with other molecules. In general, carbon–carbon double bonds are not especially reactive: if one of the electron pairs reacted with something else, it would leave a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "231"
Paragraph 1 (66 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."
Paragraph 2 (12 words) [SHORT]: "I’ve shown that at the top of the opposite page for completeness."
Paragraph 3 (123 words): "We’re nearly there. We’ve now synthesised three of the most deeply conserved molecules in all of metabolism (acetate, pyruvate and oxaloacetate) through a repetitious series of reactions that demands little more than CO 2 binding onto a surface that can transfer electrons. The last few steps take us..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "232"
Paragraph 1 (29 words) [SHORT]: "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side)."
Paragraph 2 (287 words): "The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is favoured in the acidic environment because it can immediately react with a proton to form water, helping to neutralise the acidic conditions. As before, water is formed easi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "233"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule."
Paragraph 2 (59 words) [SHORT]: "ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate leaves adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) plus inorganic phosphate ( P i ), which provides the energy needed to drive many reactions in the cell. The ATP synthas..."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "CoA Coenzyme A. A complex molecule containing a reactive thiol ( -SH ) that can bind to acetate (vinegar) to form acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all of metabolism."
Paragraph 4 (28 words) [SHORT]: "CO 2 Carbon dioxide. The ‘Lego brick’ from which almost all organic molecules are made in biochemistry via photosynthesis or by reacting with gases such as H 2"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in hydrothermal vents."
Paragraph 6 (33 words) [SHORT]: "-COOH Carboxylic acid group. Characteristic of all Krebs cycle molecules, which can have two or three such groups. The proton (H + ) dissociates easily, giving the carboxylate ( -COO – ) group."
Paragraph 7 (43 words) [SHORT]: "DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid. The hereditary material. Forms the famous double helix, composed of long chains of millions of letters (nucleotides) that pair together to form complementary strands. When prised apart, each strand acts as a template, allowing the precise sequence to be copied."
Paragraph 8 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Ech Energy-converting hydrogenase. A membrane protein that uses the flow of protons (H + ) to power the transfer of electrons from H 2 to ferredoxin, which in turn passes them on to CO 2 . A prebiotic version could have driven CO 2 fixation at the origin of life."
Paragraph 9 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Fd Ferredoxin. The red protein. An iron–sulfur protein with a unique power to transfer electrons onto CO 2 to form organic molecules. The form that transfers electrons is shortened to Fd 2– ."
Paragraph 10 (31 words) [SHORT]: "FeS cluster One of several different types of small inorganic clusters of iron and sulfur, containing just a few atoms, with structures similar to minerals. The classic is the 4Fe4S cluster."
Paragraph 11 (31 words) [SHORT]: "GSH Glutathione. GSH is the reduced form (containing H) and GSSG is the oxidised form (where an H has been extracted from each of two GSH molecules). An important cellular antioxidant."

=== NEW SECTION: 13 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "234"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases."
Paragraph 2 (26 words) [SHORT]: "H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "H 2 Hydrogen gas, composed of two hydrogen atoms covalently bound together."
Paragraph 4 (21 words) [SHORT]: "MAM Mitochondria-associated membranes. Part of an intracellular membrane system called the endoplasmic reticulum, where it is closely appositioned with the mitochondria."
Paragraph 5 (17 words) [SHORT]: "NAC N-acetyl cysteine. An antioxidant that can be taken as a dietary supplement. Too much is toxic."
Paragraph 6 (95 words): "NADH Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. One of the most important carriers of 2H, NADH is the form loaded with 2H, whereas NAD + has passed on its 2H (becoming oxidised). NAD + picks up 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates and then passes on the electrons to complex I in respiration. Technically, I sho..."
Paragraph 7 (76 words): "NADPH Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. A 2H carrier used in biosynthesis. NADP + is the oxidised form (lacking 2H). The ratio of NADPH to NADP + is pushed far from equilibrium, giving NADPH more power to force its 2H onto other molecules than NADH. Note that, as with NADH, NADPH actually..."
Paragraph 8 (58 words) [SHORT]: "pH A log scale for measuring the concentration of protons in water. Water ( H 2 O ) splits into H + and OH – ions. At neutral pH (7) their concentration is equal. At acidic pH (< 7) there is an excess of H + ions; at alkaline pH (> 7) there are more OH – ions."
Paragraph 9 (50 words) [SHORT]: "RNA Ribonucleic acid. A working copy of a gene, composed of a single strand of nucleotides linked together in a chain. Can fold into complex shapes and catalyse reactions (as a ribozyme) as well as acting as a hereditary molecule (in some viruses and in a hypothetical early ‘RNA world’)."
Paragraph 10 (30 words) [SHORT]: "ROS Reactive oxygen species. Reactive forms of oxygen that mostly form when oxygen grabs single electrons from FeS clusters in the respiratory chain to form ‘free radicals’ and related molecules."
Paragraph 11 (14 words) [SHORT]: "-SH A thiol, containing a sulfur joined to a hydrogen, which is quite reactive."
Paragraph 12 (16 words) [SHORT]: "Found in coenzyme A, the amino acid cysteine (and so many proteins) and the antioxidant glutathione."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "235"
Paragraph 1 (27 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "236"
Paragraph 1 (130 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."
Paragraph 2 (99 words): "Introduction: Life itself Leeuwenhoek and the inscrutability of cells Clifford Dobell, Antony van Leeuwenhoek and his ‘Little Animals’ (New York, Russell & Russell, 1958). A delightful if antiquated biography of van Leeuwenhoek by a distinguished protistologist who learnt Dutch to read Leeuwenhoek’s..."
Paragraph 3 (70 words): "Brian J. Ford, Single Lens: The Story of the Simple Microscope (New York, Harper & Row, 1985). A remarkable story by a master of microscopy, in which Ford rediscovers nine of Leeuwenhoek’s original samples hidden in the library of the Royal Society. He uses single-lens microscopes designed by Hooke ..."
Paragraph 4 (62 words): "N. Lane, ‘The unseen world: reflections on Leeuwenhoek (1677) “Concerning little animals”’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 370 (2015), 20140344. My own attempt to assess what van Leeuwenhoek’s discoveries mean for biologists today, written for the 350th anniversary edition of the ..."
Paragraph 5 (30 words) [SHORT]: "The paradox of information in biology Paul Davies, The Demon in the Machine: How Hidden Webs of Information are Finally Solving the Mystery of Life (London, Penguin, 2019). An eloquent"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "237"
Paragraph 1 (27 words) [SHORT]: "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life."
Paragraph 2 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical or informational (or the same thing)."
Paragraph 3 (63 words): "Erwin Schrödinger, What Is Life? (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1967). An ageless classic; one of the most influential science books of the twentieth century, which still rewards reading today. Wrong on plenty of details, but an unparalleled example of how far vision and clear thinking can ..."
Paragraph 4 (74 words): "L. D. Hansen, R. S. Criddle and E. H. Battley, ‘Biological calorimetry and the thermodynamics of the origination and evolution of life’, Pure and Applied Chemistry 81 (2009) 1843–1855. A technical paper that disagrees with Schrödinger’s take on the entropy of living systems – it is not nearly as low..."
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "The dynamic side Hopkins & Biochemistry 1861–1947. Papers concerning Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, OM, PRS, with a selection of his addresses and a bibliography of his publications. (Cambridge, W. Heffer & Sons, 1949). The title says it all. Many of Gowland Hopkins’s addresses and papers obsess abo..."
Paragraph 6 (68 words): "The unity of biochemistry D. D. Woods, ‘Albert Jan Kluyver’, Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 3 (1957) 109–128. A wonderful resource from the Royal Society – short biographical obituaries of their fellows since 1932, freely available here: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/journ..."
Paragraph 7 (30 words) [SHORT]: "H. C. Friedmann, ‘From “butyribacterium” to “E. coli”: an essay on unity in biochemistry’, Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , 47 (2004) 47–66. An entertaining history of a slippery idea."
Paragraph 8 (65 words): "R. Y. Stanier and C. B. van Niel, ‘The concept of a bacterium’, Archiv für Mikrobiologie 42 (1962) 17–35. A paper of wonderful insight, which to my mind brought to an end the classical era of microbiology, ceding precedence to the power of genetic information. Ironically, the scrambling power of lat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "238"
Paragraph 1 (59 words) [SHORT]: "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."
Paragraph 2 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Matthew Cobb, Life’s Greatest Secret. The Race to Crack the Genetic Code (London, Profile Books, 2015). A fascinating and authoritative history, which despite being further removed from the events than Judson, combines excitement with the benefit of (wise) hindsight, while bringing the genetics righ..."
Paragraph 3 (123 words): "F. H. C. Crick, J. S. Griffith and L. E. Orgel, ‘Codes without commas’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 43 (1957) 416–427. One of the most brilliantly wrong papers in the history of science, which explained how a triplet code that could encompass 64 amino acids actually coded the..."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "David S. Goodsell, The Machinery of Life (New York, Copernicus Books, 2009)."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Goodsell is a wonderful artist, whose utterly precise images bring the molecular machinery of life alive in a unique and instantly recognizable way; he even writes well. Is there a biochemist unaware of his work?"
Paragraph 6 (37 words) [SHORT]: "The molecular genetic paradigm of medicine David Weatherall, Science and the Quiet Art. Medical Research and Patient Care (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1995). An eloquent and thoughtful introduction to the molecular genetic paradigm that underpins modern medicine."
Paragraph 7 (55 words) [SHORT]: "James D. Watson, Tania A. Baker, Stephen P. Bell, Alexander Gann, Michael Levine and Richard Losick, Molecular Biology of the Gene , 7th edn (Pearson, 2013). The classic molecular biology textbook, originally by Watson and now a larger group; as close to the paradigm of molecular medicine as it poss..."
Paragraph 8 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Deep unity of biochemistry – the conserved city-centre plan E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, ‘Universality in intermediary metabolism’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101 (2004) 13168–13173."

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "239"
Paragraph 1 (18 words) [SHORT]: "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362"
Paragraph 3 (29 words) [SHORT]: "(2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably influenced my own thinking more than any other. Manages to be thrillingly original while remaining always balanced and scholarly. A masterpiece."
Paragraph 4 (42 words) [SHORT]: "The Krebs cycle Steven Rose, The Chemistry of Life , new edn (London, Penguin, 1999). A classic introduction to biochemistry that caught my imagination when I was at school, and to which I pay oblique homage in the subtitle of this book."
Paragraph 5 (44 words) [SHORT]: "Philip Ball, Molecules: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2003). Originally published as Stories of the Invisible , Ball covers the Krebs cycle and some basic metabolic biochemistry in brief as part of a wider canvas. Ball just doesn’t do small canvases."
Paragraph 6 (87 words): "Harold Baum, The Biochemists’ Songbook , 2nd edn (London Taylor and Francis, 1995). A classic, witty setting of intermediary biochemistry to music, through which generations of biochemistry students desperately crammed for exams. Just to give you a feel, the Krebs cycle is set to Waltzing Matilda an..."
Paragraph 7 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Konrad Bloch, Blondes in Venetian Paintings, the Nine-Banded Armadillo and Other Essays in Biochemistry (New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1997)."
Paragraph 8 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Seriously! An enjoyable and informative read from a distinguished biochemist, who makes it very clear why most biochemical pathways don’t run in both directions."
Paragraph 9 (73 words): "If pigs could fly chemistry L. Orgel, ‘The implausibility of metabolic cycles on the prebiotic Earth’, PLoS Biology 6 (2008) e18. Orgel didn’t mince his words, also describing the idea that metal ions or minerals could catalyse a whole suite of prebiotic reactions as ‘an appeal to magic’. He died in..."
Paragraph 10 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Chapter 1: Discovering the nanocosm Hopkins’s biochemistry lab F. Gowland Hopkins, ‘Atomic physics and vital activities’, Nature 130 (1932) 869–871. The text of Gowland Hopkins’s anniversary address to the Royal"

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "240"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Society in 1932."
Paragraph 2 (85 words): "H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder about the value ..."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Hans Krebs, Reminiscences and Reflections (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1981). An enjoyable and interesting read, published just after Krebs died, and perhaps for that reason containing a number of uncharacteristic errors in the equations."
Paragraph 4 (60 words): "Soňa Štrbáňová, Holding Hands with Bacteria. The Life and Work of Marjory Stephenson (Berlin, Springer, 2016). A really worthwhile biography of one of the most brilliant and influential female scientists in Britain in the first half of the twentieth century. (But why is it so expensive?) Krebs in Ca..."
Paragraph 5 (20 words) [SHORT]: "(suppl) (1980) K11–K15. Very charming recollections of the young Hans Krebs from a lifelong friend in both Germany and Britain."
Paragraph 6 (12 words) [SHORT]: "H. Kornberg and D. H. Williamson, ‘Hans Adolf Krebs, 25 August 1900–22"
Paragraph 7 (11 words) [SHORT]: "November 1981’, Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 30"
Paragraph 8 (24 words) [SHORT]: "(1984) 349–385. Concludes with an appraisal of Krebs’s approach to science, asking how he attracted the affection and lifelong loyalty of so many people."
Paragraph 9 (91 words): "From personal experience, they write ‘It was in a sense reassuring, and endearing, to discover that Hans was not an accomplished experimenter or even a very practical person. ... Above all, there shone through all his writings and actions a burning passion for truth, a distrust and dislike of all th..."
Paragraph 10 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Otto Warburg and respirometry Otto Warburg, The Oxygen-Transferring Ferment of Respiration, Nobel Lecture, 10 December 1931. Available from: www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1931/warburg/lecture/. A marvellous and inspiring piece, which captures all that is best about Warburg."
Paragraph 11 (44 words) [SHORT]: "P. Oesper, ‘The history of the Warburg apparatus. Some reminiscences on its use’, Journal of Chemical Education 41 (1964) 294–296. An enjoyably breezy short history that explains how Warburg’s name came to be associated with an instrument invented by T. G. Brodie and others."

=== NEW SECTION: 13 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "241"
Paragraph 1 (39 words) [SHORT]: "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard."
Paragraph 2 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘Lost in the Twentieth Century’, Annual Review of Biochemistry 32 (1963) 1–15. A short autobiography of one of the most brilliant and restless characters in biochemistry, including an account of his spying exploits in the second world war."
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "Albert Szent-Györgyi, The Living State. With Observations on Cancer (London and New York, Academic Press, 1972). Some mesmerising lines but I have to say a bit of an eccentric book. He thought about life in the right way, but to my mind never took Peter Mitchell’s thinking about electrical membrane ..."
Paragraph 4 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Albert Szent-Györgyi, The Crazy Ape (New York, Philosophical Library, 1970)."
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Quite a disturbed book with short, revolutionary essays."
Paragraph 6 (44 words) [SHORT]: "Albert Szent-Györgyi, Oxidation, Energy Transfer, and Vitamins, Nobel Lecture, 11 December 1937. Available from: www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/szent- gyorgyi-lecture.pdf. Szent-Györgyi won the Nobel prize in 1937, the same year that Krebs published his cycle. Here Szent-Györgyi ponders how it a..."
Paragraph 7 (17 words) [SHORT]: "J. J. Farmer, B. R. Davis, W. B. Cherry, D. J. Brenner, V. R. Dowell and A."
Paragraph 8 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Balows, ‘50 years ago: the theory of Szent-Györgyi’, Trends in Biochemical Sciences 10 (1985) 35–38. A short but dense dip into biochemical history. Puts Szent-Györgyi’s conception of carboxylic acids being the carriers of 2H to oxygen into context."
Paragraph 9 (67 words): "Discovery of the Krebs cycle H. A. Krebs and W. A. Johnson, ‘The role of citric acid in intermediary metabolism in animal tissues’, Enzymologica 4 (1937) 148–156. The classic non- Nature paper on the Krebs cycle, written with W. A. Johnson, who did most of the experimental work. Johnson’s contributi..."
Paragraph 10 (39 words) [SHORT]: "(1993) 61–62, ‘William Arthur Johnson – a postgraduate’s contribution to the Krebs cycle.’ H. A. Krebs, ‘The intermediate metabolism of carbohydrates’, Lancet 230 (1937) 736–738. An immediate perspective on the cycle, written by Krebs alone and aimed at medics."
Paragraph 11 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: The Formation of a Scientific Life 1900–1933 ."
Paragraph 12 (11 words) [SHORT]: "Volume 1 (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991). A monumental tome of"

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "242"
Paragraph 1 (27 words) [SHORT]: "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle."
Paragraph 2 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1993). The second monumental volume of Holmes’s scientific biography, covering the Krebs cycle itself, more or less experiment by experiment. Hard work, but captures a lot of ..."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Hans A. Krebs, The Citric Acid Cycle, Nobel Lecture, 11 December 1953."
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Available from: https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1953/krebs/lecture/."
Paragraph 5 (119 words): "A nice history, including thoughts on the role of the cycle in biosynthesis as well as the evolution of energy metabolism. He finishes with the prescient lines: ‘The presence of the same mechanism of energy production in all forms of life suggests two other inferences, firstly, that the mechanism of..."
Paragraph 6 (56 words) [SHORT]: "J. M. Buchanan, ‘Biochemistry during the life and times of Hans Krebs and Fritz Lipmann’, Journal of Biological Chemistry 277 (2002) 33531–33536. Some interesting recollections on these two pioneers of intermediary metabolism from another distinguished biochemist, John Buchanan, who was an early pio..."
Paragraph 7 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Fritz Lipmann and acetyl CoA G. D. Novelli and F. Lipmann, ‘The catalytic function of coenzyme A in citric acid synthesis’, Journal of Biological Chemistry 182 (1950) 213–228. The paper that finally made sense of the first step of the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 8 (74 words): "Fritz Lipmann, Wanderings of a Biochemist (New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1971). Lipmann’s autobiography mixed with essays and papers. An eclectic read, full of interest both historical and scientific. Includes his paper on the origin of life, which begins with ‘My basic motivation for entering into..."
Paragraph 9 (36 words) [SHORT]: "W. P. Jenks and R. V. Wolfenden, ‘Fritz Albert Lipmann’, Biographical Memoirs 88 (2006) 246–266. The US National Academy of Sciences equivalent to the Royal Society Memoirs . Features the memorable closing line that Lipmann died"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "243"
Paragraph 1 (24 words) [SHORT]: "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed."
Paragraph 2 (128 words): "Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, 8 December 1978. Available here: https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/mitchell-lecture.pdf. The fascinating story of Mitchell’s own thinking, pa..."
Paragraph 3 (67 words): "John Prebble and Bruce Webber, Wandering in the Gardens of the Mind (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2003). A fascinating, detailed biography of Mitchell, scholarly, sympathetic, and extremely knowledgeable, from two biochemists steeped in membrane bioenergetics and its history. They have also publ..."
Paragraph 4 (52 words) [SHORT]: "R. E. Davies and H. A. Krebs, ‘Biochemical aspects of the transport of ions by nervous tissue’, Proceedings of the Biochemical Society 50 (1952) xxi. An abstract that captures the essence of the chemiosmotic idea nearly a decade before Mitchell; but I’m not surprised Mitchell missed it. This is a st..."
Paragraph 5 (48 words) [SHORT]: "A. T. Jagendorf, ‘Chance, luck and photosynthesis research: an inside story’, Photosynthesis Research 57 (1998) 215–229. An entertaining personal account of bioenergetics around the time of Mitchell’s hypothesis, and Jagendorf’s own seminal experiment that first persuaded a sceptical field. Jagendor..."
Paragraph 6 (72 words): "Mitchell and Moyle P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Stoichiometry of proton translocation through the respiratory chain and adenosine triphosphatase systems of rat liver mitochondria’, Nature 208 (1965) 147–151. One of the classic papers published by Mitchell and Moyle in Nature in the mid-1960s, less ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "244"
Paragraph 1 (34 words) [SHORT]: "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis."
Paragraph 2 (27 words) [SHORT]: "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemiosmotic hypothesis of oxidative phosphorylation’, Nature 213 (1967) 137–139. A detailed rebuttal of criticisms, containing a summary of Moyle’s experimental evidence."
Paragraph 3 (18 words) [SHORT]: "Paul Boyer and the ATP synthase Paul D. Boyer, Energy, Life and ATP, Nobel Lecture, 8 December 1997."
Paragraph 4 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Available here: https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/boyer-lecture.pdf. A remarkable story of how Boyer conceived the mechanism of rotational catalysis of the ATP synthase, including his early drawings. Sir John Walker shared the prize that year for his X-ray crystallography structure showing ..."
Paragraph 5 (40 words) [SHORT]: "J. N. Prebble, ‘Contrasting approaches to a biological problem: Paul Boyer, Peter Mitchell and the mechanism of the ATP synthase’, Journal of the History of Biology 46 (2013) 699–737. Another fine piece on the history of bioenergetics from John Prebble."
Paragraph 6 (16 words) [SHORT]: "The mechanism of proton pumping M. Wikström, ‘Recollections. How I became a biochemist’, IUBMB Life 60"
Paragraph 7 (73 words): "(2008) 414–417. A memoir of the later ‘ox phos wars’, over the mechanism of proton pumping, especially cytochrome oxidase. Mitchell resisted the idea of conformational change in proteins for eight years, before eventually conceding that Wikström and colleagues’ interpretations were correct. Mitchell..."
Paragraph 8 (14 words) [SHORT]: "Franklin M. Harold, The Vital Force: A Study of Bioenergetics (New York, W. H."
Paragraph 9 (79 words): "Freeman, 1986). An unusually personable textbook from one of the pioneers of membrane bioenergetics, which gives a clear view of the chemiosmotic hypothesis. Harold has written several books for the general public which are eloquent, thoughtful and nuanced attempts to confront the biggest questions ..."
Paragraph 10 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Evolution of the Krebs cycle J. E. Baldwin and H. A. Krebs, ‘The evolution of metabolic cycles’, Nature 291"
Paragraph 11 (14 words) [SHORT]: "(1981) 381–382. An influential paper that stands out in my mind for not even"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "245"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic text in biochemistry, this is a detailed molecular exploration, which benefits from Hans Kornberg’s microbiological perspectiv..."
Paragraph 3 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Endosymbiosis and mitochondria Nick Lane, The Vital Question: Why Is Life the Way it Is? (London, Profile Books, 2015). Published by W. W. Norton in the US with the subtitle Energy, Evolution and the Origins of Complex Life . My own take on how bioenergetics shaped the origin of life and the evoluti..."
Paragraph 4 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Nick Lane, Power, Sex, Suicide: Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2018). Reprinted with a new introduction as part of the Oxford Landmark Science series (quite an honour). An older take on the importance of mitochondria, but with more background on both Mitchell ..."
Paragraph 5 (65 words): "Chapter 2: The path of carbon Rubisco S. G. Wildman, ‘Along the trail from Fraction I protein to Rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase’, Photosynthesis Research 73 (2002) 243– 250. Or how rubisco got its name. A fascinating historical piece in Photosynthesis Research , which under the..."
Paragraph 6 (80 words): "R. J. Ellis, ‘The most abundant protein in the world’, Trends in Biochemical Sciences 4 (1979) 241–244. A delightfully precise piece that explores why rubisco is so inefficient. John Ellis is one of the clearest thinkers I know, and I strongly recommend his short book on evolution, How Science works..."
Paragraph 7 (37 words) [SHORT]: "R. J. Ellis, ‘Tackling unintelligent design’, Nature 463 (2010) 164–165. An interesting commentary from John Ellis on attempts to improve the activity of Rubisco by refolding the cyanobacterial version using chaperone proteins – discovered by Ellis himself."
Paragraph 8 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Lawrence and the Rad Lab Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). A remarkable and absorbing scientific biography, with many memorable character portraits of the leading"

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "246"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record."
Paragraph 2 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a planetary scale with a compelling analysis of how to counter the climate emergency."
Paragraph 3 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Angela N. H. Creager, Life Atomic: A History of Radioisotopes in Science and Medicine (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2015). A scholarly history of the development of radioisotopes in relation to the emergence of Cold War science and the ‘porous civilian–military divide’."
Paragraph 4 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Early carbon isotope work S. Ruben, W. Z. Hassid and M. D. Kamen, ‘Radioactive carbon in the study of photosynthesis’, Journal of the American Chemical Society 61 (1939) 661–663."
Paragraph 5 (26 words) [SHORT]: "The first publication from Sam Ruben, Zev Hassid and Martin Kamen on the (crazy) use of 11 C for tracking the path of carbon in photosynthesis."
Paragraph 6 (74 words): "C. B. Van Niel, S. Ruben, S. F . Carson, M. D. Kamen and J. W. Foster, ‘Radioactive carbon as an indicator of carbon dioxide utilization: VIII. The role of carbon dioxide in cellular metabolism’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 28 (1942) 8–15. A thoughtful exploration of how CO 2..."
Paragraph 7 (36 words) [SHORT]: "S. Ruben, ‘Photosynthesis and phosphorylation’, Journal of the American Chemical Society 65 (1943) 279–282. Sam Ruben gets so far as to suggest that the molecule that accepts CO 2 in photosynthesis could be a sugar phosphate."
Paragraph 8 (25 words) [SHORT]: "S. Ruben and M. D Kamen, ‘Long-lived radioactive carbon: C14’, Physical Review 59 (1941) 349–354. The paper that first introduced 14 C to the world."
Paragraph 9 (23 words) [SHORT]: "The path of carbon in photosynthesis J. A. Bassham, A. A. Benson, L. D. Kay, A. Z. Harris, A. T. Wilson and M."
Paragraph 10 (64 words): "Calvin, ‘The path of carbon in photosynthesis. XXI. The cyclic regeneration of carbon dioxide acceptor’, Journal of the American Chemical Society 76 (1954) 1760–1770. Number 21! Finally they nailed it. It should be said this is not slow for a major breakthrough. The road less travelled is easily los..."
Paragraph 11 (45 words) [SHORT]: "A. A. Benson, ‘Following the path of carbon in photosynthesis: a personal story’, Photosynthesis Research 73 (2002) 29–49. Benson said little about his time with Calvin until decades later, when he finally broke his silence. One senses he was trying hard not to be bitter."

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "247"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson."
Paragraph 2 (107 words): "T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An excellent, detailed scientific outline of the whole period of discovery with a balanced final analysis of the rift between Calvin and Benson. While noting that Benson was not blameless in ..."
Paragraph 3 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Photophosphorylation D. I. Arnon, F. R. Whatley and M. B. Allen, ‘Photosynthesis by isolated chloroplasts. II. Photosynthetic phosphorylation, the conversion of light into phosphate bond energy’, Journal of the American Chemical Society 76 (1954) 6324–6329. The paper that made Daniel Arnon’s name; t..."
Paragraph 4 (14 words) [SHORT]: "Published in the same volume as the paper that led to Calvin’s Nobel prize."
Paragraph 5 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Reverse Krebs cycle K. V. Thimann, ‘The absorption of carbon dioxide in photosynthesis’, Science 88"
Paragraph 6 (35 words) [SHORT]: "(1938) 506–507. A beautiful short hypothesis from Kenneth Thimann, who more or less predicts the reverse Krebs cycle as the mechanism of CO 2 fixation in photosynthesis, just a year after Krebs proposed his cycle."
Paragraph 7 (10 words) [SHORT]: "D. I. Arnon, ‘Ferredoxin and photosynthesis’, Science 149 (1965) 1460–1470."
Paragraph 8 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Ferredoxin was discovered in the early 1960s and in this paper Arnon brought together an impressive set of experimental observations, ending with the teaser ‘Evidence for the participation of bacterial ferredoxin in bacterial photophosphorylation is being actively sought.’ The reverse Krebs cycle fo..."
Paragraph 9 (51 words) [SHORT]: "M. C. Evans, B. B. Buchanan and D. I. Arnon, ‘A new ferredoxin-dependent carbon reduction cycle in a photosynthetic bacterium’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 55 (1966) 928–934. An all-time classic paper, which somehow remained controversial or ignored over the following quarter..."
Paragraph 10 (15 words) [SHORT]: "B. B. Buchanan, R. Sirevåg, G. Fuchs, R. N. Ivanovsky, Y. Igarashi, M. Ishii, F."
Paragraph 11 (34 words) [SHORT]: "R. Tabita and I. A. Berg, ‘The Arnon–Buchanan cycle: a retrospective, 1966– 2016’, Photosynthesis Research 134 (2017) 117–131. A fascinating compendium of recollections from the main protagonists of the reverse Krebs cycle, fifty years"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "248"
Paragraph 1 (18 words) [SHORT]: "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known."
Paragraph 2 (38 words) [SHORT]: "B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his friend and long-term colleague Bob Buchanan."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "B. B. Buchanan, ‘Thioredoxin: an unexpected meeting place’, Photosynthesis Research 92 (2007) 145–148. Bob Buchanan’s account of the difficult relationship between Calvin and Arnon, and how Andrew Benson later bridged the intellectual gap."
Paragraph 4 (103 words): "The problems with peer review Don Braben, Scientific Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization (San Francisco, Stripe Press, 2020). A fine book that makes the case for rethinking how science is funded. Peer review is deeply conservative and tends to oppose toppling the status quo. Radical new ideas do exa..."
Paragraph 5 (79 words): "Ferredoxin and photorespiration J. Ormerod, ‘“Every dogma has its day”: a personal look at carbon metabolism in photosynthetic bacteria’, Photosynthesis Research 76 (2003) 135–143. Yes, I stole his phrase. A very personable account from an experimentalist and deep thinker, who started out doing mano..."
Paragraph 6 (79 words): "Y. Shomura, M. Taketa, H. Nakashima et al. , ‘Structural basis of the redox switches in the NAD + -reducing soluble [NiFe]-hydrogenase’, Science 357 (2017) 928–932. A neat paper, which shows that an H 2 -oxidising bacterium can survive exposure to oxygen by switching its hydrogenase enzymes to an in..."
Paragraph 7 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Widespread reverse Krebs cycle A. Mall, J. Sobotta, C. Huber et al ., ‘Reversibility of citrate synthase allows autotrophic growth of a thermophilic bacterium’, Science 359 (2018) 563–567. A"

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "249"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all."
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "So do dogmas fall."
Paragraph 3 (15 words) [SHORT]: "L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I."
Paragraph 4 (73 words): "A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive the TCA cycle backwards towards autotrophy’, Nature 592 (2021) 784–788. Another paper from Ivan Berg’s group, this time showing that high atmospheric CO 2 (as on the early Earth) tends to drive the normal oxidative cycle in reverse, to fix CO 2 . From being restricte..."
Paragraph 5 (13 words) [SHORT]: "I. A. Berg, ‘Ecological aspects on the distribution of different autotrophic CO 2"
Paragraph 6 (40 words) [SHORT]: "fixation pathways’, Applied and Environmental Microbiology 77 (2011) 1925– 1936. One of the pioneers of alternative CO 2 fixation pathways reflects on their distribution and ecology; now a little dated by his own recent discoveries, but still full of insight."
Paragraph 7 (71 words): "Chapter 3: From gases to life Discovery of black smoker vents J. B. Corliss, J. A. Baross and S. . Hoffman, ‘An hypothesis concerning the relationship between submarine hot springs and the origin of life on earth’, Oceanologica Acta Special Issue (1981) 0399-1784. Hot on the heels of the discovery o..."
Paragraph 8 (50 words) [SHORT]: "J. A. Baross and S. E. Hoffman, ‘Submarine hydrothermal vents and associated gradient environments as sites for the origin and evolution of life’, Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 15 (1985) 327–345. A serious wrestling with how steep chemical gradients in hydrothermal environments could p..."
Paragraph 9 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Discovering Hydrothermal Vents. A wealth of interesting information on the discovery of black smokers on the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute: https://www.whoi.edu/feature/history-hydrothermal-vents/index.html. WHOI commissioned the Alvin submersible in 1964, and have maintained it over nearly 60 ..."
Paragraph 10 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Reanalysis of early Earth hydrothermal systems W. Martin, J. Baross, D. Kelley and M. J. Russell, ‘Hydrothermal vents and the origin of life’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 805–814. A good overview of the different types of vent system and their roles at the origin of life, from two distingui..."

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "250"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excellent article that considers how the geological record constrains hydrothermal theories for the origin of life."
Paragraph 3 (28 words) [SHORT]: "N. T. Arndt and E. G. Nisbet, ‘Processes on the young Earth and the habitats of early life’, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 40 (2012) 521–49."
Paragraph 4 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Gives a good sense of how geologists’ understanding of the Hadean has shifted in recent decades; no longer is the early Earth thought of as a hellhole of boiling magma and asteroid impacts, but rather as a relatively tranquil waterworld."
Paragraph 5 (13 words) [SHORT]: "F. Westall, K. Hickman-Lewis, N. Hinman, P. Gautret, K. A. Campbell, J. G."
Paragraph 6 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Breheret, F. Foucher, A. Hubert, S. Sorieul, A. V. Dass, T. P. Kee, T. Georgelin and A. Brack, ‘A hydrothermal-sedimentary context for the origin of life’, Astrobiology 18 (2018) 259–293. A well-balanced overview of geological conditions on the early Earth in relation to life’s origins."
Paragraph 7 (86 words): "Mike Russell and Gunter Wächtershäuser G. Wächtershäuser, ‘Evolution of the first metabolic cycles’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 87 (1990) 200–204. One of the first papers to take the reverse Krebs cycle seriously as prebiotic chemistry, giving a detailed exposition of how it..."
Paragraph 8 (47 words) [SHORT]: "G. Wächtershäuser, ‘Groundworks for an evolutionary biochemistry: the iron– sulphur world’, Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 58 (1992) 85– 201. An exhaustive, revolutionary thesis, detailing much of Wächtershäuser’s early thinking on an autotrophic origin of life. More of a whole book th..."
Paragraph 9 (77 words): "M. J. Russell and A. J. Hall, ‘The emergence of life from iron monosulphide bubbles at a submarine hydrothermal redox and pH front’, Journal of the Geological Society 154 (1997) 377–402. Mike Russell and Allan Hall had been writing papers on alkaline hydrothermal vents for nearly a decade at this po..."
Paragraph 10 (30 words) [SHORT]: "W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells’, Philosophical"

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "251"
Paragraph 1 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science."
Paragraph 2 (37 words) [SHORT]: "J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitly, in this case even including a photoshopped image of Russell as the renaissance man Erasmus."
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Quite a tribute."
Paragraph 4 (76 words): "Discovery of Lost City D. S. Kelley, J. A. Karson, D. K. Blackman, G. L. Früh-Green, D. A. Butterfield, M. D. Lilley, E. J. Olson, M. O. Schrenk, K. K. Roe, G. T. Lebon, P. Rivizzigno; AT3-60 Shipboard Party, ‘An off-axis hydrothermal vent field near the Mid- Atlantic Ridge at 30 degrees N’, Nature ..."
Paragraph 5 (24 words) [SHORT]: "D. S. Kelley, J. A. Karson, G. L. Früh-Green et al ., ‘A serpentinite-hosted ecosystem: the Lost City hydrothermal field,’ Science 307 (2005) 1428–1434."
Paragraph 6 (21 words) [SHORT]: "More on Lost City from Deborah Kelley and colleagues, linking the geology to the chemistry and microbiology of this iconic system."
Paragraph 7 (57 words) [SHORT]: "D. S. Kelley, ‘From the mantle to microbes: the Lost City hydro-thermal field’, Oceanography 18 (2005) 32–45. A personal piece by Deborah Kelley, who captained the Alvin submersible on that serendipitous discovery of Lost City in 2000. Richly illustrated and with an exciting early view of the signif..."
Paragraph 8 (118 words): "Terrestrial geothermal systems David W. Deamer, Assembling Life: How Can Life Begin on Earth and Other Habitable Planets? (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2019). David Deamer has worked on the origin of life over several decades and did pioneering work on lipid membranes and proto-cells, including ..."
Paragraph 9 (75 words): "A. Y. Mulkidjanian, A. Y. Bychkov, D. V. Dibrova, M. Y. Galperin, E. V. Koonin, ‘Origin of first cells at terrestrial, anoxic geothermal fields’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 109 (2012) E821–830. Armen Mulkidjanian is a distinguished bioenergeticist who has had some strikingly..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "252"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading."
Paragraph 2 (127 words): "J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a prominent chemist who has developed an impressive network of prebiotic chemistry to synthesise many of the core building blocks of life, including nucleotides,..."
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "J. Szostak, ‘How did life begin?’, Nature 557 (2018) S13–S15. Jack Szostak won the Nobel prize for his work on telomeres and since then has focused on the origin of life, producing many fine papers. He works closely with John Sutherland on prebiotic chemistry and has little sympathy with the idea of..."
Paragraph 4 (70 words): "This article includes the line: ‘Strikingly, many of the chemical intermediates on the way to RNA crystallize out of re action mixtures, self-purifying and potentially accumulating on the early Earth as organic minerals – reservoirs of material waiting to come to life when conditions change.’ This c..."
Paragraph 5 (69 words): "Protometabolism using life as a guide Christian De Duve, Singularities. Landmarks on the Pathways of Life (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2005). I didn’t mention de Duve’s thinking much in this book but I should have done. Like Morowitz, de Duve focused on how geochemistry could give rise to..."
Paragraph 6 (85 words): "M. Preiner, K. Igarashi, K. B. Muchowska, M. Yu, S. J. Varma, K. Kleinermanns, M. K. Nobu, Y. Kamagata, H. Tüysüz, J. Moran and W. F. Martin, ‘A hydrogen- dependent geochemical analogue of primordial carbon and energy metabolism’, Nature Ecology and Evolution 4 (2020) 534–542. Three different groups..."
Paragraph 7 (15 words) [SHORT]: "The immediate electron donor here is hydrogen, not raw iron – as happens in life."
Paragraph 8 (50 words) [SHORT]: "S. J. Varma, K. B. Muchowska, P. Chatelain and J. Moran, ‘Native iron reduces CO 2 to intermediates and end-products of the acetyl-CoA pathway’, Nature Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018) 1019–1024. Joseph Moran’s group is unusual in that they trained as synthetic chemists, yet are thinking from a bioche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "253"
Paragraph 1 (54 words) [SHORT]: "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."
Paragraph 2 (23 words) [SHORT]: "K. B. Muchowska, S. J. Varma and J. Moran, ‘Synthesis and breakdown of universal metabolic precursors promoted by iron’, Nature 569 (2019) 104–107."
Paragraph 3 (67 words): "Some wild loops around the Krebs cycle driven by glyoxylate, a two-carbon intermediate that ‘short-circuits’ the Krebs cycle in plants and some bacteria (the glyoxylate cycle was also discovered by Krebs, working with Hans Kornberg and published in Nature in 1957). I’m not sure how close to life’s c..."
Paragraph 4 (25 words) [SHORT]: "M. Ralser, ‘An appeal to magic? The discovery of a non-enzymatic metabolism and its role in the origins of life’, Biochemical Journal 475 (2018) 2577–2592."
Paragraph 5 (90 words): "An expert on metabolic biochemistry in health, Markus Ralser has published a number of important papers on how metabolic pathways arose before genes, with experimental work showing that glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway, gluconeogenesis and parts of the Krebs cycle can all operate as spontan..."
Paragraph 6 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Michael Madigan, Kelly Bender, Daniel Buckley, W. Matthew Sattley and David Stahl, Brock Biology of Microorganisms , 15th edn (London, Pearson, 2018). One of the few microbiology textbooks that grapples in a serious way with the origin of life. Given the parallels between vent chemistry and microbia..."
Paragraph 7 (54 words) [SHORT]: "H. Hartman, ‘Speculations on the origin and evolution of metabolism’, Journal of Molecular Evolution 4 (1975) 359–70. An old but still penetrating paper, one of the first to think through metabolic chemistry starting from CO 2 in terms of the Krebs cycle, not so long after the early papers on the re..."
Paragraph 8 (81 words): "The physiology of LUCA M. C. Weiss, F. L. Sousa, N. Mrnjavac, S. Neukirchen, M. Roettger, S. Nelson- Sathi and W. F. Martin, ‘The physiology and habitat of the last universal common ancestor’, Nature Microbiology 1 (2016) 16116. A controversial paper that attempts to tack around the knotty problem o..."
Paragraph 9 (26 words) [SHORT]: "While some details have been decried, the paper reinforces the idea that LUCA lived from H 2 and CO 2 using proton gradients and iron–sulfur proteins."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "254"
Paragraph 1 (92 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."
Paragraph 2 (55 words) [SHORT]: "F. L. Sousa, T. Thiergart, G. Landan, S. Nelson-Sathi, I. A. C. Pereira, J. F. Allen, N. Lane and W. F. Martin, ‘Early bioenergetic evolution’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 368 (2013) 20130088. A detailed paper that attempts to constrain the earliest steps of evolution in terms ..."
Paragraph 3 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Acetyl CoA pathway M. J. Russell and W. Martin, ‘The rocky roots of the acetyl-CoA pathway’, Trends in Biochemical Sciences 29 (2004) 358–363. A little gem of a paper, which points to the ubiquity of metal ion clusters, notably iron–sulfur clusters, in the most ancient metabolic pathways."
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "G. Fuchs, ‘Alternative pathways of carbon dioxide fixation: insights into the early evolution of life?’, Annual Review of Microbiology 65 (2011) 631–658."
Paragraph 5 (51 words) [SHORT]: "There are only six known pathways of CO 2 fixation, and this authoritative and detailed paper from Georg Fuchs (who had a hand in discovering three of them) considers what they say about the earliest stages of life. In essence, they point to the centrality of both acetyl CoA and ferredoxin."
Paragraph 6 (65 words): "W. Nitschke, S. E. McGlynn, J. Milner-White and M. J. Russell, ‘On the antiquity of metalloenzymes and their substrates in bioenergetics’, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Bioenergetics 1827 (2013) 871–881. Wolfgang Nitschke trained as a physicist before turning to molecular biology. He has profound in..."
Paragraph 7 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Harold Morowitz and the reverse Krebs cycle Harold J. Morowitz, Energy Flow in Biology (New York, Academic Press, 1968)."
Paragraph 8 (18 words) [SHORT]: "A classic work, where Morowitz introduces the idea that energy flows, matter cycles. Difficult and mathematical but worthwhile."
Paragraph 9 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Eric Smith and Harold J. Morowitz, The Origin and Nature of Life on Earth: The Emergence of the Fourth Geosphere (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2016). A magisterial volume, and fitting final testament of Morowitz, written with his long-term collaborator, the equally brilliant Eric Smith. De..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "255"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive."
Paragraph 2 (49 words) [SHORT]: "J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213. A fine short piece that is serious but accessible, with an enjoyable title that puns on thermodynamics and Darwin’s Descent of Man ."
Paragraph 3 (73 words): "Leslie Orgel and an appeal to magic L. Orgel, ‘Self-organizing biochemical cycles’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 97 (2000) 12503–12507. Orgel wrote this paper as a direct refutation of Morowitz, describing the idea of self-organising cycles as ‘an appeal to magic’. He warmed t..."
Paragraph 4 (91 words): "Nucleotide synthesis using life as a guide S. A. Harrison and N. Lane, ‘Life as a guide to prebiotic nucleotide synthesis’, Nature Communications 9 (2018) 5176–5177. Stuart Harrison did his PhD in my lab and is now working with me as a post-doc. This little paper laid out our ideas for how nucleotid..."
Paragraph 5 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Magic surfaces G. D. Cody, N. Z. Boctor, R. M. Hazen, J. A. Brandes, H. J. Morowitz, H. S."
Paragraph 6 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Yodor Jr, ‘Geochemical roots of autotrophic carbon fixation: hydrothermal experiments in the system citric acid, H 2 O-(±FeS)-(±NiS)’, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 65 (2001) 3557–3576. Early work on the propensity of iron- sulfide minerals to catalyse the chemistry of the Krebs cycle from George ..."
Paragraph 7 (47 words) [SHORT]: "E. Camprubi, S. F. Jordan, R. Vasiliadou and N. Lane, ‘Iron catalysis at the origin of life’, IUBMB Life 69 (2017) 373–381. A theoretical chemistry paper that details the reverse Krebs cycle (or rather, line) as we imagine it occurring across the surface of semiconducting iron–nickel–sulfur minerals..."
Paragraph 8 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Methanogens as a guide R. K. Thauer, A.-K. Kaster, H. Seedorf, W. Buckel and R. Hedderich, ‘Methanogenic archaea: ecologically relevant differences in energy conservation’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 579–591. A treasure-trove of data and mechanisms on the energetics of making a living at t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "256"
Paragraph 1 (75 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."
Paragraph 2 (16 words) [SHORT]: "pH gradients N. Lane, J. F. Allen and W. Martin, ‘How did LUCA make a living?"
Paragraph 3 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Chemiosmosis in the origin of life’, BioEssays 32 (2010) 271–280. Wrestling with the problems of how and when chemiosmotic coupling might have arisen in early cells. In retrospect I think we focused too much attention on ATP, and not enough on CO 2 fixation, but that’s a bone of contention."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "N. Lane, ‘Why are cells powered by proton gradients?’, Nature Education 3"
Paragraph 5 (41 words) [SHORT]: "(2010) 18. A concise account of the problem and possible solutions, as part of a series of really valuable short articles aimed at students and a general scientific readership. Do take a look at Scitable , home of this educational resource."
Paragraph 6 (40 words) [SHORT]: "N. Lane and W. Martin, ‘The origin of membrane bioenergetics’, Cell 151 (2012) 1406–1416. A paper with some important ideas, if I say so myself, forged in the exciting crucible of discussion with Bill Martin. I’m proud of this paper."
Paragraph 7 (15 words) [SHORT]: "B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi, C. Watson, L. Dartnell, J. Ward, J. R. G."
Paragraph 8 (58 words) [SHORT]: "Evans and N. Lane, ‘An origin-of-life reactor to simulate alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Journal of Molecular Evolution 79 (2014) 213–227. Our early attempts to build an ‘origin-of-life’ reactor, many of which failed. This was a mixed bag of a paper that included some of the highlights of a system th..."
Paragraph 9 (80 words): "N. Lane, ‘Proton gradients at the origin of life’, BioEssays 39 (2017) 1600217. A riposte to the criticisms of Baz Jackson, a fine bioenergeticist, who sadly died of cancer soon afterwards. Towards the end of his life, he took an interest in the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents, raisin..."
Paragraph 10 (75 words): "R. Vasiliadou, N. Dimov, N. Szita, S. Jordan and N. Lane, ‘Possible mechanisms of CO 2 reduction by H 2 via prebiotic vectorial electrochemistry’, Royal Society Interface Focus 9 (2019) 20190073. A detailed theoretical paper with some experimental results, showing that protons can cross iron–sulfur ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "257"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M."
Paragraph 2 (69 words): "A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton gradients across semiconducting barriers really can promote the transfer of elec..."
Paragraph 3 (69 words): "Formation of protocells in hydrothermal vents T. M. McCollom, G. Ritter and B. R. Simoneit, ‘Lipid synthesis under hydrothermal conditions by Fischer–Tropsch-type reactions’, Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 29 (1999) 153–166. Starting with formate at high pressure and high temperature, M..."
Paragraph 4 (68 words): "S. F. Jordan, H. Rammu, I. Zheludev, A. M. Hartley, A. Marechal and N. Lane, ‘Promotion of protocell self-assembly from mixed amphiphiles at the origin of life’, Nature Ecology & Evolution 3 (2019) 1705–1714. Rather surprisingly, we found that alkaline hydrothermal conditions actually favour the spo..."
Paragraph 5 (60 words): "S. F. Jordan, E. Nee and N. Lane, ‘Isoprenoids enhance the stability of fatty acid membranes at the emergence of life potentially leading to an early lipid divide’, Royal Society Interface Focus 9 (2019) 20190067. Amazingly, protocells with membranes composed mostly of fatty acids (like bacteria) te..."
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Something to do with curvature."
Paragraph 7 (15 words) [SHORT]: "S. F. Jordan, I. Ioannou, H. Rammu, A. Halpern, L. K. Bogart, M. Ahn, R."
Paragraph 8 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Vasiliadou, J. Christodoulou, A. Maréchal and N. Lane, ‘Spontaneous assembly of redox-active iron–sulfur clusters at low concentrations of cysteine’, Nature Communications 12 (2021) 5925. Our own demonstration that the biological iron–sulfur clusters found in ferredoxin, which promote CO 2 fixation ..."
Paragraph 9 (89 words): "T. West, V. Sojo, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The origin of heredity in protocells’, Philosphical Transactions of the Royal Society B 372 (2017) 20160419. I think this is an important paper, but it has stayed under the radar. We show that positive feedbacks between organic molecules (fatty acids a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "258"
Paragraph 1 (52 words) [SHORT]: "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."
Paragraph 2 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Energy flow in hydrothermal vents J. P. Amend and T. M. McCollom, ‘Energetics of biomolecule synthesis on early Earth’, in L. Zaikowski et al. (eds), Chemical Evolution II: From the Origins of Life to Modern Society (American Chemical Society, 2009) pp. 63–94. I still find this mind-blowing. Which i..."
Paragraph 3 (14 words) [SHORT]: "and CO 2 , or cells? The answer is cells. That’s why life exists."
Paragraph 4 (76 words): "J. P. Amend, D. E. LaRowe, T. M. McCollom and E. L. Shock, ‘The energetics of organic synthesis inside and outside the cell’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 368 (2013) 20120255. More on the thermodynamics of prebiotic chemistry in hydrothermal systems from Amend and McCollom, with..."
Paragraph 5 (15 words) [SHORT]: "W. F. Martin, F. L. Sousa and N. Lane, ‘Energy at life’s origin’, Science 344"
Paragraph 6 (21 words) [SHORT]: "(2014) 1092–1093. A short take on why life itself points to hydrothermal vents as the site of its origin. Occam’s razor."
Paragraph 7 (59 words) [SHORT]: "A. Whicher, E. Camprubi, S. Pinna, B. Herschy and N. Lane, ‘Acetyl phosphate as a primordial energy currency at the origin of life’, Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 48 (2018) 159–179. Our first experiments on acetyl phosphate as a prebiotic energy currency. It works quite well at phospho..."
Paragraph 8 (69 words): "S. Pinna, C. Kunz, S. Harrison, S. F. Jordan, J. Ward, F. Werner and N. Lane, ‘A prebiotic basis for ATP as the universal energy currency’, BioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.06.463298 (2021). Amazingly, acetyl phosphate is unique in that it will phosphorylate ADP to ATP in water, but can’t do ..."
Paragraph 9 (54 words) [SHORT]: "Chapter 4: Revolutions Cambrian explosion Stephen Jay Gould, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the History of Nature (New York, W. W. Norton, 1989). A heady book that must have drawn a generation of young minds into palaeontology. But it has not weathered so well, and pushes its central thesis a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "259"
Paragraph 1 (58 words) [SHORT]: "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "M. A. S. McMenamin, ‘Cambrian chordates and vetulicolians’, Geosciences 9"
Paragraph 3 (24 words) [SHORT]: "(2019) 354. A useful update on the early Cambrian chordates, which frustratingly lacks even estimated dates (you’ll have to look into the references cited)."
Paragraph 4 (117 words): "J. Y. Chen, D. Y. Huang and C. W. Li, ‘An early Cambrian craniate-like chordate’, Nature 402 (1999) 518–522. A flavour of new discoveries of early chordates in the Maotianshan Shale in China; observes coyly that ‘These findings will add to the debate on the evolutionary transition from invertebrate ..."
Paragraph 5 (52 words) [SHORT]: "Oxygen Donald E. Canfield, Oxygen: A Four Billion Year History (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2014). A fine book by one of the leading protagonists of early- Earth history, rolling up his sleeves on how we can know anything at all about the composition of the air and oceans billions of year..."
Paragraph 6 (61 words): "Nick Lane, Oxygen: The Molecule that Made the World (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2002). My own take on the evolutionary history of oxygen, written in 2002. Given how much has changed in two decades it hasn’t weathered badly, though I no longer agree with all that I wrote. (Others do and think I..."
Paragraph 7 (66 words): "Andrew H. Knoll, Life on a Young Planet: The First Three Billion Years of Life on Earth (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2003). An authoritative, personable and engaging first-hand take on the difficulty of knowing anything about the world as it was billions of years ago. Andy Knoll combines ..."
Paragraph 8 (34 words) [SHORT]: "N. J. Butterfield, ‘Oxygen, animals and oceanic ventilation: an alternative view’, Geobiology 7 (2009) 1–7. Quite a diatribe against the lazy ascription of dramatic environmental change to the simple gas oxygen. A valuable corrective."
Paragraph 9 (25 words) [SHORT]: "O. Judson, ‘The energy expansions of evolution’, Nature Ecology and Evolution 1 (2017) 0138. A sweeping take from Olivia Judson on how a succession of"

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "260"
Paragraph 1 (19 words) [SHORT]: "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire."
Paragraph 2 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as electron acceptors: a historical review’, Frontiers in Microbiology 9 (2018) 401."
Paragraph 3 (39 words) [SHORT]: "A clear historical review of one of the most important advances in bioenergetics, nay, in all microbiology, by two great pioneers of the field who had been wrestling with the problem for the best part of half a century."
Paragraph 4 (67 words): "Margaret Dayhoff and Lynn Margulis M. O. Dayhoff, R. V. Eck, E. R. Lippincott and C. Sagan, ‘Venus: atmospheric evolution’, Science 155 (1967) 556–558. One of Margaret Dayhoff’s collaborations with Carl Sagan, calculating the equilibrium composition of Venus’s atmosphere, and ruling out the possibil..."
Paragraph 5 (26 words) [SHORT]: "R. V. Eck and M. O. Dayhoff, ‘Evolution of the structure of ferredoxin based on living relics of primitive amino acid sequences’, Science 152 (1966) 363–366."
Paragraph 6 (11 words) [SHORT]: "One of my favourite papers, an utter masterpiece of scientific deduction."
Paragraph 7 (50 words) [SHORT]: "R. M. Schwartz and M. O. Dayhoff, ‘Origins of prokaryotes, eukaryotes, mitochondria, and chloroplasts. A perspective is derived from protein and nucleic acid sequence data’, Science 199 (1978) 395–403. Margaret Dayhoff getting into her stride, dealing with the origin of just about everything that ma..."
Paragraph 8 (52 words) [SHORT]: "J. Barnabas, R. M. Schwartz and M. O. Dayhoff, ‘Evolution of major metabolic innovations in the Precambrian’, Origins of Life 12 (1982) 81–91. A late classic from Margaret Dayhoff, sketching the deep roots of the tree of life, and supporting the inferences of Lynn Margulis on bacterial ancestry of m..."
Paragraph 9 (13 words) [SHORT]: "L. Sagan, ‘On the origin of mitosing cells’, Journal of Theoretical Biology 14"
Paragraph 10 (45 words) [SHORT]: "(1967) 225–274. A wonderful paper that reconceptualised the evolution of cells on a planetary scale. Revelatory and justly famous, if not correct about everything (as is normal in science). Note that Lynn Margulis had recently divorced Carl Sagan, hence the name Sagan on this paper."
Paragraph 11 (56 words) [SHORT]: "N. Lane, ‘Serial endosymbiosis or singular event at the origin of eukaryotes?’, Journal of Theoretical Biology 434 (2017) 58–67. My own appraisal of Lynn Margulis’s contribution to cell evolution, written for a special fiftieth anniversary issue of the journal in which she published her classic 1967..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "261"
Paragraph 1 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."
Paragraph 2 (25 words) [SHORT]: "S. E. McGlynn, G. L. Chadwick, C. P. Kempes and V. J. Orphan, ‘Single cell activity reveals direct electron transfer in methanotrophic consortia’, Nature 526"
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "(2015) 531–535. A beautiful paper harnessing stunning technology, which shows that tight-knot consortia of cells form clumps with regular numbers of specific types of cell (an optimal stoichiometry), which transfer electrons between cells."
Paragraph 4 (43 words) [SHORT]: "E. Libby, L. Hébert-Dufresne, S.-R. Hosseini and A. Wagner, ‘Syntrophy emerges spontaneously in complex metabolic systems’, PLoS Computational Biology 15 (2019) e1007169. A clever paper showing how metabolic syntrophy (mutual reliance) can arise simply through mutations causing the partial degenerat..."
Paragraph 5 (66 words): "Paul G. Falkowski, Life’s Engines: How Microbes made the Earth Habitable (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2015). An engaging take on the history of life from the point of view of life’s engines – both the protein machines and the bacterial consortia that power evolution. Aimed at the general ..."
Paragraph 6 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Dawn of photosynthesis J. Allen and W. Martin, ‘Out of thin air’, Nature 445 (2007) 610–612. A sparkling piece that elaborates on John Allen’s ‘redox switch’ hypothesis for how the Z-scheme that enabled oxygenic photosynthesis came to be."
Paragraph 7 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Nick Lane, Life Ascending: The Ten Great Inventions of Evolution (London, Profile Books and New York, W. W. Norton, 2009). If you’re confused by my references to the Z-scheme here, then try my chapter on photosynthesis in Life Ascending , where I devote a chapter to its evolution, focusing on John A..."
Paragraph 8 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Nick Lane, Building with Light: Primo Levi, Science and Writing (Centro internazionale di studi Primo Levi, 2012). Available here: www.primolevi.it/en/primo-levi-science-writer. An unusual story, told in the piece itself, at the invitation of Levi’s son, Renzo. Primo Levi was a wonderful writer and ..."
Paragraph 9 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Tim Lenton and Andrew Watson, Revolutions that Made the Earth (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2013). A detailed overview of how the Earth system (or Gaia) can flip from one stable state to another as conditions change, sometimes abruptly. The intellectual son and grandson of James Lovelock (using ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 13 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "262"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak."
Paragraph 2 (18 words) [SHORT]: "H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D."
Paragraph 3 (82 words): "Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018) 1556–1562. The Bristol group comprises some of the best phylogeneticists in the world today, and this paper uses sophisticated methods to uncover a wealth o..."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "T. Oliver, P. Sánchez-Baracaldo, A. W. Larkum, A. W. Rutherford and T."
Paragraph 5 (77 words): "Cardona, ‘Time-resolved comparative molecular evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis’, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Bioenergetics 1862 (2021) 148400. I can’t help but cite this radically different take on the early origin of oxygenic photosynthesis by the fearless Tanai Cardona and some distinguished..."
Paragraph 6 (61 words): "Shurum conundrum G. A. Shields, ‘Carbon and carbon isotope mass balance in the Neoproterozoic Earth system’, Emerging Topics in Life Sciences 2 (2018) 257–265. Mass balance might sound dull but if we can’t add up then nothing makes sense. Graham Shields uses it as the basis for an important reanalys..."
Paragraph 7 (37 words) [SHORT]: "G. A. Shields, B. J. W. Mills, M. Zhu, T. D. Raub, S. J. Daines and T. M. Lenton ‘Unique Neoproterozoic carbon isotope excursions sustained by coupled evaporite dissolution and pyrite burial’, Nature Geoscience 12 (2019) 823–827."
Paragraph 8 (31 words) [SHORT]: "Graham Shields’s thinking about the role of sulfate in the Neoproterozoic oxygenation and the Cambrian explosion makes some explicit predictions about the burial of iron pyrites, which seem to be true."
Paragraph 9 (16 words) [SHORT]: "S. K. Sahoo, N. J. Planavsky, G. Jiang, B. Kendall, J. D. Owens, X. Wang, X."
Paragraph 10 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Shi, A. D. Anbar and T. W. Lyons, ‘Oceanic oxygenation events in the anoxic Ediacaran ocean’, Geobiology 14 (2016) 457–468. A fine-grained geological analysis of the precise timing of oxygenation events during the Neoproterozoic and into the Cambrian. Exquisite detail."
Paragraph 11 (22 words) [SHORT]: "G. Shields-Zhou and L. Och, ‘The case for a Neoproterozoic oxygenation event: geochemical evidence and biological consequences’, GSA Today 21 (2011) 4–11."
Paragraph 12 (24 words) [SHORT]: "A marshalling of the evidence that the rise in oxygen in the late Neoproterozoic was linked to the Cambrian explosion. Not a straightforward case!"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "263"
Paragraph 1 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."
Paragraph 2 (63 words): "S. D. Evans, I. V. Hughes, J. G. Gehling and M. L. Droser, ‘Discovery of the oldest bilaterian from the Ediacaran of South Australia’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 7845–7850. Trace fossils of small bilaterians (a few millimetres in length) crawling through the mud a..."
Paragraph 3 (55 words) [SHORT]: "William F. Martin, Aloysius G. M. Tielens and Marek Mentel, Mitochondria and Anaerobic Energy Metabolism in Eukaryotes: Biochemistry and Evolution (Berlin, De Gruyter, 2020). A comprehensive treatment of the biochemistry and physiology of eukaryotes (including animals) that live in the absence or ne..."
Paragraph 4 (16 words) [SHORT]: "S. Song, V. Starunov, X. Bailly, C. Ruta, P. Kerner, A. J. M. Cornelissen and G."
Paragraph 5 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Balavoine, ‘Globins in the marine annelid Platynereis dumerilii shed new light on hemoglobin evolution in bilaterians’, BMC Evolutionary Biology 20 (2020) 165. Shows that the ‘Ur-bilaterian’ (the common ancestor of all bilaterally symmetrical animals) already had at least five haemoglobin genes, lon..."
Paragraph 6 (65 words): "Forked Krebs cycle Laurence A. Moran, Robert Horton, Gray Scrimgeour and Marc Perry, Principles of Biochemistry , 5th edn (London, Pearson, 2011). One of the few biochemistry textbooks that deals with evolution in a serious way. Larry Moran also writes an excellent, hugely informative and good-humou..."
Paragraph 7 (45 words) [SHORT]: "C. Da Costa and E. Galembeck, ‘The evolution of the Krebs cycle: a promising subject for meaningful learning of biochemistry’, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 44 (2016) 288–296. A thoughtful and balanced piece that should be read by everyone who ever teaches the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 8 (77 words): "D. G. Ryan, C. Frezza and L. A. J. O’Neill, ‘TCA cycle signalling and the evolution of eukaryotes’, Current Opinion in Biotechnology 68 (2021) 72–88. I read this paper after finishing the book and would have said more about it if had I spotted it earlier. Argues that Krebs-cycle intermediates were c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "264"
Paragraph 1 (72 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."
Paragraph 2 (16 words) [SHORT]: "Because plants can generate ATP in their chloroplasts, they often use their mitochondria as biosynthetic organelles."
Paragraph 3 (56 words) [SHORT]: "Chapter 5: To the dark side Oncogenes and tumour-suppressor genes Robert A. Weinberg, One Renegade Cell: The Quest for the Origins of Cancer (Science Masters Series) (New York, Basic Books, 1998). A classic text, which conveys the selfishness of cancer cells and the multiple genetic hits that turn a..."
Paragraph 4 (69 words): "D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg, ‘The hallmarks of cancer’, Cell 100 (2000) 57– 70 . The kind of paper that gives journals like Cell their high ‘impact factor’: this paper has nearly 40,000 citations, and its successor published eleven years later (‘Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation’, Cell 144 ..."
Paragraph 5 (79 words): "Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes. ‘A collection of research and related content from the ICGC/TCGA consortium on whole-genome sequencing and the integrative analysis of cancer’, Nature Special (5 February 2020). Mostly open access articles, including a ‘flagship article’ with the same title; but..."
Paragraph 6 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Robin Hesketh, Betrayed by Nature: The War on Cancer (New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2012). An enjoyable book that tackles the science of cancer in a serious but good-humoured way, aimed at those who need to know more. This is as clear an account of the genetic basis of cancer as you are likely to re..."
Paragraph 7 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Hesketh skips lightly over the metabolic perspective I elaborate in this book, even suggesting that Warburg might be quietly pleased that we now recognise ‘metabolic perturbation to be a characteristic of most, if not all, cancers’. I suspect Warburg would have raged against such an insipid statemen..."
Paragraph 8 (75 words): "Evidence against mutations driving cancer P. Rous, ‘Surmise and fact on the nature of cancer’, Nature 183 (1959) 1357– 1361. Quite a diatribe against the somatic mutation theory of cancer, written in the same year that Rous received the Nobel prize for his work on viruses as a cause of cancer, and w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "265"
Paragraph 1 (182 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."
Paragraph 2 (46 words) [SHORT]: "A. M. Soto and C. Sonnenschein, ‘The somatic mutation theory of cancer: growing problems with the paradigm?’, BioEssays 26 (2004) 1097–1107. After pointing out a few of the problems, offers an alternative hypothesis dubbed the ‘tissue organisation field theory’. None of these ideas are mutually excl..."
Paragraph 3 (16 words) [SHORT]: "The fact that one idea does not explain everything does not mean it is completely wrong."
Paragraph 4 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Robin Holliday, Understanding Ageing (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995). A really fine book that gives an excellent overall view of ageing, including the evidence against an accumulation of somatic mutations driving ageing or age-related diseases such as cancer."
Paragraph 5 (55 words) [SHORT]: "C. A. Rebbeck, A. M. Leroi and A. Burt, ‘Mitochondrial capture by a transmissible cancer’, Science 331 (2011) 303. A bit of an oddity, this paper, and very wacky. Some cancers can be transmitted through bites, especially between dogs, wolves and coyotes; but to take hold, tumours often need to steal..."
Paragraph 6 (27 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg H. A. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. I cited this in Chapter 1 as well."
Paragraph 7 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs at his most gentlemanly in highlighting his mentor’s greatest accomplishments, while finding kind words to allay Warburg’s less appealing side."
Paragraph 8 (25 words) [SHORT]: "A. M. Otto, ‘Warburg effect(s)—a biographical sketch of Otto Warburg and his impacts on tumor metabolism’, Cancer & Metabolism 4 (2016) 5. A lively and"

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "266"
Paragraph 1 (19 words) [SHORT]: "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer."
Paragraph 2 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s worth another mention here for Kamen’s description of meeting Warburg, on his postwar visit to the United States, at the behe..."
Paragraph 3 (35 words) [SHORT]: "G. M. Weisz, ‘Dr Otto Heinrich Warburg – survivor of ethical storms’, Rambam Maimonides Medical Journal 6 (2015) e0008. An interesting short piece that asks how Warburg survived the Nazi period despite his Jewish ancestry."
Paragraph 4 (63 words): "John N. Prebble, Searching for a Mechanism: A History of Cell Bioenergetics (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2019). Another fine piece of historical science from John Prebble, including an account of the long dispute between Warburg and David Keilin, which arguably cost the latter a Nobel prize tha..."
Paragraph 5 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Michael S. Rosenwald, ‘Hitler’s mother was “the only person he genuinely loved.” Cancer killed her decades before he became a monster’, Washington Post , 20 April 2017. An interesting partial explanation of why Hitler had such a fear of cancer, allowing Warburg to survive in Germany, as well as faci..."
Paragraph 6 (54 words) [SHORT]: "Govindjee, ‘On the requirement of minimum number of four versus eight quanta of light for the evolution of one molecule of oxygen in photosynthesis: a historical note’, Photosynthesis Research 59 (1999) 249–254. Fascinating history from Govindjee in Photosynthesis Research again, this time of the fe..."
Paragraph 7 (58 words) [SHORT]: "E. Höxtermann, ‘A comment on Warburg’s early understanding of biocatalysis’, Photosynthesis Research 92 (2007) 121–127. Valuable historical context, giving insight into why Warburg was so hostile to more complex ideas of enzymatic catalysis, both for respiration and photosynthesis. He ended up with ..."
Paragraph 8 (16 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg and his critics on cancer Otto Warburg, Über den Stoffwechsel der Tumoren (Berlin, Springer, 1926)."
Paragraph 9 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Translated as The Metabolism of Tumours (London, Arnold Constable, 1930)."
Paragraph 10 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg’s first publication on cancer, showing extreme accumulation of lactate in cancer cells, which became the basis for his work on cancer over the following decades."
Paragraph 11 (29 words) [SHORT]: "O. Warburg, ‘On the origin of cancer cells’, Science 123 (1956) 309–314. A searing piece that I quote from in some detail in my chapter. Worth taking a look"

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "267"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "at the original for the full context."
Paragraph 2 (65 words): "Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and translated into English with the help of Wa..."
Paragraph 3 (57 words) [SHORT]: "B. Chance, ‘Profiles and legacies. Was Warburg right? Or was it that simple?’, Cancer Biology & Therapy 4 125–(2005) 126. A withering critique of Warburg from Britton Chance, one of the few biochemists who could match Warburg’s inventive skill in the laboratory (and an Olympic gold medallist in sail..."
Paragraph 4 (67 words): "S. Weinhouse, ‘The Warburg hypothesis fifty years later’, Zeitschrift für Krebsforschung 87 (1976) 115–126. A detailed critique of Warburg’s theory written fifty years later, after Warburg’s death. Weinhouse and Chance were arguably more responsible than anyone for the collapse in popularity of Warb..."
Paragraph 5 (28 words) [SHORT]: "Reinterpretation of the Warburg effect M. G. Vander Heiden, L. C. Cantley and C. B. Thompson, ‘Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation’, Science 324"
Paragraph 6 (56 words) [SHORT]: "(2009) 1029–1033. A masterful paper, which to my mind captures the key to the Warburg effect, which Warburg himself had missed: growth. For reasons that I discuss in my chapter, mild suppression of respiration with age produces a metabolic rewiring leading to a growth phenotype. We put on weight and..."
Paragraph 7 (61 words): "P. S. Ward and C. B. Thompson, ‘Metabolic reprogramming: a cancer hallmark even Warburg did not anticipate’, Cancer Cell 21 (2012) 297–308. Craig Thompson again, this time discussing evidence that metabolites such as Krebs- cycle intermediates ‘can be oncogenic by altering cell signalling and blocki..."
Paragraph 8 (62 words): "D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondria and cancer’, Nature Reviews Cancer 12 (2012) 685–698. I neglected to say much about Doug Wallace’s work on cancer in this chapter, in part because I discussed his ideas at some length in Chapter 6. I hardly need to say that he was one of the strongest voices calling atte..."
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "An ancient switch"

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "268"
Paragraph 1 (57 words) [SHORT]: "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."
Paragraph 2 (97 words): "D. G. Ryan, M. P. Murphy, C. Frezza, H. A. Prag, E. T. Chouchani, L. A. O’Neill and E. L. Mills, ‘Coupling Krebs cycle metabolites to signalling in immunity and cancer’, Nature Metabolism 1 (2019) 16–33. Regrettably, I barely touched on the immune system in this book. But Krebs-cycle intermediates a..."
Paragraph 3 (77 words): "O’Neill, ‘Mitochondria are the powerhouses of immunity’, Nature Immunology 18 (2017) 488–498.) C. Frezza and E. Gottlieb, ‘Mitochondria in cancer: not just innocent bystanders’, Seminars in Cancer Biology 19 (2009) 4–11. A fine historically grounded overview of the Warburg effect, with a balanced ap..."
Paragraph 4 (31 words) [SHORT]: "C. Frezza, ‘Metabolism and cancer: the future is now’, British Journal of Cancer 122 (2020) 133–135. A call to arms from Christian Frezza. Time the metabolic basis of cancer became mainstream."
Paragraph 5 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Hypoxia in cancer E. T. Chouchani, V. R. Pell, E. Gaude et al. , ‘Ischaemic accumulation of succinate controls reperfusion injury through mitochondrial ROS’, Nature 515"
Paragraph 6 (46 words) [SHORT]: "(2014) 431–435. A barnstorming paper that finally makes sense of reperfusion injury, from heart attacks to organ transplants. Not everyone agrees, but this is the kind of paper that reframes the problem for future generations. It certainly made sense of my own PhD, twenty years earlier."
Paragraph 7 (70 words): "I. H. Jain, L. Zazzeron, R. Goli et al. , ‘Hypoxia as a therapy for mitochondrial disease’, Science 352 (2016) 54–61. A revelatory paper from Vamsi Mootha and colleagues. Strong evidence that reactive oxygen species really do cause problems in damaged mitochondria, which can be offset by living in a..."
Paragraph 8 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Glutamine in cancer H. Eagle, ‘Nutrition needs of mammalian cells in tissue culture’, Science 122"
Paragraph 9 (32 words) [SHORT]: "(1955) 501–514. One of the first papers to point to the addiction of cancer cells to glutamine, in this case in HeLa cells. On that count, I feel obliged to point you"

=== NEW SECTION: 16 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "269"
Paragraph 1 (28 words) [SHORT]: "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong."
Paragraph 2 (12 words) [SHORT]: "S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S."
Paragraph 3 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the differential use of glucose and glutamine in cell proliferation as revealed by synchronized HeLa cells’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 108 (2011) 21069–21074."
Paragraph 4 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Proof that cancer cells can still grow without glucose but won’t if deprived of glutamine. They need mitochondria. HeLa cells again."
Paragraph 5 (41 words) [SHORT]: "S. Ochoa, ‘Isocitrate dehydrogenase and carbon dioxide fixation’, Journal of Biological Chemistry 159 (1945) 243–244. A paper for the ages from the great Spanish biochemist Severo Ochoa, showing that animals can fix CO 2 by reversing bits of the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 6 (52 words) [SHORT]: "A. Mullen, W. Wheaton, E. Jin et al. , ‘Reductive carboxylation supports growth in tumour cells with defective mitochondria’, Nature 481 (2012) 385–388. A major paper which showed for the first time that parts of the Krebs cycle can operate in reverse in cancer, fixing CO 2 to generate citrate from ..."
Paragraph 7 (37 words) [SHORT]: "Should have been less of a revelation, given that CO 2 fixation in animals and the reverse Krebs cycle were not exactly news. Critically, this only occurred in tumour cells with defective mitochondria, preventing normal forwards flux."
Paragraph 8 (17 words) [SHORT]: "S. M. Fendt, E. L. Bell, M. A. Keibler, B. A. Olenchock, J. R. Mayers, T. M."
Paragraph 9 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Wasylenko, N. I. Vokes, L. Guarente, M. G. Vander Heiden and G."
Paragraph 10 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Stephanopoulos, ‘Reductive glutamine metabolism is a function of the α- ketoglutarate to citrate ratio in cells’, Nature Communications 4 (2013) 2236."
Paragraph 11 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Ratios matter in biochemistry. Which way will the Krebs cycle operate? You can predict on the basis of how much α-ketoglutarate there is relative to citrate."
Paragraph 12 (17 words) [SHORT]: "A. R. Mullen, Z. Hu, X. Shi, L. Jiang, L. K. Boroughs, Z. Kovacs, R. Boriack, D."
Paragraph 13 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Rakheja, L. B. Sullivan, W. M. Linehan, N. S. Chandel and R. J. DeBerardinis, ‘Oxidation of alpha-ketoglutarate is required for reductive carboxylation in cancer cells with mitochondrial defects’, Cell Reports 7 (2014) 1679–1690."
Paragraph 14 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Complications! To convert α-ketoglutarate to citrate requires oxidising α- ketoglutarate, the exact opposite. In other words, there has to be branched flux through the Krebs cycle. Time to forget the idea of a ‘normal’ Krebs cycle in cancer, or life more generally."
Paragraph 15 (52 words) [SHORT]: "NADPH-linked power drivers L. A. Sazanov and J. B. Jackson, ‘Proton-translocating transhydrogenase and NAD- and NADP-linked isocitrate dehydrogenases operate in a substrate cycle which contributes to fine regulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle activity in mitochondria’, FEBS Letters 344 (1994) 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "270"
Paragraph 1 (80 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."
Paragraph 2 (44 words) [SHORT]: "Sirtuins and epigenetic shifts S.-i. Imai and L. Guarente, ‘It takes two to tango: NAD + and sirtuins in aging/longevity control’, Aging and Mechanisms of Disease 2 (2016) 16017. A nice update on how sirtuins control gene expression in relation to NAD + levels."
Paragraph 3 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Challenges the notion that the ratio of NAD + to NADH matters, although I’m suspicious of this conclusion in relation to the low-calorie diets that tend to activate sirtuins."
Paragraph 4 (99 words): "M. S. Bonkowski and D. A. Sinclair, ‘Slowing ageing by design: the rise of NAD + and sirtuin-activating compounds’, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 17 (2016) 679–690. An excellent detailed overview of the science behind the hot topic of NAD + precursors as activators of sirtuins to extend life..."
Paragraph 5 (77 words): "D. V. Titov, V. Cracan, R. P. Goodman, J. Peng, Z. Grabarek and V. K. Mootha, ‘Complementation of mitochondrial electron transport chain by manipulation of the NAD + /NADH ratio’, Science 352 (2016) 231–235. The activation of sirtuins depends on the NAD + /NADH ratio (probably!) which in turn depend..."
Paragraph 6 (87 words): "Respiring with glycerol phosphate A. E. McDonald, N. Pichaud and C. A. Darveau. ‘“Alternative” fuels contributing to mitochondrial electron transport: Importance of non-classical pathways in the diversity of animal metabolism’, Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology B: Biochemistry & Molecular Biol..."
Paragraph 7 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Erich Gnaiger, Mitochondrial Pathways and Respiratory Control. An Introduction to OXPHOS Analysis (Innsbruck, Bioenergetics Communications,"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "271"
Paragraph 1 (61 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."
Paragraph 2 (67 words): "Glutamine cycle in muscles R. DeBerardinis and T. Cheng, ‘Q’s next: the diverse functions of glutamine in metabolism, cell biology and cancer’, Oncogene 29 (2010) 313–324. Puts forward the disturbing notion that cancers ‘deliberately’ release the ammonia from glutamine, which provokes the breakdown ..."
Paragraph 3 (79 words): "Ketogenic diet and cancer D. D. Weber, S. Aminzadeh-Gohari, J. Tulipan, L. Catalano, R. G. Feichtinger and B. Kofler, ‘Ketogenic diet in the treatment of cancer – where do we stand?’, Molecular Metabolism 33 (2020) 102–121. A good balanced analysis. I’ve not said much about ketogenic diets in this b..."
Paragraph 4 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Chapter 6: The flux capacitor Evolutionary ideas of ageing Peter Medawar, An Unsolved Problem of Biology (London, H. K. Lewis, 1952)."
Paragraph 5 (24 words) [SHORT]: "The book from his inaugural lecture at UCL, which put forward a new theory of ageing that is still more or less current today."
Paragraph 6 (73 words): "T. Niccoli and L. Partridge, ‘Ageing as a risk factor for disease’, Current Biology 22 (2012) R741–R752. Dame Linda Partridge has been one of the most authoritative voices in the ageing field for decades, and recently stepped down from running the Institute of Healthy Ageing at UCL. Fix ageing and w..."
Paragraph 7 (19 words) [SHORT]: "George C. Williams, Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current Evolutionary Thought (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1966)."
Paragraph 8 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Williams independently put forward a similar view of ageing to Medawar’s, known forbiddingly as antagonistic pleiotropy (meaning that genes can have positive benefits in youth that outweigh disadvantages with older age). While this book does not focus on ageing it is one of the finest and most influ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "272"
Paragraph 1 (14 words) [SHORT]: "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all."
Paragraph 2 (37 words) [SHORT]: "André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natural history with a theoretical underpinning."
Paragraph 3 (78 words): "Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) Carl Zimmer, She Has Her Mother’s Laugh: The Powers, Perversions and Potential of Heredity (London, Penguin Random House, 2018). A magisterial volume on the history and future of genetics, with excellent coverage of its murky past grounded in the warped ideas o..."
Paragraph 4 (24 words) [SHORT]: "V. Tam, N. Patel, M. Turcotte, Y. Bossé, G. Paré and D. Meyre, ‘Benefits and limitations of genome-wide association studies’, Nature Reviews Genetics 20"
Paragraph 5 (20 words) [SHORT]: "(2019) 467–484. A recent comprehensive review of GWAS that does a good job of addressing pervasive criticisms in the literature."
Paragraph 6 (58 words) [SHORT]: "Missing heritability T. A. Manolio, F. S. Collins, N. J. Cox et al. , ‘Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases’, Nature 461 (2009) 747–753. One of the first papers to spell out the problem which has only partially been solved since then. For me the bottom line is most GWAS studies negle..."
Paragraph 7 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Adam Rutherford, A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived: The Stories in Our Genes (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017). Adam Rutherford takes up the mantle of Steve Jones for the rising generation, finding his range in this sprawling, opinionated and cogent take on human genetics. Well worth re..."
Paragraph 8 (23 words) [SHORT]: "His more recent book How to Argue with a Racist (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2020) is even better, and should be read by everybody."
Paragraph 9 (16 words) [SHORT]: "G. Pesole, J. F. Allen, N. Lane, W. Martin, D. M. Rand, G. Schatz and C."
Paragraph 10 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Saccone, ‘The neglected genome’, EMBO Reports 13 (2012) 473–474. A short and heartfelt plea to the GWAS community to stop discarding mitochondrial DNA."
Paragraph 11 (43 words) [SHORT]: "Doug Wallace and advances in mitochondrial research D. C. Wallace, Y. Pollack, C. L. Bunn and J. M. Eisenstadt, ‘Cytoplasmic inheritance in mammalian tissue culture cells’, In Vitro 12 (1976) 758–776. The paper from Doug Wallace’s PhD thesis on cybrids treated with antibiotics."

=== NEW SECTION: 13 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "273"
Paragraph 1 (72 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."
Paragraph 2 (15 words) [SHORT]: "D. A. Merriwether, A. G. Clark, S. W. Ballinger, T. G. Schurr, H. Soodyall, T."
Paragraph 3 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Jenkins, S. T. Sherry and D. C. Wallace, ‘The structure of human mitochondrial DNA variation’, Journal of Molecular Evolution 33 (1991) 543–55. One of the earlier papers tracing human ancestry and migrations using mitochondrial DNA."
Paragraph 4 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Unlike others, Wallace never thought of mitochondrial DNA as ‘neutral’ (only weakly subject to selection), but perceives it as facilitating adaptation to new environments; on the flip side, mutations can also cause disease."
Paragraph 5 (36 words) [SHORT]: "D. C. Wallace, M. D. Brown and M. T. Lott, ‘Mitochondrial DNA variation in human evolution and disease’, Gene 238 (1999) 211–230. A later contribution from Wallace and colleagues, taking mitochondrial diseases into more explicit consideration."
Paragraph 6 (29 words) [SHORT]: "D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondrial diseases in man and mouse’, Science 283 (1999) 1482–1488. A seminal paper on mitochondrial diseases, comparing mouse models with human conditions. Wallace in his pomp."
Paragraph 7 (16 words) [SHORT]: "W. Fan, K. G. Waymire, N. Narula, P. Li, C. Rocher, P. E. Coskun, M. A."
Paragraph 8 (80 words): "Vannan, J. Narula, G. R. Macgregor and D. C. Wallace, ‘A mouse model of mitochondrial disease reveals germline selection against severe mtDNA mutations’, Science 319 (2008) 958–962. An important paper that reconciled a paradox in Wallace’s thinking – how could a fast mitochondrial mutation rate faci..."
Paragraph 9 (13 words) [SHORT]: "N. Lane, ‘Biodiversity: on the origin of bar codes’, Nature 462 (2009) 272–274."
Paragraph 10 (23 words) [SHORT]: "My own attempt to reconcile adaptation, mitochondrial mutations and the surprisingly sharp distinctions between species (so-called bar-codes in mitochondrial DNA), discussing Wallace’s work."
Paragraph 11 (48 words) [SHORT]: "M. Colnaghi, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The need for high-quality oocyte mitochondria at extreme ploidy dictates mammalian germline development’, eLife 10 (2021) e69344. A mathematical model showing that the architecture of the female germline can be understood in terms of selection against detri..."
Paragraph 12 (25 words) [SHORT]: "D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondria as chi’, Genetics 179 (2008) 727–735. Pushing the boundaries of Western medicine, with its twin pillars grounded in the work of"

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "274"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students."
Paragraph 2 (41 words) [SHORT]: "Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summary of some sticky issues."
Paragraph 3 (22 words) [SHORT]: "P. Innocenti, E. H. Morrow and D. K. Dowling, ‘Experimental evidence supports a sex-specific selective sieve in mitochondrial genome evolution’, Science 332"
Paragraph 4 (21 words) [SHORT]: "(2011) 845–848. A seminal paper from Damian Dowling’s group, showing that maternal inheritance of mitochondria really does cause problems in males."
Paragraph 5 (54 words) [SHORT]: "M. F. Camus, D. J. Clancy and D. K. Dowling, ‘Mitochondria, maternal inheritance, and male aging’, Current Biology 22 (2012) 1717–1721. More from Damian Dowling, this time with my UCL colleague Flo Camus, showing that the maternal inheritance of mitochondria might even account for the shorter lifesp..."
Paragraph 6 (71 words): "A. L. Radzvilavicius, N. Lane and A. Pomiankowski, ‘Sexual conflict explains the extraordinary diversity of mechanisms regulating mitochondrial inheritance’, BMC Biology 15 (2017) 94. Our modelling take on why there are so many different ways of enforcing maternal inheritance of mitochondria. It boi..."
Paragraph 7 (75 words): "Hybid breakdown does not vary with genetic distance M. F. Camus, M. O’Leary, M. Reuter and N. Lane, ‘Impact of mitonuclear interactions on life-history responses to diet’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 375 (2020) 20190416C. The most striking finding here is that there is no relat..."
Paragraph 8 (25 words) [SHORT]: "L. Carnegie, M. Reuter, K. Fowler, N. Lane and M. F. Camus, ‘Mother’s curse is pervasive across a large mitonuclear Drosophila panel’, Evolution Letters 5"
Paragraph 9 (27 words) [SHORT]: "(2021) 230–239. A large panel of 81 different fly lines, in which the mitochondria are systematically mismatched against the nuclear background, demonstrates that mother’s curse is real."
Paragraph 10 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Redox stress caused by the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) E. Rodríguez, F. Grover Thomas, M. F. Camus and N. Lane, ‘Mito-nuclear interactions produce diverging responses to mild stress in Drosophila larvae’, Frontiers in Genetics 12 (2021) 734255. Larvae just eat and grow, placing the mitochond..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "275"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA."
Paragraph 2 (93 words): "M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.02.10.479862). The paper I dwelt on at length in this chapter. A shock to me. Flies keep..."
Paragraph 3 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Glutathione, redox stress and S-glutathionylation P. Korge, G. Calmettes and J. N. Weiss, ‘Increased reactive oxygen species production during reductive stress: the roles of mitochondrial glutathione and thioredoxin reductase’, Biochimica Biophysica Acta 1847 (2015) 514–525."
Paragraph 4 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Glutathione is considered the ‘master antioxidant’ but there can be too much of a good thing. The problem here is called ‘reductive stress’, where there are (in effect) too many electrons to stay in balance. They end up dribbling onto oxygen to form reactive oxygen species."
Paragraph 5 (46 words) [SHORT]: "R. J. Mailloux and W. G. Willmore, ‘ S -Glutathionlylation reactions in mitochondrial function and disease’, Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 2 (2014) 68. A nice review of the redox regulatory system whereby oxidised glutathione binds to proteins ( S -glutathionylation), which can suppres..."
Paragraph 6 (44 words) [SHORT]: "R. J. Mailloux, ‘Protein S -glutathionylation reactions as a global inhibitor of cell metabolism for the desensitization of hydrogen peroxide signals’, Redox Biology 32 (2020) 101472. Ryan Mailloux shows that S -glutathionylation suppresses hydrogen peroxide signalling – by suppressing all metabolis..."
Paragraph 7 (73 words): "Number of heartbeats Raymond Pearl, The Rate of Living. Being an Account of some Experimental Studies on the Biology of Life Duration (London, University of London Press, 1928). Raymond Pearl’s rate of living theory fell out of fashion because there seemed to be many exceptions; birds, for example, ..."
Paragraph 8 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Geoffrey West, Scale: The Universal Laws of Life and Death in Organisms, Cities and Companies (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017). West is a physicist who has published revolutionary papers on fractal scaling, with Brian Enquist and James Brown, which I’m not citing individually here. There are pl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "276"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane."
Paragraph 2 (102 words): "Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 899 (2000) 136–147. The gurus of free radical biology, and authors of a famous textbook ( Free Radicals in Biology..."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "M. W. Moyer, ‘The myth of antioxidants’, Scientific American 308 (2013) 62–67."
Paragraph 4 (35 words) [SHORT]: "A clear presentation showing that antioxidants don’t work, in either animal models or humans. Large human trials show that, if anything, antioxidant supplementation is associated with worse outcomes and a slightly higher risk of death."
Paragraph 5 (14 words) [SHORT]: "M. P. Murphy, A. Holmgren, N. G. Larsson, B. Halliwell, C. J. Chang, B."
Paragraph 6 (76 words): "Kalyanaraman, S. G. Rhee, P. J. Thornalley, L. Partridge, D. Gems, T. Nyström, V. Belousov, P. T. Schumacker and C. C. Winterbourn, ‘Unraveling the biological roles of reactive oxygen species’, Cell Metabolism 13 (2011) 361–366. A bit of a ‘Hollywood’ lineup, aiming for a consensus on the role of fr..."
Paragraph 7 (102 words): "N. Lane, ‘A unifying view of ageing and disease: the double-agent theory’, Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 531–540. A hypothesis sketched out for the general reader in Oxygen (Oxford University Press, 2002) and developed more formally here. I attempt to reconcile the paradox that (were bot..."
Paragraph 8 (89 words): "Hyperfunction M. V. Blagosklonny, ‘Aging is not programmed’, Cell Cycle 12 (2013) 3736– 3742. A clarification of his own influential thinking. Ageing is driven by ‘quasi- programs’ that keep on running too long; sometimes called the ‘bloated soma theory’. According to this theory there is no program..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "277"
Paragraph 1 (33 words) [SHORT]: "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological."
Paragraph 2 (38 words) [SHORT]: "The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat the underlying problem – ageing itself. To define ageing as ‘healthy’ dissolves both the problem and the solution. Gems is a proponent of quasi-programs driving ageing."
Paragraph 3 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Glycation damage M. Fournet, F. Bonté and A. Desmoulière, ‘Glycation damage: a possible hub for major pathophysiological disorders and aging’, Aging and Disease 9 (2018) 880– 900. A good review of the targets of glycation (the decoration of proteins, lipids and DNA with sticky, sugary tails) with ag..."
Paragraph 4 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Variations in mitochondrial proteome between tissues S. E. Calvo and V. K. Mootha, ‘The mitochondrial proteome and human disease’, Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 11 (2010) 25–44. How much do the proteins in mitochondria differ from one tissue to another? More than you might think: near..."
Paragraph 5 (83 words): "Insulin secretion depends on membrane potential E. Heart, R. F. Corkey, J. D. Wikstrom, O. S. Shirihai and B. E. Corkey, ‘Glucose-dependent increase in mitochondrial membrane potential, but not cytoplasmic calcium, correlates with insulin secretion in single islet cells’, American Journal of Physiol..."
Paragraph 6 (57 words) [SHORT]: "A. A. Gerencser, S. A. Mookerjee, M. Jastroch and M. D. Brand, ‘Positive feedback amplified the response of mitochondrial membrane potential to glucose concentration in clonal pancreatic beta cells’, Biochimica Biophysica Acta: Molecular Basis of Disease 1863 (2017) 1054–1065. More details on how gl..."
Paragraph 7 (52 words) [SHORT]: "Links between diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease S. M. de la Monte and J. R. Wands, ‘Alzheimer’s disease is type 3 diabetes – evidence reviewed’, Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 2 (2008) 1101– 1113. The evidence is mounting that Alzheimer’s disease is a form of diabetes. I need to mind my d..."
Paragraph 8 (35 words) [SHORT]: "P. I. Moreira, ‘Sweet mitochondria: a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 62 (2018) 1391–1401. Never was there a more sinister use of the term ‘sweet mitochondria’ (the term ‘diabetes mellitus’ means sweet"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "278"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease."
Paragraph 2 (88 words): "D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable Barry Halliwell agrees, there is little room for doubt. As an aside, science is based on trust: when on unfamiliar gr..."
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "Mitochondrial-associated membranes and Alzheimer’s disease E. Area-Gomez and E. A. Schon, ‘On the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: the MAM hypothesis’, FASEB Journal 31 (2017) 864–867. An extremely coherent explanation for Alzheimer’s disease, linking mitochondrial damage in diabetes with calciu..."
Paragraph 4 (78 words): "E. Area-Gomez, C. Guardia-Laguarta, E. A. Schon and S. Przedborski, ‘Mitochondria, OxPhos, and neurodegeneration: cells are not just running out of gas’, Journal of Clinical Investigation 129 (2019) 34–45. My favourite paper on the MAM hypothesis. Not just a coherent explanation for Alzheimer’s dise..."
Paragraph 5 (31 words) [SHORT]: "Powering up mitochondria by calcium activation of pyruvate dehydrogenase A. P. Wescott, J. P. Y. Kao, W. J. Lederer and L. Boyman, ‘Voltage-energized calcium-sensitive ATP production by mitochondria’, Nature Metabolism 1"
Paragraph 6 (57 words) [SHORT]: "(2019) 975–984. Just a wonderful paper. Calcium floods into the mitochondria (from the MAMs, though the authors don’t explicitly make the link) and ramps up the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase, which cranks up the Krebs cycle, mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP synthesis. The membrane poten..."
Paragraph 7 (72 words): "Biology by the numbers Ron Milo and Rob Phillips, Cell Biology by the Numbers (New York, Garland Science, 2016). Engaging, quantitative answers to all the questions you never knew you had about cells. I’m citing this book in relation to Joana Xavier’s calculations on the number of metabolic reaction..."
Paragraph 8 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Epilogue: Self"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "279"
Paragraph 1 (63 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "L. Turin and E. M. C. Skoulakis ‘Electron spin resonance (EPR) in Drosophila and general anesthesia’, Methods in Enzymology 603 (2018) 115–128 ... But they do in this paper, albeit in a less visible place. A couple of clever tricks allow them to show that general anaesthetics short-circuit the flow ..."
Paragraph 3 (47 words) [SHORT]: "A. Gaitanidis, A. Sotgui and L. Turin, ‘Spontaneous radiofrequency emission from electron spins within Drosophila : a novel biological signal’, arXiv :1907.04764 (2019). A tough paper for anyone who is not a biophysicist, but this is radical material that is opening the doors to real twenty-first-ce..."
Paragraph 4 (69 words): "EEG and mitochondria M. X. Cohen, ‘Where does EEG come from and what does it mean?’, Trends in Neurosciences 40 (2017) 208–218. Well worth a read. The fact that we’ve known about the electroencephalogram for a century, and can measure changes with great precision in sleep and many disease states, sh..."
Paragraph 5 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Actually, it shouldn’t be embarrassing. Sing it from the rooftops! Science is about what we don’t know; the fact we don’t understand the EEG means there’s exciting work to be done. Never be fooled into thinking we know most of the answers."
Paragraph 6 (15 words) [SHORT]: "T. Yardeni, A. G. Cristancho, A. J. McCoy, P. M. Schaefer, M. J. McManus, E."
Paragraph 7 (75 words): "D. Marsh and D. C. Wallace, ‘An mtDNA mutant mouse demonstrates that mitochondrial deficiency can result in autism endophenotypes’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 118 (2021) e2021429118. A specific mitochondrial mutation in mice leads to behavioural changes that are reminiscent ..."
Paragraph 8 (28 words) [SHORT]: "Electrical fields in development M. Levin and C. J. Martyniuk, ‘The bioelectric code: an ancient computational medium for dynamic control of growth and form’, Biosystems 164 (2018) 76–93."

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "280"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology."
Paragraph 2 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so."
Paragraph 3 (57 words) [SHORT]: "M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020. Here Levin teams up with Daniel Dennett, who has a very acute nose for what is important in biology, especially in relation to consciousness. We are about to make serious progress on the most exciting and important ope..."
Paragraph 4 (39 words) [SHORT]: "D. Ren, Z. Nemati, C. H. Lee, J. Li, K. Haddadi, D. C. Wallace and P. J. Burke, ‘An ultra-high bandwidth nano-electronic interface to the interior of living cells with integrated fluorescence readout of metabolic activity’, Scientific Reports 10"
Paragraph 5 (38 words) [SHORT]: "(2020) 10756. Doug Wallace is still at it, teaming up with a group of nanotechnologists on the vibrant campus in Philadelphia to measure electrical fields from mitochondria in single cells. The first steps towards addressing a tough question."
Paragraph 6 (63 words): "Consciousness and self Derek Denton, The Primordial Emotions. The Dawning of Consciousness (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2006). Denton worked for many years on salt balance and thirst, which led him to explore the ‘imperious states of arousal and compelling intentions to act’ found across the an..."
Paragraph 7 (36 words) [SHORT]: "Now in his nineties, Denton is still active; and others, including Mark Solms and Peter Godfrey-Smith (who has written two fine books on consciousness, Other Minds and Metazoa ) are beginning to argue along similar lines."
Paragraph 8 (123 words): "Mark Solms, The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of Consciousness (London, Profile Books, and New York, W. W. Norton, 2021). I was going to discuss Solms’s recent ideas in my Epilogue but they didn’t quite fit. Where he writes about the central nervous system, I think about cells. Solms develo..."
Paragraph 9 (12 words) [SHORT]: "The language of consciousness is the language of electrical fields on membranes."
Paragraph 10 (59 words) [SHORT]: "M. Solms and K. Friston, ‘How and why consciousness arises: some considerations from physics and physiology’, Journal of Consciousness Studies 25 (2018) 202–238. Solms’s ideas on consciousness were developed with Karl Friston, whose concept of free energy in this context is sometimes called ‘Friston..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "281"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016."
Paragraph 2 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his cemi field theory. I need to talk to him about mitochondria ..."
Paragraph 3 (73 words): "Membrane potential in bacteria and cell death E. S. Lander, ‘The heroes of CRISPR’, Cell 164 (2016) 18–28. I mentioned CRISPR (now widely used for clever gene editing) in relation to the bacterial immune system. This paper covers some of the backstory, tracing several decades of curiosity-driven res..."
Paragraph 4 (89 words): "D. Refardt, T. Bergmiller and R. Kümmerli, ‘Altruism can evolve when relatedness is low: evidence from bacteria committing suicide upon phage infection’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B 280 (2013) 20123035. This paper is really about kin selection in bacteria, proving it is worth their while to k..."
Paragraph 5 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Death is the permanent loss of membrane potential; plainly that kills the conscious mind too."
Paragraph 6 (127 words): "H. Strahl and L. W. Hamoen, ‘Membrane potential is important for bacterial cell division’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 107 (2010) 12281–12286. How do bacteria divide down the middle to form two daughter cells? It turns out that oscillator proteins move rapidly from one end of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "282"
Paragraph 1 (305 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."
Paragraph 2 (134 words): "I must thank, too, my fantastic lab group at UCL. They have had to fight their way through Covid, with the lab closed for several months and disrupted for much longer, leaving them worried about how to finish their PhDs, or compete for post-doc positions. Thankfully, none faced personal tragedy. Som..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "283"
Paragraph 1 (236 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."
Paragraph 2 (155 words): "Many friends and colleagues have also read either chapters or the whole book. While on the theme of Covid, I want to thank in particular Diego Maria Bertini. Diego emailed me from his hospital bed in Italy, while recovering from severe Covid during that traumatic Italian spring of 2020. Lacking much..."
Paragraph 3 (87 words): "A few words of thanks to other friends, who have read chapters or the whole book and given me feedback on pitch, content and style. Mike Carter has read all my books, chapter by chapter, and never fails to keep me going through darker days with unreasonably enthusiastic comments, to say nothing of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "284"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry."
Paragraph 2 (124 words): "She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the current title put my mind at rest. I am indebted to the legendary film editor Walter Murch, who is the only person I know who uses scientific m..."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "I can only hope that I have warmed the offending waters appropriately."
Paragraph 4 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Thanks as well to Emily MacKay, who fought her way through several chapters laced with chilly depths, having returned to university to take a degree in nutrition and medical sciences. She had to capitulate to the demands of serious study before finding her way back to warmer waters."
Paragraph 5 (23 words) [SHORT]: "And thanks to Wai Mun Yoon, who bubbles over with his own profligate ideas, always seeing the logical implications and the way ahead."
Paragraph 6 (257 words): "I need to thank a few specialist colleagues and friends for reading over specific chapters. I treasure their comments, in part for confirming that I had not made any egregious errors (though they all found a few trivial mistakes), in part for pointing me in new directions, and best of all for being ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "285"
Paragraph 1 (107 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."
Paragraph 2 (78 words): "While on the subject of cancer, I must thank Prof. Frank Sullivan, formerly of the US National Cancer Institute, and now returned to clinical practice in Galway. Frank brings a tough hands-on perspective to the difficulty of treating patients with prostate cancer, and has long seen metabolism and en..."
Paragraph 3 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Franklin Harold for detailed comments on much of my book. Frank is in his nineties, yet is still writing books himself, books that continue to brim with insight and poetry. We have been discussing bioenergetics and evolution by email and occasionally in person for two decades. I will never forget ou..."
Paragraph 4 (122 words): "Frank taught me the value of open-minded scepticism in science, and he is unyielding in applying this philosophy to my writings too. But he has also allowed himself to be somewhat caught up in the ideas presented here. And I thank Prof. Mårten Wikström, veteran of the later ‘Ox Phos wars’, who after..."
Paragraph 5 (76 words): "A short note on consciousness. I wrote a chapter on consciousness in Life Ascending in 2009, which failed to answer the question (I’m hardly alone in that). That led me into a long and enjoyable correspondence with Prof. Derek Denton, now in his nineties, yet still overflowing with energy and plans...."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "286"
Paragraph 1 (109 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."
Paragraph 2 (119 words): "Happily, that has renewed correspondence with Prof. Dan Dennett too, as well as Doug Wallace, Luca Turin and Michael Levin. I have the feeling we are about to make real progress. As Dan wrote, ‘What interesting times!’ I would like to thank Bill Gates and his team, especially Dr Trevor Mundel and Dr..."
Paragraph 3 (43 words) [SHORT]: "It remains for me to thank my family, especially my father, the historian Anthony Lane, who as always has read every chapter and commented on infelicities of style, signposting and historical context, despite harbouring little love of molecules. Love is the watchword here."
Paragraph 4 (83 words): "Some find science too cold and rational for their taste, and seek meaning in religion or spirituality. I can find plenty of meaning in science, but it would be little solace without the love of my family: my parents, brother and sister-in-law in Yorkshire, and my family in Spain and Italy. I have al..."
Paragraph 5 (25 words) [SHORT]: "Despite our best efforts to inculcate a love of science in Eneko and Hugo, it’s already clear that they will follow different paths through life."
Paragraph 6 (8 words) [SHORT]: "I look forward to seeing where they lead."
Paragraph 7 (91 words): "On the subject of family and meaning, I want to thank Mary Jane Ackland-Snow for allowing me to share a few lines about Ian, and to dedicate this book to his memory. Perhaps our best and most lasting legacy is to influence the lives of others for the better. Ian had an immense impact on my life. He ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "287"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane."
Paragraph 2 (243 words): "Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline for her unwavering belief and encouragement, and for reading and commenting on the whole book as she always does. Thanks to Ed Lake at..."
Paragraph 3 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Finally, I thank Cliff Hanks for bringing the poem ‘Like Most Revelations’ to my attention, and Richard Howard for his gracious permission to reprint the poem. It somehow captures the essence of what I have tried to say in this book, yet in a few lines from another dimension."

=== NEW SECTION: 28 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "288"
Paragraph 1 (29 words) [SHORT]: "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations."
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1"
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "conversion to succinate 295–301"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 105–6"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "acetyl CoA from citrate 223"
Paragraph 8 (2 words) [SHORT]: "discovery 56"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "prebiotic equivalent 139"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "acetyl CoA pathway 122–3, 294"
Paragraph 11 (6 words) [SHORT]: "acetyl phosphate 56, 173n4, 289–90, 293"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "ATP formation from 151–2"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "acetylation, epigenetic 223"
Paragraph 14 (7 words) [SHORT]: "acid conditions see pH Ackland-Snow, Ian 231"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "ADP (adenosine diphosphate) 66 , 151, 214, 289"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "ageing accumulation of mutations 257, 269"
Paragraph 17 (8 words) [SHORT]: "diet and 25, 232, 233, 264, 268, 272"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "diseases of 233–5, 243, 263"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "and flux capacitance 245"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "free radical theory 257–9, 262"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "glycolysis and carbon fixation 230–31"
Paragraph 22 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle reversal and 111, 259"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "mechanism of 260–67"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "predisposing to cancer 25, 195, 229–32"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "suppression of respiration 230, 259–60, 262, 264"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "alleles compensatory 247"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and individuality 234–6, 238, 243"

=== NEW SECTION: 32 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "289"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299"
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115"
Paragraph 4 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280"
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215"
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226"
Paragraph 7 (2 words) [SHORT]: "chirality 277"
Paragraph 8 (7 words) [SHORT]: "prebiotic formation 114, 116, 120–22, 132, 145"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "RNA and hydrophobicity of 149n9"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "single-letter code 165"
Paragraph 11 (12 words) [SHORT]: "see also arginine; aspartate; cysteine; glutamine ammonia 39, 70, 113–14, 222, 226–7"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "anaesthetics and consciousness 276–8"
Paragraph 13 (4 words) [SHORT]: "anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–1n7"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "antibiotic resistance 238"
Paragraph 15 (7 words) [SHORT]: "antioxidant defences 205–7, 218–19, 225 , 251"
Paragraph 16 (11 words) [SHORT]: "see also glutathione; vitamins antioxidant dosing 26, 225 , 249–50, 258"
Paragraph 17 (7 words) [SHORT]: "see also NAC antiviral defences, bacteria 282"
Paragraph 18 (12 words) [SHORT]: "apoptosis see cell death, programmed archaea (specifically) methanogens 143, 164, 166, 170"
Paragraph 19 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle in 110–11, 122–3"
Paragraph 20 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also bacteria and archaea Area-Gomez, Estela 266"
Paragraph 21 (2 words) [SHORT]: "arginine 52–3"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Arnon, Daniel 98–100, 102, 164"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "artificial intelligence (AI) 13, 274"
Paragraph 24 (7 words) [SHORT]: "ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 44–5, 48, 252"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Asimov, Isaac 248"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "aspartate 179n5, 224–7"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "assembly line analogy 170, 208"
Paragraph 28 (7 words) [SHORT]: "atmospheres early/primordial 76, 109–10, 114, 119, 165"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "of other planets 165"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "atmospheric oxygen balance 177"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "see also GOE"

=== NEW SECTION: 33 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "290"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in cellular respiration 56–7, 64"
Paragraph 3 (6 words) [SHORT]: "formation without ATP synthase 144, 151"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8"
Paragraph 5 (7 words) [SHORT]: "yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207"
Paragraph 6 (7 words) [SHORT]: "ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6"
Paragraph 7 (7 words) [SHORT]: "ATP synthase absent from first cells 151"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "effects of excess ATP 208, 218"
Paragraph 9 (11 words) [SHORT]: "as a machine 66 , 67, 69, 99, 150–51, 211, 218"
Paragraph 10 (7 words) [SHORT]: "autocatalysis 100, 126–7, 128 , 130, 132"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "autoradiographs 91–2, 102–3"
Paragraph 12 (6 words) [SHORT]: "autotrophs autotrophic bacteria 85n4, 102, 114"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin’s contribution 98"
Paragraph 14 (7 words) [SHORT]: "carbon fixation without light 85n4, 100, 288"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "origins of life and 116, 121–2, 153, 169"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "plants as 77, 103"
Paragraph 17 (10 words) [SHORT]: "bacteria carbon fixation in 69, 100, 123, 143, 167, 283"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "ecosystems and cell culture 171"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "infection causing hypoxia 213"
Paragraph 20 (3 words) [SHORT]: "membrane potentials 282"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "membrane transfer 61"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "response to phage attacks 282"
Paragraph 23 (10 words) [SHORT]: "see also cyanobacteria bacteria, anaerobic ATP and ferredoxin generation 153n2"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "sulfur bacteria 100, 103–5, 114, 166"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "vent bacteria 110, 163n2"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "bacteria, ancient molecular phylogenetics 166"
Paragraph 27 (2 words) [SHORT]: "non-photosynthetic 110"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "origins of mitochondria 68–9, 167, 281"
Paragraph 29 (7 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 73, 78, 100, 101"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "rubisco in 108"
Paragraph 31 (5 words) [SHORT]: "bacteria, autotrophic 85n4, 102, 114"
Paragraph 32 (9 words) [SHORT]: "bacteria and archaea acetyl CoA pathway in 122–3, 151"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "291"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "symbiosis among 170, 188"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Baldwin, Ernest 59"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Barja, Gustavo 271"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Baross, John 113–14"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Bassham, James 97"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3"
Paragraph 9 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9"
Paragraph 10 (7 words) [SHORT]: "the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "bilaterians 157, 183, 189"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "biochemistry defence of 22–3"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "indirect measurements 34"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "structural diagrams explained 40"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "synthetic chemistry contrasted 116"
Paragraph 16 (10 words) [SHORT]: "biological, opposed to chronological time 236–8, 256, 264, 269, 273"
Paragraph 17 (8 words) [SHORT]: "biosynthesis amino acids 72, 101, 122, 208, 215"
Paragraph 18 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle and its reversal 73, 188, 208"
Paragraph 19 (5 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 78, 101–2"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "role of NADPH 108n11, 206"
Paragraph 21 (6 words) [SHORT]: "together with energy generation 161, 260–61"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Bloch, Eduard 202–3"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Bohr, Niels 82"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Boyer, Paul 68n13"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Braben, Don 103n10"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "brain electrical fields in 280"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glucose preference 265–8, 280"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "oxidative Krebs cycle in 187"
Paragraph 29 (6 words) [SHORT]: "radio emissions and EEG signals 277–9"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Buchanan, Bob 100, 104"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Buckel, Wolfgang 163n2"
Paragraph 32 (11 words) [SHORT]: "building blocks of life, molecular as fundamental 4, 6, 9–10, 131"
Paragraph 33 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle as source 20, 33, 115, 161"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "prebiotic 24, 275"

=== NEW SECTION: 36 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "292"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2"
Paragraph 3 (6 words) [SHORT]: "in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105"
Paragraph 5 (18 words) [SHORT]: "see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102–4"
Paragraph 8 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin–Benson cycle alternative as reversed Krebs 99–100, 102–5, 114"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "other carbon fixation pathways 121–2"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen levels and 107–9, 169, 175"
Paragraph 11 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 95, 107, 174"
Paragraph 12 (9 words) [SHORT]: "the ‘Cambrian explosion’ 5, 157–61, 168, 179, 187, 210"
Paragraph 13 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Cambrian period emergence of animals and predation 25, 156–7, 160, 180, 182, 189"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "preceded by Shuram excursion 180"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Camus, Flo 246, 248"
Paragraph 16 (9 words) [SHORT]: "cancer age as a predisposing factor 25, 195, 229–32"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "altered Krebs cycle enzymes, 196, 209–10"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "archetypal metabolism 227"
Paragraph 19 (2 words) [SHORT]: "cachexia 226–7"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in the Cambrian 156"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "death rates 192, 193"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "drug treatments 15–16"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "genetic mutations explanation 192–4, 229"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "hypoxia response and 213"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle flux and 20–21, 111, 186"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "as metabolic, rather than genetic 2–5"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "use of radioisotopes 80"
Paragraph 28 (7 words) [SHORT]: "cancer cells effect of glutamine deprivation 216"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "effect of transplanting 25, 194"
Paragraph 30 (5 words) [SHORT]: "glucose fermentation 197, 201–2, 208–9n4"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Cancer Genome Atlas 193"
Paragraph 32 (3 words) [SHORT]: "cancer viruses 205"
Paragraph 33 (6 words) [SHORT]: "CARA (Council for At-Risk Academics) 31n1"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "carbon-11 ( 11"
Paragraph 35 (5 words) [SHORT]: "C) 80–81, 83–4, 85n4, 178"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "293"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "carbon-12 ( 12"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "C) 178, 180–82"
Paragraph 3 (7 words) [SHORT]: "carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6"
Paragraph 4 (9 words) [SHORT]: "carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177"
Paragraph 6 (12 words) [SHORT]: "carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in ancient atmospheres 119"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "reduction on mineral surfaces 133–41"
Paragraph 10 (9 words) [SHORT]: "carbon fixation/CO 2 fixation alternative pathways 109, 122–3, 127"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "ferredoxin and 288"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "fixation in animals 217"
Paragraph 13 (9 words) [SHORT]: "fixation in bacteria 69, 100, 123, 143, 167, 283"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "fixation in plants 83–5, 103"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "fixation in protocells 148, 163"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 85–6, 98, 100, 288"
Paragraph 17 (7 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 78, 100–101, 217, 231"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "rubisco and 76–7"
Paragraph 19 (6 words) [SHORT]: "carbon monoxide 35, 135–6, 139, 216"
Paragraph 20 (3 words) [SHORT]: "carboxylation 96, 104–5"
Paragraph 21 (9 words) [SHORT]: "carboxylic acids from CO 2 and hydrogen 115, 121"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and the Krebs line 132"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "prebiotic biosynthesis 145"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 39–41, 50"
Paragraph 25 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also acetate; C4; C6; pyruvate carcinogens 195, 204–5"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "catalysts biochemical cycles as catalytic 53"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "iron-sulfide mineral surfaces 135–9"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "metal ions 131, 152"
Paragraph 29 (6 words) [SHORT]: "nucleic acids and nucleotides 129, 148"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "ornithine as 52–3"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "succinate as 46"
Paragraph 32 (3 words) [SHORT]: "thermodynamics and 22"
Paragraph 33 (13 words) [SHORT]: "catalysts, protein see enzymes cell death, programmed (apoptosis) 194, 205, 207, 213, 216"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "and mitochondria 242"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "294"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "cell-free extracts 62"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "cell nucleus, transplanting 195"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "cells as batteries 162"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "cellular level consciousness 276"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18"
Paragraph 7 (2 words) [SHORT]: "colour 35–6n3"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "emission of radiation 27–8"
Paragraph 9 (4 words) [SHORT]: "grouping stoichiometry 171, 188"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "membranes and cell walls 61–2"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "central dogma 192"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Chandel, Navdeep 217"
Paragraph 13 (4 words) [SHORT]: "chemical reactions, depiction 134"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "chemiosmotic hypothesis/coupling 68"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Cheshire Cat grin 43, 47, 56, 106, 297"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Chlorobium bacteria 100, 103–4, 166"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "chlorophyll in anoxygenic photosynthesis 166–7, 175"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "as a haem pigment 35–6"
Paragraph 19 (7 words) [SHORT]: "mechanism of photosynthesis 85, 99, 105, 174–5"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "as a transducer 174"
Paragraph 21 (10 words) [SHORT]: "see also haem; photosynthesis chloroplasts 78, 100, 167, 221n6, 228n7"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "chordates 155, 156n1"
Paragraph 23 (8 words) [SHORT]: "cities, parallels with living cells 1–2, 14, 17–18"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "citrate and cancer growth 222–3"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "exported from mitochondria 222–3, 231, 244, 259–60"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in the Krebs non-cycle 183–4"
Paragraph 27 (9 words) [SHORT]: "removal in the Krebs cycle 172–3, 220–21, 261, 286"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 51–2, 54–5"
Paragraph 29 (14 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 101, 105, 110–11, 128 , 216–19, 221, 287 , 300– 301"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "citrate synthase 110–11, 123"
Paragraph 31 (9 words) [SHORT]: "citric acid cycle see Krebs cycle cloud chambers 86–7"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "coal and oil 139, 177"
Paragraph 33 (8 words) [SHORT]: "coenzyme A (CoA) 56–7, 128 , 140, 295–6"
Paragraph 34 (4 words) [SHORT]: "CoA-S - 289–90, 292"

=== NEW SECTION: 33 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "295"
Paragraph 1 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Colnaghi, Marco 241n2"
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "evidence from anaesthetics 276–8"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and membrane potentials 278, 283"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Corliss, Jack 112–14"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "cosmological constants 131n7"
Paragraph 8 (10 words) [SHORT]: "coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 65–6, 228n7, 262n8, 278"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Crick, Francis 10–11, 59, 128–9, 165"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "CRISPR gene editing 228n7, 282"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "crop yields 76, 109"
Paragraph 12 (8 words) [SHORT]: "cyanide and the origin of life 116, 120"
Paragraph 13 (6 words) [SHORT]: "cyanobacteria death and membrane potentials 283"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as endosymbionts 221n6"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "as ‘inventors’ of photosynthesis 78, 107, 173, 175–6"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "cycles, biochemical necessarily catalytic 53"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "nutrient cycles 126"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Q cycle 68n13"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "urea cycle 52, 224–7"
Paragraph 20 (14 words) [SHORT]: "see also Calvin–Benson; Krebs; reverse Krebs cyclotrons 79, 80n2, 82, 83n3, 84, 85n4, 87–9"
Paragraph 21 (2 words) [SHORT]: "cysteine 146"
Paragraph 22 (7 words) [SHORT]: "see also NAC cytochromes 64n11, 166–7, 198–9"
Paragraph 23 (8 words) [SHORT]: "cytochrome oxidase 35–6n3, 49, 199, 214n5, 216, 278"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "‘Darwin’s dilemma’ 157"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Davies, Paul 129n6"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Dayhoff, Margaret 164–8"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "DeBerardinis, Ralph 217"
Paragraph 28 (3 words) [SHORT]: "dehydration reactions 138"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Delphi, Temple of Apollo 272–3"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "diabetes 21, 189, 243, 266, 268n10"
Paragraph 31 (5 words) [SHORT]: "diet and drug response 15"
Paragraph 32 (11 words) [SHORT]: "and the effects of ageing 25, 232, 233, 264, 268, 272"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "296"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "imposed on Calvin 94n6"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "ketogenic diets 228"
Paragraph 3 (8 words) [SHORT]: "and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wallace on 242"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg on 197"
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269"
Paragraph 7 (6 words) [SHORT]: "diseases chronic infections and cancer 195"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "genetic variation and 14, 235, 237"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondrial genome 240"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "of old age 233–5, 243, 263"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "succinate accumulation 214–15"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "disulfide bridges 252–4"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "DNA sequencing 193"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "structure elucidation 10–11"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "dogmas 28, 77, 98, 103, 192"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "drug treatments and response 15–16, 249"
Paragraph 17 (8 words) [SHORT]: "the ‘dynamic side’ 6–7, 12–13, 16, 28, 274"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Earth as a battery 162"
Paragraph 19 (7 words) [SHORT]: "geology of the early Earth 117, 119"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "global freeze 158, 176, 179"
Paragraph 21 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Ech (energy-converting hydrogenase) 143, 145–6, 147 , 163"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Eck, Richard 164"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Ediacarans 155, 157, 182–3, 189"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "EEG (electroencephalography) 278–9"
Paragraph 25 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Einstein, Albert 82–3n3, 198–200, 212"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "electron bifurcation 163n2"
Paragraph 27 (6 words) [SHORT]: "electron donors, alternative ferredoxin as 105–6"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "H 2 S as 166–7"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen from hydrothermal vents 141"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "electron spin resonance 276–7"
Paragraph 31 (6 words) [SHORT]: "electron transfers in anaesthesia 277, 279"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in carbon dioxide reduction 133–41"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "by ferredoxin 288"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "electron-transport chains 174"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "297"
Paragraph 1 (8 words) [SHORT]: "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Emerson, Robert 199–200"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Enceladus 117, 120"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "endoplasmic reticulum 266n9"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "endosymbiosis 69, 221n6"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "energetics of early life 168"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "of fixed carbon 160"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "of living cells as invisible 3"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "of respiration 32"
Paragraph 10 (9 words) [SHORT]: "energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275"
Paragraph 11 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Energy Flow in Biology , by Morowitz 125–6"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "environmental adaptation 236, 242"
Paragraph 13 (5 words) [SHORT]: "enzymes driving metabolic flux 14–15"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "iron-(nickel-)sulfur 135, 139, 143"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "mineral surfaces compared 134, 294"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle and 130"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "turnover rates 76"
Paragraph 18 (14 words) [SHORT]: "see also specific enzymes epigenetic changes in cells 215, 223, 231, 244–5, 269, 271–3"
Paragraph 19 (6 words) [SHORT]: "of tissues 190, 252, 259, 262–4"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "epilepsy 237, 240, 278"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "eukaryotes 179, 189, 269n11"
Paragraph 22 (6 words) [SHORT]: "evolution ideal of perfection and 199–200"
Paragraph 23 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle and its reverse 70–73"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "of the mitochondrial genome 240–41"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "exercise 25, 223, 232–3, 256, 264, 268"
Paragraph 26 (2 words) [SHORT]: "exoplanets 119"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "extinct species, resurrecting 238–9"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) 48"
Paragraph 29 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Fendt, Sarah-Maria 261n7"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "‘ferment’, respiratory 35–6, 64n11, 199, 216"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "fermentation alcoholic 170"
Paragraph 32 (7 words) [SHORT]: "of glucose in cancer 197, 201–2, 208–9n4"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "of glucose with ageing 230"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "298"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142"
Paragraph 3 (5 words) [SHORT]: "detailed mechanism of action 288–93"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "discovery and properties 105–10, 114"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Ech interaction 143–4"
Paragraph 6 (7 words) [SHORT]: "mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "reactivity with oxygen 106–8"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 128 , 163"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "FeS see iron-sulfur Fieldhouse, Margaret 49n7"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Fischer–Tropsch synthesis 139, 145, 295"
Paragraph 11 (2 words) [SHORT]: "flagella 283"
Paragraph 12 (2 words) [SHORT]: "flavins 35n3"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Fleming, Alexander 59"
Paragraph 14 (9 words) [SHORT]: "flies, Drosophila melanogaster 245–6, 248–51, 253–6, 259, 263, 276–7"
Paragraph 15 (3 words) [SHORT]: "flux, defined 7"
Paragraph 16 (15 words) [SHORT]: "see also Krebs cycle flux; metabolic flux; ROS flux flux capacitors, mitochondria as 244, 266"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "‘follow the money’ rule 196, 228"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Franklin, Rosalind 10, 13"
Paragraph 19 (5 words) [SHORT]: "free energy 4n1, 32, 65n12"
Paragraph 20 (7 words) [SHORT]: "free radicals 25, 106–7, 248, 252, 278"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen as 158–9"
Paragraph 22 (7 words) [SHORT]: "free radical theory of ageing 257–9, 262"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Frezza, Christian 210, 214n5"
Paragraph 24 (2 words) [SHORT]: "fumarate 286–7"
Paragraph 25 (6 words) [SHORT]: "fumarate hydratase 210, 215, 217, 220"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "fumarate reductase 185, 210–11, 213"
Paragraph 27 (7 words) [SHORT]: "gas pressures pressure and hydrogen availability 142"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "tissue slice experiments 33–8"
Paragraph 29 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Gell-Mann, Murray 124"
Paragraph 30 (5 words) [SHORT]: "gene editing 14, 228n7, 282"
Paragraph 31 (7 words) [SHORT]: "genes activated by HIF 1α 212, 215"
Paragraph 32 (3 words) [SHORT]: "globin genes 187"
Paragraph 33 (4 words) [SHORT]: "late-acting genes 234, 236–7"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "299"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "origins in protocells 149–50, 275"
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "(reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215"
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150"
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9, 166"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "genetic determinism and cancer 193–4, 229"
Paragraph 6 (7 words) [SHORT]: "geology of the early Earth 117, 119"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "gluconeogenesis 108, 131, 224"
Paragraph 8 (7 words) [SHORT]: "glucose in neurons and pancreas 265, 267–8"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 37, 39–40, 57"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and the textbook Krebs cycle 23–4"
Paragraph 11 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and the Warburg Effect 197, 200"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glutamine from α-ketoglutarate 184"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "in cancer 215–16, 217 , 221–2, 224, 226–7"
Paragraph 14 (6 words) [SHORT]: "in nitrogen delivery 70, 189, 215"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glutathione (GSH) 206, 251–5"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glutathione, oxidised (GSSG) 252–4"
Paragraph 17 (2 words) [SHORT]: "S-glutathionylation 254"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glycation of proteins 260"
Paragraph 19 (6 words) [SHORT]: "glyceraldehyde phosphate 95, 100, 174, 224"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glycerol phosphate 224, 225"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glycerol phosphate shunt 262"
Paragraph 22 (9 words) [SHORT]: "glycolysis aerobic glycolysis 203, 209–10, 213, 215, 223–5, 232"
Paragraph 23 (6 words) [SHORT]: "effect of excess ATP 207–8, 213"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs’s observation 39–40"
Paragraph 25 (6 words) [SHORT]: "NAD + -to-NADH ratios 179n5, 230"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and tissue ATP demands 188, 201"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Gnaiger, Erich 171–2"
Paragraph 28 (10 words) [SHORT]: "GOE (the Great Oxidation Event) 176, 178, 181, 182n6, 186"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Gould, Stephen Jay 156n1"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "greigite 121, 133, 135"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "groups, chemical 38–9n4"
Paragraph 32 (10 words) [SHORT]: "growth metabolic shift in cancer 196, 205, 209, 213, 223–4"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic shift with age 231"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "300"
Paragraph 1 (2 words) [SHORT]: "protocells 146–7"
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244"
Paragraph 3 (7 words) [SHORT]: "2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6"
Paragraph 4 (11 words) [SHORT]: "see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Haldane, JS 30"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "half-lives, proteins 212"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Halpern, Aaron 148"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "‘handicap principle’ 261"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Harrison, Stuart 131, 148"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Hassid, Zev 84–5"
Paragraph 13 (4 words) [SHORT]: "heredity mechanism of 10"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in protocells 147–8"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "heritability missing 236–7, 263"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "and mitochondria 244"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "heterotrophy 108, 116, 168–9, 182"
Paragraph 18 (7 words) [SHORT]: "HIF 1α (hypoxia-inducible factor) 212–13, 259, 270"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "histones, acetylation 223–4, 231"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Hitler, Adolph 30, 191, 202–3"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Hochachka, Peter 257n5"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Hoffman, Sarah 113–14"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "homeostasis, metabolic 188–9, 259, 283"
Paragraph 24 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Hopkins, Frederick Gowland 6–8, 27–31, 44, 49, 58–60, 64n11"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Howard, Richard 285"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Hudson, Reuben 144"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "humans ATP synthesis in 66"
Paragraph 28 (7 words) [SHORT]: "cell numbers and reactions per second 269"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "lifespan prolongation 235–6, 258, 272"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "‘hybrid breakdown’ 247"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "hydride ions 136, 297"
Paragraph 32 (8 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen (2H) balanced in Krebs non-cycle 185, 201"
Paragraph 33 (8 words) [SHORT]: "in biosynthesis 73, 106–7, 108n11, 128 , 206"

=== NEW SECTION: 33 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "301"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261"
Paragraph 2 (6 words) [SHORT]: "2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6"
Paragraph 3 (7 words) [SHORT]: "2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 99–100, 174"
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262"
Paragraph 6 (10 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141"
Paragraph 7 (9 words) [SHORT]: "reaction with CO 2 115, 121, 133, 141–4, 152–4"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "transfer in respiration 37, 47–52"
Paragraph 9 (12 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) 105, 113–14, 166–7, 182–3, 210, 213, 263"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "hydrophobicity 149n9, 278"
Paragraph 11 (8 words) [SHORT]: "hydrothermal vents alkaline environment 120, 141–4, 146, 147"
Paragraph 12 (8 words) [SHORT]: "chemical environment 113–14, 119–20, 132, 139, 141, 153–4"
Paragraph 13 (6 words) [SHORT]: "explored with a submersible 112–13, 115"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "non-photosynthetic bacteria 110, 163n2"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "origin of life and 116–17, 142–6, 150, 162"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "photosynthesis at 114, 115n2"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "pressure and hydrogen availability 142"
Paragraph 18 (2 words) [SHORT]: "hyperglycaemia 267n10"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "inflammatory response 213, 231"
Paragraph 20 (6 words) [SHORT]: "information absent from small molecules 283–4"
Paragraph 21 (10 words) [SHORT]: "as fundamental to biology 4, 12, 129, 148–51, 194, 275"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "view of cancer 192"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "insulin secretion/resistance 265–7, 268n10"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Inwongwan, Gla 252"
Paragraph 25 (8 words) [SHORT]: "iron–(nickel–)sulfur enzymes 135, 139, 143, 147 , 262"
Paragraph 26 (13 words) [SHORT]: "see also ferredoxin iron-sulfide minerals in alkaline hydrothermal vents 114–15, 121–2, 144, 147"
Paragraph 27 (6 words) [SHORT]: "surfaces as catalytic 133, 135, 139"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "iron–sulfur clusters/catalysts in ferredoxin 105"
Paragraph 29 (6 words) [SHORT]: "FeS clusters/surfaces 147, 151, 254, 255n4"
Paragraph 30 (5 words) [SHORT]: "growth of protocells with 147"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 174"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and reverse Krebs cycle 118–19"

=== NEW SECTION: 32 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "302"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146"
Paragraph 2 (11 words) [SHORT]: "isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "isotope studies 144"
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Japanese lifespans 272"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Jordan, Sean 145"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 200"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Kelley, Deborah 115"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "ketocarboxylates 41, 106, 288"
Paragraph 12 (14 words) [SHORT]: "α-ketoglutarate carboxylation to (iso)citrate 101 , 105, 128 , 217–21, 222 , 261, 287"
Paragraph 13 (5 words) [SHORT]: "conversion to glutamine 226, 227"
Paragraph 14 (13 words) [SHORT]: "derived from citrate and isocitrate 51–2, 184, 185 , 218, 220, 231, 261"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "derived from glutamine 70, 221, 222 , 261n7"
Paragraph 16 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also Krebs cycle intermediates ketones 228, 265"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Kluyver, Albert 9"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Knoll, Andy 182–3"
Paragraph 19 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs, Hans 18, 23, 28, 30, 31n1, 49–50n7, 65n12"
Paragraph 20 (7 words) [SHORT]: "work on respiration 32–3, 37–8, 43–4, 51"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs, (Lord) John 31n1, 49n7"
Paragraph 22 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle biosynthesis and ATP synthesis 260–61"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "first draft 54–5"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "fuelling the Cambrian explosion 160"
Paragraph 25 (2 words) [SHORT]: "introduced 18–19"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "origins and evolution 70–73, 118, 184"
Paragraph 27 (7 words) [SHORT]: "oxidative and reductive prongs 184–6, 210, 230"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reversal 61n7, 111, 126, 217, 230"
Paragraph 29 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle, reverse see reverse Krebs Krebs cycle enzymes membrane bound 211"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mutations affecting 196, 209–10, 215, 220"
Paragraph 31 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle fluxes and ageing 25, 252–3, 264–7, 272, 280–81"

=== NEW SECTION: 36 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "303"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in cancer cells 222–3, 228"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in fruit flies 255–6"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "autocatalysis and 127n5"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "conserved intermediates 123"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "diagnostic of cell health 270"
Paragraph 11 (5 words) [SHORT]: "leaking from mitochondria 259, 270"
Paragraph 12 (7 words) [SHORT]: "in prebiotic chemistry 121–3, 132, 149, 152"
Paragraph 13 (7 words) [SHORT]: "succinate as a tipping point 186, 211–12"
Paragraph 14 (6 words) [SHORT]: "whether involved in photosynthesis 93–4, 103–5"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs junctions 222, 225 , 226"
Paragraph 16 (7 words) [SHORT]: "the Krebs line 132–3, 161, 172–3, 294–301"
Paragraph 17 (8 words) [SHORT]: "lactate in cancer cells 204, 216, 224, 228"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "from pyruvate 200–201, 216, 224–5"
Paragraph 19 (9 words) [SHORT]: "as waste product 185 , 188, 200–201, 224, 228"
Paragraph 20 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Lawrence, Ernest 79–80, 82, 87n5, 88, 90"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Lehninger, Albert 53n10"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Levin, Michael 280"
Paragraph 23 (7 words) [SHORT]: "life characterised by energy flows 4–5, 18"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "characterised by metabolism 8"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘elementary particles’ of 67"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "elsewhere in the solar system 117"
Paragraph 27 (6 words) [SHORT]: "emergence as inevitable 127, 131n7, 275"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "photosynthesis freeing life from minerals 174–5"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "as thermodynamically favoured 275"
Paragraph 30 (12 words) [SHORT]: "life, origin see origin of life Life Itself , by Crick 129"
Paragraph 31 (6 words) [SHORT]: "lifespan of bats and birds 271"
Paragraph 32 (4 words) [SHORT]: "biological time and 235–6"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "differences, men and women 247"
Paragraph 34 (5 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic rate and 256–8, 270–71"
Paragraph 35 (4 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondrial DNA and 272"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "304"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "tissue symbiosis 190"
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3"
Paragraph 3 (6 words) [SHORT]: "light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "powering ATP synthesis 105"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "synthesis of organics in plants 107"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "limestone 119, 178"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151"
Paragraph 9 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Lost in the Twentieth Century , by Szent-Györgyi 44"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "LUCA (last universal common ancestor) 122"
Paragraph 11 (7 words) [SHORT]: "machines, molecular ATP synthase 67, 69, 150"
Paragraph 12 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle as 19, 53"
Paragraph 13 (9 words) [SHORT]: "of respiration 99, 174, 196, 202, 214n5, 266, 270"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "the ribosome 13–14"
Paragraph 15 (14 words) [SHORT]: "malate as Krebs cycle C4 acid 47, 70–71, 93, 184, 185 , 283, 286"
Paragraph 16 (9 words) [SHORT]: "in the Krebs line 128, 230, 287 , 299–300"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 128, 230, 287"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "malate–aspartate shuttle 179n5"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "male fertility 248–9"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "malic enzyme 224, 253"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "MAMs (mitochondria-associated membranes) 266–8, 280"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "manganese fields 176, 178"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "manometers 31, 34–5, 37, 39"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Margulis, Lynn 68–9, 165, 167"
Paragraph 25 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Martin, Bill 117, 119–21, 168"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "mass extinctions, end-Permian 158, 182–3"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "McGlynn, Shawn 170"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Medawar, Peter 234, 236"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "membranes anaesthetic effects and 277"
Paragraph 30 (7 words) [SHORT]: "electrical charge on 68, 244, 275, 282–3"
Paragraph 31 (7 words) [SHORT]: "formation of, and primitive life 117, 145"
Paragraph 32 (13 words) [SHORT]: "see also mitochondrial membranes membrane bound enzymes 211, 219–20, 222 , 226, 253"
Paragraph 33 (6 words) [SHORT]: "see also Ech Mendel, Gregor 243–4"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "305"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "numeric interpretation 8, 269–70"
Paragraph 3 (7 words) [SHORT]: "redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "as reversible 153, 168–9"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "signalling function 20–21, 244"
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic rate and lifespan 256–8, 270–71"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic reprogramming 205–6"
Paragraph 11 (6 words) [SHORT]: "metabolism conservation of core process 18"
Paragraph 12 (8 words) [SHORT]: "as having preceded genes 5–6, 17, 118, 150"
Paragraph 13 (7 words) [SHORT]: "overemphasis on sugars 23–4, 77, 81–3, 90"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "metabolomics 16, 17n3, 189"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "metals, worldwide oxidation 176"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "methane 113–14, 116, 176–7"
Paragraph 17 (7 words) [SHORT]: "methanogens and methanotrophs 143, 164, 166, 170"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "methyl group transfer 138–9"
Paragraph 19 (11 words) [SHORT]: "microbes see bacteria and archaea; protists Millay, Edna St Vincent 17"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Miller, Stanley 114, 116"
Paragraph 21 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mineral surfaces carbon dioxide reduction 133–41"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "compared to enzymes 134, 294"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "iron-sulfide as catalysts 135–9"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "origin of life and 133, 144"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Mitchell, Peter 58–69, 99"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Mitchell, Sir Godfrey 60–61n9"
Paragraph 27 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondria bacterial origins 68–9, 167, 281"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "as flux capacitors 244, 266"
Paragraph 29 (7 words) [SHORT]: "as location of respiration 32, 67–8n13, 70–71"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "response to damage 217"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘mitochondrial Eve’ 241–2, 246"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondrial genome diseases 240, 247–8, 263–4"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "drug response 249"
Paragraph 34 (4 words) [SHORT]: "interactions with nuclear 238–41"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "306"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "offering improved lifespan 272"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8"
Paragraph 6 (8 words) [SHORT]: "charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9"
Paragraph 7 (2 words) [SHORT]: "cristae 279"
Paragraph 8 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 263–4"
Paragraph 9 (4 words) [SHORT]: "molecules organic, defined 119"
Paragraph 10 (4 words) [SHORT]: "simple, in biochemistry 6–8"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Moncada, Salvador 216–17"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Moran, Joseph 121"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Moreira, Paula 268n10"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Morowitz, Harold 125n4, 140"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Morowitz’s cycling law 124–8"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "‘mother’s curse’ 246–8"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "movie-making analogy 97–8n6"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Moyle, Jennifer 59–60, 65–7"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Muller, Hermann 245"
Paragraph 20 (6 words) [SHORT]: "multicellular organisms parallel processing 161, 188"
Paragraph 21 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mutations accumulation with ageing 257, 269"
Paragraph 22 (6 words) [SHORT]: "affecting Krebs cycle enzymes 196, 209–10"
Paragraph 23 (8 words) [SHORT]: "in the mitochondrial genome 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "occurring outside tumours 194"
Paragraph 25 (5 words) [SHORT]: "rates in different species 195–6"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "whether underlying cancer 192–4, 196, 204"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "from X-irradiation 245"
Paragraph 28 (8 words) [SHORT]: "NAC ( N -acetyl cysteine) 249–52, 255, 263"
Paragraph 29 (12 words) [SHORT]: "NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) 63, 108n11, 179n5, 201, 206n3, 220, 261"
Paragraph 30 (7 words) [SHORT]: "NAD + to NADH ratio 179n5, 270"
Paragraph 31 (6 words) [SHORT]: "NADH 63–4, 108n11, 196, 206n3, 223"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "oxidation and age 230, 261, 270–71"
Paragraph 33 (11 words) [SHORT]: "NADP + (phosphorylated NAD + ) 107, 108n11, 109, 206n3, 218–19"
Paragraph 34 (1 words) [SHORT]: "NADPH"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "307"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "programmed cell death and 207"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and transhydrogenase 222 , 226"
Paragraph 8 (7 words) [SHORT]: "nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "nanoSIMS (secondary ion mass spectrometry) 170"
Paragraph 10 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Nature (periodical) 55, 65, 171, 193, 217"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Needham, Dorothy 29, 45"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "neurons 265–8, 274"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "electrical fields 279–80"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "neutrons 27, 80–81, 87–8, 178"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "nitric oxide (NO) 36n3, 159, 216"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "nitrogen delivered as aspartate 224, 225"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "delivered as glutamine 215, 224"
Paragraph 18 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Nobel Prizes awarded to Warburg 35, 196–7, 199"
Paragraph 19 (9 words) [SHORT]: "not awarded to Kamen, Ruben or Moyle 65, 90"
Paragraph 20 (11 words) [SHORT]: "other individual laureates 27–8, 44, 57, 59, 65, 67–8n13, 82, 97"
Paragraph 21 (16 words) [SHORT]: "nuclear genome, effects on males 247 see also mitonuclear mismatches nuclear physics, in 1932 27, 87n5"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "nucleotides as catalysts 129, 148"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "energetics of synthesis 208"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "laboratory synthesis 116n3"
Paragraph 25 (5 words) [SHORT]: "possible origin in protocells 148"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "role of glutamine 215, 222"
Paragraph 27 (11 words) [SHORT]: "from sugars and amino acids 20, 104, 122, 131, 205, 224"
Paragraph 28 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also FAD; NAD + Nunes Palmeira, Raquel 148"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Ochoa, Severo 105, 217"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "oncogenes 192–4, 205"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "oocytes and mitochondria 240–42"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Oppenheimer, Robert 82, 88, 90"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "organ transplantation 214"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Orgel, Leslie 128–31"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "308"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "inevitability 127, 131n7, 275"
Paragraph 3 (6 words) [SHORT]: "metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen as inimical 157"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "processes summarised 275"
Paragraph 6 (2 words) [SHORT]: "ornithine 52–3"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248"
Paragraph 9 (2 words) [SHORT]: "overeating 264"
Paragraph 10 (4 words) [SHORT]: "overheating in animals 262n8"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Overton, Judge William 125"
Paragraph 12 (10 words) [SHORT]: "oxaloacetate in cancer biochemistry 216, 220, 223–6, 228, 230–31, 260"
Paragraph 13 (9 words) [SHORT]: "as Krebs cycle intermediate 47–8, 54–7, 70, 100–101, 286"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in the Krebs non-cycle 184–5"
Paragraph 15 (14 words) [SHORT]: "in the reverse Krebs cycle 100–101, 104, 110, 123, 127–8, 173n4, 287 , 298"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen atmospheric, as in balance 177"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and the Cambrian explosion 156–8"
Paragraph 18 (8 words) [SHORT]: "cellular response to a deficit 201, 210, 213–14"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "free radical character 158"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle reversal and 154"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "reaction with hydrogen sulfide 114"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "from water via photosynthesis 173–4"
Paragraph 23 (2 words) [SHORT]: "palmitate 206–8"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "pancreas 265, 268"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Paramecium 276, 281"
Paragraph 26 (10 words) [SHORT]: "particle accelerators 79, 80, 81n2, 82, 83n3, 84, 85n4, 87–9"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Pauling, Linus 98, 165"
Paragraph 28 (8 words) [SHORT]: "pentose phosphate pathway/shunt 108, 131, 207, 224, 253"
Paragraph 29 (6 words) [SHORT]: "PET (positron emission tomography) scans 265"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "pH and ATP formation 64, 152"
Paragraph 31 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and CO 2 reduction 142–3"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "pH gradient, hydrothermal vents 144, 146"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "phages (bacteriophages) 282"
Paragraph 34 (7 words) [SHORT]: "philosophical approaches 58–9, 69, 99, 124, 203"

=== NEW SECTION: 36 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "309"
Paragraph 1 (9 words) [SHORT]: "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "photophosphorylation 99, 105"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "photorespiration 76, 109"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "mechanism 82–6, 103, 199"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "phosphoglycerate in 92"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "preceded by respiration 36, 167"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "range of locations 74–5"
Paragraph 12 (7 words) [SHORT]: "water as the source of oxygen 173–4"
Paragraph 13 (6 words) [SHORT]: "photosystems in oxygenic photosynthesis 167, 175"
Paragraph 14 (6 words) [SHORT]: "phylogenetic evidence 110, 122, 165, 168"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "pigeon-breast muscle 45, 52, 71, 189"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Pikaia 156, 183–4"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Pinna, Silvana 152"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "plants as autotrophs 77, 103"
Paragraph 19 (5 words) [SHORT]: "carbon fixation in 83–5, 103"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "evidence relevant to cancer 228n7"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "synthesis of organics 107"
Paragraph 22 (12 words) [SHORT]: "porphyrins see haem prebiotic chemistry 116, 120–21, 129–32, 145, 148, 151, 300–301"
Paragraph 23 (9 words) [SHORT]: "predators and prey 156, 160, 180, 183, 235–6, 281"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "pressure and CO 2 reduction 142"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘primordial soup’ idea 169"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "prolyl hydroxylases 212"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "proteins breakdown in cancer 226"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "chirality of amino acids 277"
Paragraph 29 (3 words) [SHORT]: "disulfide bridges 253–4"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "folding mechanisms 13, 258"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "peptide templating 149n9"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "rubisco as the most abundant 75"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "synthesis and ATP demand 208"
Paragraph 34 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also enzymes protists 3–4, 161, 186, 276, 281"
Paragraph 35 (6 words) [SHORT]: "‘protocells’ 24, 117, 145–50, 152–3, 275"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "310"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164"
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220"
Paragraph 3 (8 words) [SHORT]: "powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "protons in acidic environments 137–8"
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262"
Paragraph 6 (2 words) [SHORT]: "representation 41"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "pyrites, iron 115, 182"
Paragraph 9 (9 words) [SHORT]: "pyruvate/pyruvic acid from CO 2 and H 2 121"
Paragraph 10 (4 words) [SHORT]: "derived from acetate 289–93"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in glycolysis 40–41"
Paragraph 12 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 43–7, 51, 54–5"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "in reverse Krebs cycle 101–2, 105, 169, 287"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "structure and representation 42–3, 296–8"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "pyruvate dehydrogenase 209n4, 267–8, 280"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Q cycle (quinones) 68n13"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "quantum effects 64, 135, 276"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘race’ as unimportant 250"
Paragraph 19 (8 words) [SHORT]: "the Rad Lab, Berkeley 79, 82, 84, 89–90"
Paragraph 20 (6 words) [SHORT]: "radio emission from the brain 277–8"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "radioisotopes applications 16, 80"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "half-lives 81, 83. 86"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "and photosynthesis 79–82"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "radioisotopes of carbon see carbon-11; carbon-14"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Ralser, Markus 131"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Ramakrishnan, Venki 13"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Rammu, Hanadi 145"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "red beds 176, 178"
Paragraph 29 (8 words) [SHORT]: "red protein see ferredoxin redox tone 259, 271"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "respiration blocking with carbon monoxide 35"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "efficiency of aerobic 159"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Hans Krebs on 19, 32–3, 37–8"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen transfer in 37, 47–52"

=== NEW SECTION: 37 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "311"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "photophosphorylation and 99"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "as preceding photosynthesis 36"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "role of NADH 108n11"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "role of succinate 211–14"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254"
Paragraph 7 (7 words) [SHORT]: "suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264"
Paragraph 8 (12 words) [SHORT]: "respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "complex II 66 , 211, 214n5"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "complex III 66 , 225, 262"
Paragraph 11 (7 words) [SHORT]: "electron escape to form ROS 219–20, 255n4"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "fumarate reductase and 185–6"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "NADH and NADPH in 64, 108n11, 179n5, 219–20"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "succinate accumulation and 214n5"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "uncoupling in plants 228n7"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘respiratory ferment’ 199, 216"
Paragraph 17 (9 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle in ancient bacteria 78, 100, 101"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "distribution among species 110–11"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "driving ATP synthesis 98–104"
Paragraph 20 (2 words) [SHORT]: "energetics 104–11"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "eventual acceptance 103, 114"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "evolution and 73, 109–10"
Paragraph 23 (8 words) [SHORT]: "origins of life and 116, 118–23, 130, 152"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Oroboros metaphor 172–3"
Paragraph 25 (6 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen levels and 106–7, 109, 157–8"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "parallels with photosynthesis 83–4"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "side products 130–31"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Warburg effect 204"
Paragraph 29 (2 words) [SHORT]: "ribosomes 13"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "ribulose bisphosphate 94–6"
Paragraph 31 (8 words) [SHORT]: "RNA (ribonucleic acid) and amino acid hydrophobicity 149n9"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "origins in protocells 148–51, 275"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "regulatory RNAs 12n2"
Paragraph 34 (4 words) [SHORT]: "RNA World hypothesis 129"
Paragraph 35 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Rodriguez, Enrique 252"
Paragraph 36 (9 words) [SHORT]: "ROS (reactive oxygen species) from mitochondrial complex I 230"

=== NEW SECTION: 36 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "312"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "supercharged membrane potentials 219"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in transplant organs 214n5"
Paragraph 3 (13 words) [SHORT]: "see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72"
Paragraph 4 (8 words) [SHORT]: "roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102"
Paragraph 7 (7 words) [SHORT]: "rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase) Calvin–Benson cycle 96"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "carbon isotope ratios 178"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "crop yields and 76, 109"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as repurposed 108"
Paragraph 11 (5 words) [SHORT]: "shortcomings as an enzyme 75–6"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Russell, Mike 115–16, 119"
Paragraph 13 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Rutherford, Ernest 30, 81"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sagan, Carl 165"
Paragraph 15 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sanger, Fred 59"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Schon, Eric 266"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "science cancer research spending 192"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘creation science’ and 125"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as creative 36"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "culture and risk taking 198"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "disagreements in 116"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "major unsolved problems 276–7"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as self-correcting 94n6"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "serendipitous discoveries 228n7, 248"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as teamwork 97–8n9"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "testable predictions 50, 68n13"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as uncertain 273"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘Scopes II’ trial 124"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "selection and cancer 191, 217"
Paragraph 30 (5 words) [SHORT]: "favouring biochemical efficiency 116n3, 118"
Paragraph 31 (5 words) [SHORT]: "favouring reproductive fitness 4, 234"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "flight and ROS flux 271–2"
Paragraph 33 (6 words) [SHORT]: "operating on random RNA sequences 149–51"
Paragraph 34 (4 words) [SHORT]: "self, sensation of 280"
Paragraph 35 (6 words) [SHORT]: "senescent (epigenetic) states 259, 262, 269–72"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "313"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "serpentinisation 120, 174"
Paragraph 2 (6 words) [SHORT]: "sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "sexual ornamentation 261"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183"
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sirevag, Reidun 102"
Paragraph 8 (2 words) [SHORT]: "sirtuins 223"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "small organic molecules on Enceladus 117"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "protein binding 85"
Paragraph 11 (11 words) [SHORT]: "see also Krebs cycle intermediates Snowball Earth episodes 158, 176, 179"
Paragraph 12 (6 words) [SHORT]: "SNPs (single-nucleotide polymorphisms) 235, 249–50, 264"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Soddy, Frederick 81"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "sodium gradients 163n2"
Paragraph 15 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sojo, Victor 144"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "space missions 117"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "speciation, and the mitochondrial genome 238–9"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "starvation 70, 236"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "stem cells 203, 208n4"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Stephenson, Marjory 29, 31, 59–60"
Paragraph 21 (9 words) [SHORT]: "submarine vents see hydrothermal succinate accumulation in disease 214–15"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "catalytic role 46–7, 286–7"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "citrate conversion to 51–2"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "and hypoxia 185, 211–12"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "at Krebs non-cycle meeting point 185, 210"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 105–6"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "succinate dehydrogenase 185, 210–11, 214–15"
Paragraph 28 (12 words) [SHORT]: "succinyl CoA 128 , 184, 215 , 222 , 231, 260–61n7, 286–7"
Paragraph 29 (7 words) [SHORT]: "sugars in the Calvin-Benson cycle 95–6n8, 98"
Paragraph 30 (9 words) [SHORT]: "overemphasis on, in metabolism 77, 81–3, 90, 95, 103"
Paragraph 31 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also glucose sulfate as an oxidant 181"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "sulfur, in CoA 57, 289–90"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "sulfur bacteria 100, 104–5, 114"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sweetlove, Lee 228n7"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "314"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "endosymbiosis 69, 221n6"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "between tissues 189–90, 265"
Paragraph 4 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Thauer, Rolf 163n2"
Paragraph 6 (8 words) [SHORT]: "thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275"
Paragraph 7 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and the Krebs cycle 22, 126"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "laws recast as information 4"
Paragraph 9 (4 words) [SHORT]: "and metabolic rate 258–9"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Second law 124"
Paragraph 11 (2 words) [SHORT]: "thioacetate 151–2"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Thompson, Craig 206–7"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "tissue slice experiments 28, 33–9, 51–2, 71, 189"
Paragraph 14 (6 words) [SHORT]: "tissues differentiation 189, 202, 208–9, 269"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "flux complementarity 25, 189–90"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "symbiosis between 189–90, 265"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "traffic analogy 7–8, 14–16, 53–4"
Paragraph 18 (7 words) [SHORT]: "transhydrogenases, membrane 219–20, 222 , 226, 253"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "transmutation 27, 81, 88"
Paragraph 20 (9 words) [SHORT]: "tricarboxylic acid cycle see Krebs cycle trophic levels 159–60"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "tumour-suppressor genes 192–3, 205"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Turin, Luca 276–9"
Paragraph 23 (6 words) [SHORT]: "twin studies 236–8, 245, 248, 263"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "uncoupling proteins 228n7, 262n8"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "urea 8, 28, 38–9"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "urea cycle 52, 224–7"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Van Leeuwenhoek, Antonie 3"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "ventilation in an anaerobic world 183"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "vertebrates, ancestors of 155–6"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Vesalius, Andreas 243"
Paragraph 31 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Viagra 216"
Paragraph 32 (3 words) [SHORT]: "viruses 205, 282"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The Vital Question (book) 281"

=== NEW SECTION: 29 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "315"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62"
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Walker, Sara 130n6"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Walker, Sir John 67–8n13"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg, Emil 197"
Paragraph 8 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49"
Paragraph 10 (7 words) [SHORT]: "disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "experimental approach 33, 35–8"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "respiration before photosynthesis 167"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "the Warburg effect 196–7, 203–6, 209, 215, 222"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Warburg effect 204"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "water dehydration reactions in 138"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen from, in photosynthesis 173–4"
Paragraph 17 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Watson, James 10, 128"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "West, Geoffrey 257n5"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wildman, Sam 75"
Paragraph 20 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wilkins, Maurice 10"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wimpey Construction 60–61n9"
Paragraph 22 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Wonderful Life , by Gould 156n1"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "X-rays, biological effects 87n5, 245"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "X-ray crystallography 10, 13, 59"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Xavier, Joana 269n11"
Paragraph 26 (2 words) [SHORT]: "xenon 277–8"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Z scheme 175, 199"
Paragraph 28 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Zuckerkandl, Emil 165"

=== NEW SECTION: 23 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "316"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Title Page 3"
Paragraph 3 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Copyright 4"
Paragraph 4 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Dedication 5"
Paragraph 5 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Contents 6"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Introduction: Life itself 8"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "1. Discovering the nanocosm 27"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "2. The path of carbon 62"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "3. From gases to life 91"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "4. Revolutions 124"
Paragraph 11 (6 words) [SHORT]: "5. To the dark side 150"
Paragraph 12 (5 words) [SHORT]: "6. The flux capacitor 181"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Epilogue: Self 211"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Envoi: ‘Like Most Revelations’ 219"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Appendix 1: Red protein mechanics 222"
Paragraph 18 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Appendix 2: The Krebs line 227"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "List of abbreviations 233"
Paragraph 20 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Further reading 236"
Paragraph 21 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Acknowledgements 282"
Paragraph 22 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Index 288"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "9"
Paragraph 1 (102 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."
Paragraph 2 (191 words): "Zoom out, and the whole city of the cell can change shape and move around, reassembling its internal structures as it does so. From out here, through the lens of a microscope, we can watch the trafficking of goods through the cell, lit up by fluorescent dyes like a town at night, all electric reds a..."
Paragraph 3 (186 words): "Few things are as inscrutable as a cell. In the seventeenth century, when the Dutch microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek unveiled the cosmos hidden in a drop of water, he marvelled at the little ‘animalcules’ that lived out their lives there, all whirring parts and purpose. For all our deep explorat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "10"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour? Do they experience any sort of feelings?"
Paragraph 3 (64 words): "For decades, biology has been dominated by information – the power of genes. The importance of genes is unquestionable, yet there is no difference in the information content of a living protozoon and one that died a moment ago. The difference between being alive or dead lies in energy flow, in the a..."
Paragraph 4 (251 words): "If there is a view from modern biology, it is that genetic information structures the flow of energy and materials. To a first approximation, biology is understood in terms of information networks and control systems. Even the laws of thermodynamics, which govern the behaviour of molecules and their..."
Paragraph 5 (72 words): "Thinking about life only in terms of information is distorting. Seeking new laws of physics to explain the origin of information is to ask the wrong question, which can’t be answered precisely because it is not meaningful. A far better question goes back to the formative years of biology: what proce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "11"
Paragraph 1 (94 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "You and me."
Paragraph 3 (37 words) [SHORT]: "This book will explore how the flow of energy and matter structures the evolution of life and even genetic information, leaving an indelible stamp on our own lives. I want to turn the standard view upside down."
Paragraph 4 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Genes and information do not determine the innermost details of our lives. Rather, the unceasing flow of energy and matter through a world in perpetual disequilibrium conjures the genes themselves into existence and still determines their activity, even in our information-soaked lives."
Paragraph 5 (187 words): "It is the movement that creates the form. I want to capture an extraordinary renaissance that is currently hiding in plain sight: how textbook biochemistry is simultaneously galvanising new paradigms on the origin of life and cancer, to name but two fields. How could such disparate questions, separa..."
Paragraph 6 (52 words) [SHORT]: "The dynamic side To understand this flow of energy and matter and all it portends, we must first look to where biology has turned a blind eye since the ascent of information. The golden age of biochemistry began with a realisation that cells are not made of an amorphous protoplasm composed of"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "12"
Paragraph 1 (135 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."
Paragraph 2 (56 words) [SHORT]: "I’ve used the word flux a few times already, and I’ll use it again throughout the book. Before getting any further, let’s pause for a moment to clarify exactly what I mean by it. Flux is a form of flow, but with one crucial difference. Water can flow in a river, or traffic down a street."
Paragraph 3 (86 words): "What goes in at one end and what comes out at the other is the same thing – water, or cars. In biochemistry, flux is the flow of things that are transformed along the way. Imagine a car entering a street; let’s say it’s a VW Beetle. No sooner has it gone ten yards down than there’s a blinding flash ..."
Paragraph 4 (130 words): "It’s a tractor, which leaves the street. But the strangest thing about this street is that the same thing keeps on happening: only VW Beetles ever enter the street; only tractors ever leave. The same succession of transformations takes place each time. Let’s imagine that sixty VW Beetles enter the s..."
Paragraph 5 (75 words): "This is the strange world of metabolic flux. Even a simple bacterial cell can undergo as many as a billion transformations per second, an incomprehensible number. You might say that there’s a lot of repeat streets in a cell (with the same thing happening in each of them) but there may be several hun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "13"
Paragraph 1 (144 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "That was before the double helix of DNA, before the information revolution in biology, before we knew much at all about how cells work."
Paragraph 3 (58 words) [SHORT]: "It was in fact a glorious hypothesis, based on a handful of findings in the nineteenth century – notably that some molecules of life, such as urea, could be synthesised from scratch by chemists and were in no way magic, rebutting vitalism; this was ‘merely’ biological chemistry, with normal chemical..."
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "Biochemistry became the study of how these simple molecules were interconverted one into another. Did you just trip over the word ‘simple’?"
Paragraph 5 (99 words): "None of this is simple, but there are levels of complexity. The molecules that I’m talking about are small, containing between one or two and up to about twenty carbon atoms, but most of them have fewer than ten carbons. Think of these as carbon ‘skeletons’, in which the carbon is bound to itself pl..."
Paragraph 6 (33 words) [SHORT]: "The giant ‘macromolecules’ that form the fabric of the cell, notably DNA and proteins, are actually long chains, strings of these building blocks linked together following genetic instructions that (then) remained utterly mysterious."
Paragraph 7 (76 words): "The glorious hypothesis that cells are animated by the continuous directed flow of simple materials and energy turned out to be true for all life. Painstaking experiments showed that the way bacteria respire with oxygen or grow in its absence is remarkably similar to how our own heart cells behave i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "14"
Paragraph 1 (149 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."
Paragraph 2 (116 words): "The digital jungle The dawn of molecular biology! It must have been intoxicating. Darwin had given order to biology a century earlier. The discovery of genes and the laws of heredity made intellectual sense of evolution. But the molecular mechanisms of inheritance remained a black box until Crick an..."
Paragraph 3 (175 words): "The double helix of DNA is perhaps the most meaningful icon in all science. DNA is composed of two long chains of ‘letters’ that snake around each other into the farthest distance, each strand providing an exact template for the other. As soon as you see it, you can grasp in principle how heredity w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "15"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000"
Paragraph 2 (75 words): "million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean scope for interpreting meaning. Just as an actor might confer sympathy or antipathy to a character while declaiming the same lines, s..."
Paragraph 3 (203 words): "Principle is one thing; working out the details took half a century and counting. The first attempts to decipher the code of life were made by physicists, including Crick himself, who sought (and found) a mathematical beauty; but all of them turned out to be utterly wrong. The reality is far messier..."
Paragraph 4 (41 words) [SHORT]: "Genomes are a fantastical jungle of digital patterns, mingling sense and nonsense in a similar way to computer code or the internet – meaning riddled with viruses and gobbledegook. Biology has become the study of information with all its quirky content."
Paragraph 5 (45 words) [SHORT]: "That’s not intended to be critical. The information revolution has transformed everything in biology, from the study of individual cancer cell lines to the development of embryos, to the deepest reaches of evolutionary time, right back to the first stirrings of life on this planet."
Paragraph 6 (68 words): "Sequencing even overturns cherished ideas of behaviour – sparrows for example, turn out to be far less faithful to their partners than their bearing suggests; nearly a third of offspring are fathered by philandering cheats. Nothing in biology has escaped digital scrutiny. But while our exhaustive ex..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "16"
Paragraph 1 (67 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."
Paragraph 2 (129 words): "Molecular machines Biochemistry followed a rather different path, although until recently it too turned its back on the dynamic side. Genes code for the sequence of amino acids in proteins, typically several hundred of them joined together in a string. Yet genes only code for the sequence itself, no..."
Paragraph 3 (134 words): "The greatest advances have drawn on the same recondite technique that Rosalind Franklin brought to bear on DNA in the early 1950s, X-ray crystallography, albeit with an enormous increase in power and resolution since then. Perhaps the consummating achievement of crystallography was Venki Ramakrishna..."
Paragraph 4 (69 words): "Understanding precisely how these molecular machines work has preoccupied some of the best minds in biochemistry for decades. Those of us who don’t solve the structure of proteins for a living look at the pages of journals such as Nature with a mixture of jealousy and admiration, for every issue see..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "17"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale."
Paragraph 2 (145 words): "These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people prone to some condition and those who are resistant. There might be thousands, if not million..."
Paragraph 3 (60 words): "Remember that many proteins are catalysts – enzymes – which convert one molecule into another slightly different form. Vivid as it may be, our earlier metaphor of metabolic flux as traffic transforming in size and shape as it passes down a street fails to emphasise that this doesn’t happen spontaneo..."
Paragraph 4 (249 words): "Each transformation is catalysed by an enzyme. To force the metaphor a bit too far, we have to imagine the street lined with giant machines (we’d better say they’re invisible) that convert one car into another. This succession of giant machines each acts in turn down the street (a metabolic pathway)..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "18"
Paragraph 1 (16 words) [SHORT]: "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic."
Paragraph 2 (263 words): "So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative routes in terms of how a drug acts. Target a particular gene or protein, and the cell redirects metabolic flux to mini..."
Paragraph 3 (161 words): "Satnav metabolism There’s a new name for this that reflects the modern ‘omic’ age: metabolomics. We have known all the steps in the major metabolic pathways for decades – they were laboriously worked out, step by step, from the 1930s onwards, with a leap forward in the post-war years, when radioacti..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "19"
Paragraph 1 (62 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."
Paragraph 2 (257 words): "But these subtle differences in flux also emphasise one dramatic way in which cells differ from cities. Different cities are similar in that they all have roads, but the actual road map obviously differs from town to town. That’s partly true of cells too, but perhaps the most extraordinary fact is t..."
Paragraph 3 (152 words): "The reason that city street-plans differ but the central metabolic maps of cells do not is quite simple: cells descend from a common ancestor, but cities do not. Cities are similar by analogy, not homology. When we think about inheritance we tend to think about genes, but to leave any descendants a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "20"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead."
Paragraph 2 (172 words): "Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a workable solution to the utter transformation of conditions on Earth, from the suffocating anoxia of the first two bil..."
Paragraph 3 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Elusive, in part, because biochemistry moved on long ago, enchanted by the marvellous mechanics of molecular machines. But elusive most of all because this apparently perfect cycle of energy and matter in fact conceals a strained balance of opposites, a yin and yang, which touches on all aspects of ..."
Paragraph 4 (122 words): "The Krebs cycle Generations of biochemistry and medical students have been obliged to learn the steps of the Krebs cycle by rote. Despite its iconic status it has earned little love or real understanding. That’s partly the problem with visualising biochemistry: this is an invisible and abstruse set ..."
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "The energy released at each step is ingeniously captured and put to use in the cell, while the inert carcasses of water and carbon dioxide are discharged into the outside world. But why is it a cycle at all? Why not just a few simple steps? Krebs himself suggested one plausible answer: burning very ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "21"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea."
Paragraph 2 (196 words): "The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most amino acids are made directly or indirectly from molecules in the Krebs cycle. So are the long-chain lipid molecules needed to make cel..."
Paragraph 3 (151 words): "A decade ago the answer to this question would have seemed too esoteric for most researchers to worry about. Asking ‘why?’ has historically been dismissed as rank speculation by biochemists. But then it turned out that molecules accumulating in the Krebs cycle can signal the state of the cell to the..."
Paragraph 4 (103 words): "Perhaps that should not be surprising. Anything that disturbs the availability of oxygen affects not just respiration but also flux through the Krebs cycle. Breathing is an immediate life-and-death problem, but so too is the turnover of the molecules that make up our bodies. The problem in all these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "22"
Paragraph 1 (264 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."
Paragraph 2 (93 words): "If the Krebs cycle is ordained by thermodynamics, then it should take place spontaneously in some suitably propitious environment, even in the absence of genes. That idea was once dismissed as ‘if pigs could fly’ chemistry, yet revolutionary new work shows that at least some of the cycle can indeed ..."
Paragraph 3 (60 words): "The inner logic of metabolism is beginning to take shape. Much of it is imposed by thermodynamics; some is facilitated by catalysts. Some is refined by genes. And part stems from the vicissitudes of life itself, which forced evolution down improbable paths, while transforming our geologically restle..."
Paragraph 4 (53 words) [SHORT]: "This is the story of our planet from within our cells – what makes us the way we are, and ultimately why we age and die, each of us in our own tantalisingly different ways. I appreciate that biochemistry is for many people an obscure subject, full of runic symbols that suggest a"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "23"
Paragraph 1 (141 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."
Paragraph 2 (175 words): "Setting sail We will start by getting acquainted with the Krebs cycle itself – the basic chemistry you will find in any biochemistry textbook. I will enliven the dry dance of molecules with a tribute to some of the pioneers of biochemistry, men and women who imagined such ingenious, creative ways to..."
Paragraph 3 (139 words): "In Chapter 2, we will begin to deconstruct the textbook view. We will see how dogmas can set back fields by decades, and that we are by no means immune to them today. Still you will read that the Krebs cycle is about the oxidation of foodstuffs, and especially glucose. You will read that photosynthe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "24"
Paragraph 1 (37 words) [SHORT]: "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 2 (105 words): "is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with structures similar to cells. We’ll see that this chemistry can in principle – and recent experimental work shows in practice – drive almost all the core metabolism of cells, giving rise to the building blocks of genes ..."
Paragraph 3 (163 words): "Chapter 4 will ask how this spontaneous chemistry at the origin of life came to be the closed cycle that we know today. The idea of a universal cycle is misleading: even in humans, the cycle is often more of a roundabout, with flow entering and exiting everywhere, even coursing in opposite direction..."
Paragraph 4 (86 words): "Not much is known about how metabolic flux is balanced between different tissues, but we know much more about what goes wrong when cells revert to selfish behaviour in cancer. In Chapter 5, we’ll see that the standard view of cancer as a disease of the genome driven by genetic mutations is not the w..."
Paragraph 5 (72 words): "In fact, age is the biggest risk factor for cancer. We’ll see that cancer emerges from the yin and yang of the Krebs cycle as we get older – the need to use the same pathway for biosynthesis as well as energy generation. As the flux through our Krebs cycle becomes more sluggish with age, intermediat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "25"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer."
Paragraph 2 (22 words) [SHORT]: "In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us."
Paragraph 3 (106 words): "Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with age, which varies with our lifestyle (such as diet or exercise), as well as how effectively our two genomes work together – the genes in the mitochondria alongside those in the nucleus. I’ll give a new take on the fr..."
Paragraph 4 (60 words): "Finally, the Epilogue will touch on the hardest problem of all, the stream of consciousness. By now, it should come as no surprise that the moment-by-moment flux of metabolism that makes us alive should be interwoven with our innermost feelings of self, perhaps going right back to the first stirring..."
Paragraph 5 (78 words): "1 When I talk about energy flow, I’m really referring to what physicists call ‘free energy’, which is to say the energy available to power work (rather than being dissipated as heat). That goes for the whole book. And when I talk about building blocks, I’m referring to small molecules such as amino ..."
Paragraph 6 (128 words): "2 There are all kinds of interactions between ‘regulatory RNAs’ that do not involve any proteins at all. RNA is a working copy of a short section of DNA, where the exact sequence of letters in the DNA is transcribed into the same sequence of letters in the RNA copy. This copy can be read off into a ..."
Paragraph 7 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Cryptographers can get very cross about this."
Paragraph 8 (72 words): "3 Even this can be hard to interpret. A high concentration of some intermediate in the cell does not necessarily imply high flux – it might reflect a high rate of flux, with the intermediate being constantly replenished at high levels, or it could reflect the opposite – almost no downstream flux, so..."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "26"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "28"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right."
Paragraph 2 (244 words): "There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pillar of the establishment. But he always felt an outsider. He had been expelled for truancy (or technically ‘his removal was advised’) from the City of Londo..."
Paragraph 3 (158 words): "Hopkins nurtured a joyously free, productive and non-hierarchical lab environment. He had been backed consistently by the nascent Medical Research Council (MRC), but they were perpetually frustrated by his stubborn refusal to dedicate his time and efforts to applied medical research, neither taking ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "29"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale."
Paragraph 2 (118 words): "But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It was vibrant and fun. The lab’s journal, Brighter Biochemistry , included compilations of verse (Haldane wrote an annual report in rhyming couplets), ..."
Paragraph 3 (116 words): "Hans on board This was the world into which the young Hans Krebs arrived in 1933. He had not intended to leave Freiburg, of course, but had been relieved of his position, like almost all those of Jewish ancestry, after Hitler became Chancellor in January 1933. Krebs soon realised he needed to get as..."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Fisher, Margery Fry, J. S. Haldane (the equally distinguished father of J."
Paragraph 5 (12 words) [SHORT]: "B. S.), A. E. Housman, John Maynard Keynes, Ernest Rutherford and J."
Paragraph 6 (74 words): "J. Thomson – who in May that year had founded the Academic Assistance Council to support scholars who had been obliged to relinquish their posts in Germany. The founders defined their goal as ‘the relief of suffering and the defence of learning and science’. Krebs was the first to be backed by this ..."
Paragraph 7 (42 words) [SHORT]: "You can imagine that Hopkins’s lab was very different to anything that Krebs had known in Germany. Years later, Krebs reflected on what he called ‘the British way of life’, writing that ‘The Cambridge laboratory included people of many dispositions, convictions and"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "30"
Paragraph 1 (84 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."
Paragraph 2 (61 words): "But for Krebs, all this was merely a backdrop to the paramount importance of his work. He was beginning to address the most pressing question in biology at the time (and arguably still a vital question today) – how does respiration work? The broad idea is simple enough: respiration burns food in oxy..."
Paragraph 3 (193 words): "That much had been known since Lavoisier, before the French Revolution, who showed that respiration and combustion are exactly equivalent processes ( exactly ; he weighed everything with obsessive precision). Respiration and combustion both involve the complete oxidation of organic matter by oxygen ..."
Paragraph 4 (64 words): "We now know that respiration takes place in the mitochondria, the so- called ‘powerhouses’ of the cell; but every scrap of knowledge along the way was hard won. And knowledge comes tinged with the stories of how it was won. That’s only human. The harder the discoveries, the better the stories – but ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "31"
Paragraph 1 (111 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."
Paragraph 2 (101 words): "Slices and gases Krebs’s experimental approach derived from that of his mentor, the great German biochemist Otto Warburg (whom we’ll meet again in Chapter 5, on cancer). Meticulous and brilliant, Warburg was also domineering and authoritarian; he gave his tight-knit group little freedom to develop t..."
Paragraph 3 (183 words): "The key method that Warburg had pioneered was to measure the escape of gases from thin slices of tissue, cut using a razor blade. When practised skilfully, the slice was thin enough for oxygen to penetrate fully by diffusion, while the cells in the centre of the slice were undamaged, functioning mor..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "32"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway."
Paragraph 2 (119 words): "This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). Yet this was how biochemistry came to be understood; the bottom line is th..."
Paragraph 3 (295 words): "The experiment for which Warburg won the Nobel Prize in 1931 was just so beautiful I have to tell you about it. Warburg knew he could block respiration by using the gas carbon monoxide (CO), which in cells binds to metal atoms in the catalyst that converts oxygen to water. The binding of CO therefor..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "33"
Paragraph 1 (106 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "Yet even this experiment-as-work-of-art was far from elucidating what actually goes on in respiration. Really, all that it said was that one of the catalysts involved (Warburg characteristically asserted it was the only one of relevance) contained a porphyrin pigment similar to haem."
Paragraph 3 (198 words): "But what about all the other steps going from glucose to oxygen? How many steps were there? What were the intermediates? You can see in my equation above that one glucose molecule, with its six carbon atoms, is converted into six molecules of carbon dioxide and six molecules of water. Was each CO 2 ..."
Paragraph 4 (104 words): "To me, the most amazing thing is that Krebs could modify Warburg’s methods for measuring gases emanating from tissue slices to piece together most of these missing steps. It was not so much a single breath- taking experiment as a magisterial vision of what was possible using a single method, coupled..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "34"
Paragraph 1 (50 words) [SHORT]: "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected."
Paragraph 2 (65 words): "Sometimes that was because the tissue slice hadn’t been washed correctly, or the solution wasn’t fresh enough, or some other problem; but occasionally it was because the working hypothesis was wrong, and then suddenly a new avenue opened up, leading, hopefully, to a real advance in understanding. Kr..."
Paragraph 3 (11 words) [SHORT]: "Even this most measured of men could scarcely contain his excitement."
Paragraph 4 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Science is an emotional roller-coaster no matter how much scientists strive to build an objective and unemotional framework. It’s a wholly human pursuit. And so it was that day after day, week after week, year after year, Krebs slowly pieced together the detailed steps of how food is burned in respi..."
Paragraph 5 (72 words): "Deep breathing The work that had initially made Krebs’s name was on the synthesis of urea, a nitrogen-containing compound that is excreted in urine, and which is formed from the breakdown of amino acids, the building blocks of proteins. Ironically, Krebs had been trying to get away from Warburg’s fo..."
Paragraph 6 (136 words): "Krebs was wondering what happened to amino acids after they had passed on their nitrogen to form urea. By definition, amino acids contain nitrogen in the form of an amino (-NH 2 ) group. 4 Krebs inferred that this amino group was liberated as the gas ammonia (NH 3 ) in the kidneys, eventually to be ..."
Paragraph 7 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs found that adding amino acids increased the rate of respiration in his tissue slices, as did adding carboxylic acids. But adding both of"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "35"
Paragraph 1 (48 words) [SHORT]: "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion."
Paragraph 2 (85 words): "But what did it mean? Presumably, the excess carboxylic acids simply got in the way of amino-acid breakdown. That made sense, because when amino acids lose their nitrogen, they become carboxylic acids, as we’ve just noted. In which case, both types of molecule had to be respired via the same pathway..."
Paragraph 3 (63 words): "That caught Krebs’s attention because the breakdown of glucose also generates carboxylic acids. The first few steps in the breakdown of glucose had been established by the early 1930s. As noted above, a molecule of glucose contains six carbon atoms, with the general formula of C 6 H 12 O 6 . Let’s s..."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "sugar, meaning there are six carbons in the skeleton of the molecule."
Paragraph 5 (97 words): "Glucose is split (through a baroque sequence of steps called glycolysis that we can put aside here) into two three-carbon molecules known as pyruvic acid: a C3 carboxylic acid that is also generated by the breakdown of some amino acids. It seemed that everything was being funnelled into the formatio..."
Paragraph 6 (31 words) [SHORT]: "It is time to get acquainted with the molecular protagonists of this book. What exactly is a carboxylic acid? Let me draw one for you. This is the three-carbon pyruvic acid:"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "36"
Paragraph 1 (147 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."
Paragraph 2 (62 words): "Portraits capture the character of a person, along with a few of their prominent features; a large nose, squinting eyes, laughter lines and greying beard in my own case. It’s harder to read the face of a molecule, but it can be done. Each carbon atom in pyruvic acid has a different character, with i..."
Paragraph 3 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Consider the left-hand carbon atom here for example: it has three hydrogen atoms attached. That’s normally quite stable and inert. Stolid."
Paragraph 4 (51 words) [SHORT]: "But there’s lots of pent-up energy stored in those hydrogen atoms. How easy it is to get at depends on the molecular surroundings. Is this stout- bellied group associated with the molecular equivalent of a pin-striped suit, or a peg-leg and an eye-patch? It’s closer to the pirate in this case."
Paragraph 5 (51 words) [SHORT]: "That’s because the middle carbon atom in pyruvic acid has a double bond to oxygen, which likes nothing better than getting into a fight; the extra bond tends to throw its weight about. That’s what makes pyruvic acid a touch unstable and reactive. Now the middle oxygen in my picture is"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "37"
Paragraph 1 (35 words) [SHORT]: "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen."
Paragraph 2 (51 words) [SHORT]: "This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switched with ammonia to form an amino group, or vice versa, one of the most important transformations in biology (and what Krebs was studying when he was working on the breakdown of amino acids)."
Paragraph 3 (121 words): "What about the third carbon, then, at the right-hand side? That also has a double-bonded oxygen, along with another oxygen bound to a hydrogen, yet this arrangement has a very different character. In fact, it’s this group that defines pyruvic acid as a carboxylic acid. An acid is a molecule that wan..."
Paragraph 4 (121 words): "In this case, I’ve drawn a dotted line next to the carboxylic acid group, which consists of a CO 2 (one carbon and two oxygen atoms) plus a hydrogen atom attached to one of the oxygens. All carboxylic acids have at least one group like this by definition; there can be two or three of them. Now when ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "38"
Paragraph 1 (122 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."
Paragraph 2 (74 words): "The fate of pyruvate Having now familiarised ourselves with the nature of carboxylic acids, let’s return to Krebs, who was wrestling with their fate. We’ve seen that pyruvate itself plays a central role in respiration, yet Krebs knew that other carboxylic acids were involved too. The strange thing w..."
Paragraph 3 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Why would that matter, I hear you say? Recall that respiration converts organic molecules into CO 2 and H 2 O. Glucose starts with six carbons and ends up as six molecules of CO 2 . If each carbon is extracted individually, then the remaining molecule must get progressively shorter."
Paragraph 4 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs knew that the six-carbon glucose is initially split into two three- carbon molecules of pyruvate, so a reasonable working assumption was that the intermediates should be stripped down to two carbons and then one carbon. In other words, the C3 pyruvate should be broken down into"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "39"
Paragraph 1 (47 words) [SHORT]: "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense."
Paragraph 2 (71 words): "The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scientist who had completed his PhD with Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins in 1927. From a family of minor nobility with a scientific bent, Albert Szent-Györgyi was a true original. His mother was an opera singer who had auditioned with Gustav Mahler, then a c..."
Paragraph 3 (165 words): "The young Szent-Györgyi fought in the Great War and became so disgusted after two years that he shot himself through the bone in his arm, claiming that he was wounded by enemy fire – a story he narrates in his short autobiography Lost in the Twentieth Century . He completed his medical degree during..."
Paragraph 4 (163 words): "Krebs and Szent-Györgyi had crossed paths on several occasions when Krebs was still in Germany, and despite some scientific disagreements plainly held each other in high esteem. Indeed, Szent- Györgyi wrote to his old mentor Sir Frederick, bringing Krebs’s plight to his attention. Now back in Hungar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "40"
Paragraph 1 (44 words) [SHORT]: "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst."
Paragraph 2 (6 words) [SHORT]: "But what else could it be?"
Paragraph 3 (127 words): "A catalyst! That comment might not trouble a chemist much, but it was certainly unexpected for most biochemists. Say ‘catalyst’ to a biologist in a word-association game, and they will probably reply ‘enzyme’. An enzyme is a protein, encoded by a gene, typically composed of a chain of several hundre..."
Paragraph 4 (99 words): "The molecule is beautifully symmetrical, as my portrait shows. It has two carboxylate groups, one at each end – two smugly unreactive Cheshire Cat grins. No mad-eye oxygen atoms. A quick personality read-out says that it is more like an extra-smug banker than a pirate. Yet somehow succinate doesn’t ..."
Paragraph 5 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Pulling hydrogen"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "41"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley."
Paragraph 2 (130 words): "Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of which could speed up respiration to a comparable degree, as Szent-Györgyi had shown. All were known to be interchangeable, and none of them..."
Paragraph 3 (102 words): "Szent-Györgyi had seen this pattern before. Vitamin C can pick up 2H, and then pass them onto something else, notably vitamin E. And Szent- Györgyi had been fascinated by the pale-yellow pigment found in cells that he called ‘flave’ (which is now known as flavin adenine dinucleotide, or FAD, and is ..."
Paragraph 4 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Recall that respiration consumes oxygen by reacting it with hydrogen, or more specifically 2H. The product is water, or H 2 O. Warburg had"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "42"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere."
Paragraph 2 (79 words): "Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. It was a beautiful conception, and as it turned out, specifically wrong. Specifically, but not generally – he was correct that 2H carriers are ..."
Paragraph 3 (123 words): "By now, in 1935, Krebs had moved to Sheffield. Hopkins had been unable to raise the funds to keep paying his salary in Cambridge, and although he saw Krebs as his anointed successor, there was little he could do in the short term. Ironically, soon after Krebs had gone, a lectureship became available..."
Paragraph 4 (100 words): "While stimulated by Szent-Györgyi’s findings, Krebs could also see some problems. It boiled down to whether the C4 carboxylic acids were simply hydrogen carriers, as argued by Szent-Györgyi, or were actual intermediates in the breakdown of sugars, as Krebs himself thought. This is such a fine exampl..."
Paragraph 5 (71 words): "It’s also worth noting that, even though Szent-Györgyi’s idea turned out to be wrong in detail, it was valuable nonetheless, because it focused attention on a primary feature of the cycle – the removal of hydrogen (2H) from carboxylic acids. Again, I have to emphasise just how subtle our reasoning n..."
Paragraph 6 (37 words) [SHORT]: "If C4 carboxylic acids were merely hydrogen carriers, then as each 2H was stripped out from the sugar and passed onto a carboxylic acid, then CO 2 should be released from the skeletal remains of the sugar."
Paragraph 7 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that the formula for glucose is C 6 H 12 O 6 . Szent-Györgyi"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "43"
Paragraph 1 (57 words) [SHORT]: "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."
Paragraph 2 (154 words): "That makes a clear prediction: adding an excess of the carboxylic acid shuttle should lead to the complete breakdown of the sugar even in the absence of oxygen. To grasp this, remember that oxygen is normally the final 2H acceptor; it accepts 2H to form water, which is excreted as waste. Now, if the..."
Paragraph 3 (18 words) [SHORT]: "But the experiment showed that in fact very little CO 2 was formed in the absence of oxygen."
Paragraph 4 (33 words) [SHORT]: "While both men agreed that this was the case, Szent-Györgyi ascribed the discrepancy to issues with measurement in a tricky experimental system, while Krebs interpreted the result literally – he saw the C4"
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "carboxylic acids as intermediates in the breakdown of sugars, hence they had not yet had all their CO 2 stripped out, and the final steps to do so required oxygen. Going back to the case in point, if the C3 pyruvate really was an intermediate, as Krebs imagined, then it had to be transformed somehow..."
Paragraph 6 (18 words) [SHORT]: "succinate. That is ostensibly the opposite of breakdown, as the chain length gets longer rather than shorter. Perplexing."
Paragraph 7 (110 words): "But Krebs had a clue, which others may have overlooked as irrelevant. The C6 carboxylic acid citric acid, which is responsible for the tang of citrus fruit, had recently been shown to break down in several steps to give the C4 succinate. That gave quite a long series of apparently interconnected ste..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "44"
Paragraph 1 (148 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."
Paragraph 2 (27 words) [SHORT]: "Circular reasoning Only Krebs was thinking about the cryptic crossword in the right way; even his closest collaborators had little inkling of what was on his mind."
Paragraph 3 (41 words) [SHORT]: "But Krebs had thought about the catalytic effects of small molecules before. His work on the urea cycle was just that. Unlike anyone else in the field, who all had just the same information, Krebs was already thinking about a cycle."
Paragraph 4 (196 words): "The urea cycle starts with a C6 amino acid called arginine. An enzyme splits this into two unequal pieces, the C1 waste product urea, plus a shorter (C5) amino acid called ornithine. What happened to ornithine next was unknown, but Krebs had found that adding more ornithine to his tissue slices some..."
Paragraph 5 (22 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs realised that biochemical cycles are necessarily catalytic. In essence, adding more of any constituent gives rise to more of the next,"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "45"
Paragraph 1 (37 words) [SHORT]: "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely."
Paragraph 2 (288 words): "This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates with 100 per cent efficiency. But of course in reality the cycle must be continuously fed with materials to keep on spinning. If, in the first few steps of a cycle beginning with citrate, two CO 2 molecules and multiple sets..."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "If so, then which organic molecule was being fed into the cycle?"
Paragraph 4 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs focused on pyruvate. Remember that pyruvate is the intermediate breakdown product of sugars and some amino acids. Was it being fed into a cycle and catalytically broken down into CO 2 and 2H?"
Paragraph 5 (103 words): "The crux of the matter was the final C4 carboxylic acid, known as oxaloacetate. Could this be the ‘tractor unit’? Oxaloacetate was the last clear step in the breakdown of citrate, but its metabolic fate was ambiguous, or rather, it frayed into several possible pathways (we’ll come back to these in C..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "46"
Paragraph 1 (71 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."
Paragraph 2 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Could the proposed cycle account for the consumption of oxygen, the release of CO 2 , the loss of pyruvate, the formation of citrate? Yes! Yes!"
Paragraph 3 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Yes! Yes! It did account for each in full! Here is Krebs’s first simple conception of the cycle, more or less as he depicted it in his famous 1937"
Paragraph 4 (127 words): "paper: The overall effect of this cycle is to burn up one molecule of pyruvate, or at least something closely related to it. Exactly what was joined onto oxaloacetate to form citrate was still a mystery. It could not have been the C3 pyruvate itself, as depicted here, because that has one carbon too..."
Paragraph 5 (85 words): "A full decade later, in 1947, Fritz Lipmann discovered that pyruvate was indeed stripped of one CO 2 (and 2H) leaving a C2 carboxylic acid attached to a larger molecule that acted as a kind of molecular handle. He named the overall assemblage acetyl coenzyme A or acetyl CoA for short. This turned ou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "47"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA."
Paragraph 2 (150 words): "Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who would interrupt and ask people to repeat what they had just said, yet he seemed ..."
Paragraph 3 (166 words): "The term ‘acetyl’ refers to the 2C acetic acid – vinegar – which is not very reactive. Look at my portrait of it below and you can see that it has the stout belly and Cheshire Cat grin of pyruvate – but no mad-eye oxygen to stir up trouble. To make it react with oxaloacetate, the acetate needs to be..."
Paragraph 4 (23 words) [SHORT]: "oxaloacetate, to give the C6 citrate. At last, everything added up properly. The process by which glucose is oxidised goes like this. First,"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "48"
Paragraph 1 (75 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."
Paragraph 2 (145 words): "There is some poetry in the parallel lives and eventual convergence of the scientific ideas of Lipmann and Krebs, so it seems only fitting that they shared the Nobel prize in 1953. Yet this was by no means the end of the story. There was another detail (one might call it the whole point) which Krebs..."
Paragraph 3 (121 words): "The living structure of cells Peter Mitchell arrived as an undergraduate in Cambridge several years after Krebs had left, at the outbreak of war in 1939. A sporting injury at school had prevented him joining the army. He had been a mixed student, and his example serves as another reminder of the dan..."
Paragraph 4 (78 words): "Mitchell hardly repaid his trust. He did badly in his degree and initially failed his doctorate. He had written an opaquely philosophical thesis on how bacteria transport molecules in and out of the cell, grounded in his own development of ancient Greek theory on ‘fluctids’ and ‘statids’. The examin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "49"
Paragraph 1 (51 words) [SHORT]: "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Despite these failings, Mitchell certainly impressed those around him."
Paragraph 3 (158 words): "Fred Sanger, a double Nobel laureate, wrote that ‘Peter had an original idea on every subject and we all knew even then that he would possibly change science.’ Just after the war, in 1947, Marjory Stephenson was elected President of the Society for General Microbiology (with strong support from Alex..."
Paragraph 4 (32 words) [SHORT]: "I can hardly begin to imagine what Jennifer Moyle might have accomplished in another age. She had gone to Girton College Cambridge in 1939 where she studied Natural Sciences, specialising in biochemistry."
Paragraph 5 (33 words) [SHORT]: "She was inspired by the lectures of the comparative biochemist Ernest Baldwin, another protégé of Hopkins, while attending many lectures in philosophy. She completed her ‘Title of Bachelor of Arts’ degree in 1942"
Paragraph 6 (67 words): "– sad to say, formal degrees were not awarded to women in Cambridge until 1948, when Girton College was granted full college status by the university. Straight after her ‘title of’ degree, Moyle joined the Auxiliary Territorial Service, the women’s branch of the British Army during the war, and she ..."
Paragraph 7 (84 words): "By the end of the war she was second in command of a unit that analysed intelligence from the breaking of German ciphers, and afterwards spent a year helping prepare servicemen for their return to civilian life. She then joined Marjory Stephenson in Cambridge as a research assistant in 1946, first m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "50"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life."
Paragraph 2 (116 words): "Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- century biology, starting in the free air of Hopkins’s biochemistry department, before moving to E..."
Paragraph 3 (244 words): "For source it was: Mitchell reconceived energy flow, in a way that we are only just beginning to assimilate properly into biology today – a theme I’ll return to later in the book. Krebs had thought beyond linear pathways and discovered cycles, four of them in all. But Mitchell really transcended che..."
Paragraph 4 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg and Krebs had both talked about the ‘living structure of cells’, arguing that some processes were ‘bound to the life of the cells’."
Paragraph 5 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Many biochemists were uncomfortable with this view, as it recalled the discredited idea of vitalism, implying that there was something special about living matter that could not be reduced to mere chemistry; and frankly, this view is still prevalent today. The goal of biochemistry was"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "51"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible."
Paragraph 2 (69 words): "Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better preparation methods were eventually demonstrated in cell-free extracts. So, while Warburg and Krebs contended that respiration could only take place..."
Paragraph 3 (36 words) [SHORT]: "For Mitchell that view was anathema. The integrity of the membrane was indispensable to the life of cells. The membrane is the thin oily layer that surrounds all cells, barely six millionths of a millimetre (6"
Paragraph 4 (178 words): "nanometres) in thickness, enclosing the gel-like cytoplasm inside. Some cells such as plants, fungi and bacteria also have a more robust, mesh- like cell wall, which prevents swelling and protects against mechanical injury, while allowing the movement of small molecules in and out; but it is the fli..."
Paragraph 5 (86 words): "Separating charge I have talked about stripping hydrogen (2H) from molecules and feeding them to oxygen. These 2H are not free in solution, nor are they shuttled by carboxylic acids, as Szent-Györgyi once thought; it turned out they are bound to a large molecule called NAD + (or ‘nicotinamide adenin..."
Paragraph 6 (29 words) [SHORT]: "NADH will figure large later in this book, but for now, when you see the term NADH, just focus on the ‘H’. I hope you will develop a Pavlovian"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "52"
Paragraph 1 (160 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."
Paragraph 2 (182 words): "Mitchell proposed that the 2H (derived from the Krebs cycle, in the form of NADH) are split into their component protons and electrons. The electrons are transferred to oxygen by way of the respiratory chain of carriers embedded in the membrane itself – an electrical current, insulated by the surrou..."
Paragraph 3 (75 words): "All this is now received wisdom, but it was hard won. These ideas were bitterly contested over two decades. Jennifer Moyle’s experiments contributed largely to the eventual acceptance of Mitchell’s ideas, for which he alone was awarded the Nobel prize in 1978. Her essential contribution would surely..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "53"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details)."
Paragraph 2 (126 words): "They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as the pesticide rotenone, partially blocked the acidification of the medium..."
Paragraph 3 (159 words): "A grossly simplified schematic of the respiratory chain. The transfer of electrons from NADH to oxygen is shown by the dotted line. These electrons pass through three great protein complexes embedded in the membrane (complex I, III and IV; we’ll meet complex II in Chapter 4). This current of electro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "54"
Paragraph 1 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped."
Paragraph 2 (92 words): "Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics. In particular, he long opposed the idea that pumping could be accomplished by rapid conformational changes in proteins spanning the membrane (rather than in the order and properties of the carriers themselv..."
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Perhaps Mitchell’s greatest error concerned the iconic ATP synthase."
Paragraph 4 (54 words) [SHORT]: "This extraordinary protein is a rotating motor embedded in the membrane. Dubbed ‘the elementary particles of life’ when first observed by electron microscopy in the early 1960s, there are many thousands of them in every mitochondrion. We now know that the inward flow of protons through these nanosca..."
Paragraph 5 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Their operation is wholly mechanical, utterly different from anything that Mitchell had ever imagined, and yet the ATP synthase has come to represent the essence of his hypothesis – its rotation, up to 500"
Paragraph 6 (17 words) [SHORT]: "revolutions per second, is powered by the proton-motive force, just as he predicted from the beginning. 13"
Paragraph 7 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Regardless of his errors, Mitchell’s conception was just magnificent."
Paragraph 8 (47 words) [SHORT]: "The energy released by the reaction between 2H (extracted from Krebs cycle intermediates) and oxygen is transduced into an electrical charge on the membrane. This charge is awesome. It might not sound like much – just 150–200 millivolts – yet the membrane is extremely thin, only 6"
Paragraph 9 (94 words): "nanometres in thickness as noted earlier. This means that the electrical field strength (what you would experience as a molecule in the membrane) is about 30 million volts per metre, equivalent to a bolt of lightning across every square nanometre of membrane. And the area of electrically charged mem..."
Paragraph 10 (27 words) [SHORT]: "This is how respiration works in our own mitochondria, the ‘powerhouses’ of complex cells. When Mitchell was developing his chemiosmotic hypothesis, in the mid-1960s, Lynn Margulis was"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "55"
Paragraph 1 (194 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."
Paragraph 2 (124 words): "But that’s not the message that others have taken from the extraordinary sophistication of cell respiration. Biochemistry turned away from the philosophical ideas that underpinned Mitchell’s framework, and concerned itself with the marvellous mechanics of proton pumps and nanomotors. We are left wit..."
Paragraph 3 (109 words): "Bizarre contortions Imagine you’re starving. You are beginning to break down the proteins in your own muscles for the energy you need to keep going. Nothing much can be harvested from the proteins themselves; it’s their component amino acids that you need to burn. That’s how it began for Krebs back ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "56"
Paragraph 1 (74 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."
Paragraph 2 (129 words): "Of course we can burn amino acids, but it can be surprisingly complex. Here’s what happens in the case of α-ketoglutarate. It is first broken down by way of the Krebs cycle to one of the C4 carboxylic acids, malate. Malate is then exported out of the mitochondria, across two membranes, into the cyto..."
Paragraph 3 (188 words): "Part of the answer relates to contingency. The Krebs cycle and cellular respiration take place inside the mitochondria, which we’ve noted were once free-living bacteria; they brought along their bacterial metabolism to the ancestor of complex (eukaryotic) cells two billion years ago. To some extent ..."
Paragraph 4 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Adding succinate to pigeon-breast muscle raised the respiratory rate by 600% because that tissue is poised to oxidise glucose as quickly as possible, to provide energy for flying (and the tissue slices were supplied with plenty of glucose needed to form acetyl CoA). But had they"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "57"
Paragraph 1 (97 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."
Paragraph 2 (238 words): "The reason is simple enough but has profound consequences for life, which we will explore in this book. The Krebs cycle supplies precursors for the synthesis of amino acids, fats, sugars and more. If Krebs-cycle intermediates are siphoned off for these syntheses, then fewer intermediates remain to p..."
Paragraph 3 (136 words): "It might seem easier to explain the evolution of a crazy roundabout system than a perfect cycle, but these reflections really just raise the opposite problem. Why did several billion years of evolution come up with such a crazy system, or fail to improve it? Krebs himself grappled with this question..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "58"
Paragraph 1 (122 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."
Paragraph 2 (311 words): "1 For balance it should be said that there were also some protests outside the lab against foreigners taking scarce British jobs during the Great Depression. The parallel with modern times is uncomfortably close. But here is a more edifying modern parallel. Lord John Krebs, the distinguished son of ..."
Paragraph 3 (51 words) [SHORT]: "3 Carbon monoxide poisoning can kill you by binding to the iron in the haemoglobin of your red blood cells and displacing oxygen, but if you survived that, CO would stifle respiration in your cells for the same reasons. The haem protein that Warburg discovered is now called cytochrome oxidase, ‘cyto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "59"
Paragraph 1 (50 words) [SHORT]: "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."
Paragraph 2 (35 words) [SHORT]: "These gases can control the rate of respiration so exquisitely that they alter the local concentration of oxygen. This trick is employed wonderfully by fireflies to generate flashes of light using the oxygen-dependent enzyme luciferase."
Paragraph 3 (113 words): "4 A ‘group’ refers to a few atoms bound together within a molecule, which tend to stick together in the same arrangement even when transferred to another molecule. Groups are chemically semi-stable configurations that are found in multiple molecules, such as the amino group in all amino acids. While..."
Paragraph 4 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Some are more reactive than others. We’ll consider the diverse chemical properties of the different groups in a simple molecule in a moment."
Paragraph 5 (114 words): "5 Szent-Györgyi had a way with words. Some of the most arresting aphorisms in biochemistry trace back to him. One of my favourites is ‘Life is nothing but an electron looking for a place to rest.’ Szent-Györgyi wrote a number of books, ranging widely across science and life, including a collection o..."
Paragraph 6 (234 words): "He begins: ‘Every biologist has at some time asked “What is life?” and none has ever given a satisfactory answer.’ That’s still true today. He continues: ‘Life, as such, does not exist. What we can see and measure are material systems which have the wonderful quality of “being alive”. What we can as..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "60"
Paragraph 1 (107 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."
Paragraph 2 (108 words): "7 He married Margaret Fieldhouse in 1938. She taught in a Catholic convent school near the university, having been instructed in the Montessori teaching method by the inspirational Maria Montessori herself. When Hans asked Margaret’s father for her hand in marriage, Mr Fieldhouse said to Margaret ‘I..."
Paragraph 3 (26 words) [SHORT]: "He was ennobled in 2007 as Lord Krebs and – as mentioned earlier – founded the Sir Hans Krebs Trust in 2015, to support refugee scientists."
Paragraph 4 (96 words): "8 For the more astute accountants among you, some of the hydrogens burnt in fact derive from water, which is added at two separate steps onto Krebs-cycle intermediates (see figure on page 286 for one of them). Recall that stripping the 2H from glucose would give you six sets of 2H, whereas the Krebs..."
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "9 Mitchell had some wealth through his uncle, Sir Godfrey Mitchell, a construction engineer who had bought a small, insolvent construction company, George Wimpey, in 1919. Under Godfrey’s dynamic direction, Wimpey went on to build some 300,000 homes in England by the time of his death in 1982. Durin..."
Paragraph 6 (52 words) [SHORT]: "During the war years, the success of Wimpey allowed Peter Mitchell to cut a flamboyant figure around Cambridge, driving a silver Rolls-Royce, with his flowing mane of hair. Later on, periodic gifts of shares allowed him to purchase and renovate Glynn House, and helped him to maintain the institute t..."
Paragraph 7 (63 words): "10 NADH was also discovered by Warburg, but he failed to appreciate its full significance. It fell to the great US biochemist Albert Lehninger (author of a famous textbook) to show that the oxidation of NADH by oxygen was linked to ATP synthesis, in two classic papers in the late 1940s. Lehninger’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "61"
Paragraph 1 (42 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "11 A much-loved figure, with a faintly owlish look, Keilin headed the Molteno Institute in Cambridge, just across the lawn from Hopkins’s biochemistry department. He had welcomed Krebs into his home a decade earlier, despite a long and acrimonious dispute with Warburg about the nature of respiration..."
Paragraph 3 (146 words): "12 There’s an irony here because Krebs and R. E. Davies came up with a similar idea a decade before Mitchell, in 1951, in which they proposed that ‘It is feasible that ionic concentration differences form the link between the free energy of respiration on the one hand and ATP synthesis on the other...."
Paragraph 4 (194 words): "13 Although Mitchell had himself proposed conformational changes in proteins in his early work on bacteria, he stubbornly resisted the idea in later years, in a long-running dispute with Paul Boyer (who eventually received the Nobel prize alongside Sir John Walker for their work on the structure and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "63"
Paragraph 1 (90 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."
Paragraph 2 (294 words): "Rubisco is so abundant because it is unusually bad at its job, for an enzyme. Enzymes normally rattle along at incomprehensible rates, catalysing exactly the same reaction hundreds or thousands of times every second. Rubisco, in contrast, has a turnover rate of less than ten reactions per second, me..."
Paragraph 3 (68 words): "Not surprisingly, there has been commercial interest in replacing rubisco with a substitute of ostensibly more rational design, with the carrot of improved yields dangling distractingly overhead. Yet rubisco – which swiftly came to be seen as the enzyme for carbon fixation – is emblematic of a more ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "64"
Paragraph 1 (159 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."
Paragraph 2 (277 words): "The simplistic dichotomy between plants and animals – the notion that plants make sugars by photosynthesis, while animals respire those sugars via the Krebs cycle – is of course partly true, but also profoundly misleading, making little sense of the structure of metabolism, and therefore little sens..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "65"
Paragraph 1 (165 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."
Paragraph 2 (144 words): "To see why that’s the case, we first need to follow the path of carbon in photosynthesis, to put rubisco in its proper place. Our winding path will start to straighten out the circular logic of the Krebs cycle – how it came to be the conflicted engine of biosynthesis today. We’ll set out with the ex..."
Paragraph 3 (104 words): "The advent of radioisotopes The story of rubisco goes back to the development of cyclotrons in the 1930s by Ernest Lawrence and Stanley Livingstone at the ‘Rad Lab’ (radiation laboratory) in Berkeley, California. A cyclotron accelerates charged particles, typically protons, into a high-energy beam t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "66"
Paragraph 1 (70 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."
Paragraph 2 (183 words): "By bombarding the nuclei of target atoms, a high-energy proton beam disrupts their atomic structure, producing isotopes – atoms with differing numbers of neutrons in the nucleus, giving each one a slightly different atomic weight. The chemical properties of an atom depend on the number of protons an..."
Paragraph 3 (43 words) [SHORT]: "But it was the fundamental applications in biology that made the biggest difference, with the advent of radioactive carbon isotopes, initially carbon-11 in the late 1930s. Carbon normally has an atomic weight of 12, with six protons and six neutrons in its nucleus."
Paragraph 4 (138 words): "Bombarding crystals of boron – carbon’s neighbour in the periodic table – with deuterons (heavy hydrogen nuclei, composed of a neutron as well as a proton) transmutes some of the boron into carbon-11, usually notated 11 C, as it picks up an additional proton. This conversion of one element into anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "67"
Paragraph 1 (50 words) [SHORT]: "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20"
Paragraph 2 (61 words): "minutes. After two hours, nearly 99% of 11 C will have decayed back to boron, with its radioactivity accordingly declining to a hundredth of the starting point. Before much longer, the residual radioactivity will have dwindled to undetectable levels. That didn’t give researchers long to do much with..."
Paragraph 3 (76 words): "The pioneers of carbon isotopes were chemists caught between physics and biology. Their story is the stuff of scientific mythology, even if it is less widely known to the general public, and it is worth recounting not only because it explains our focus on sugars at the heart of metabolism, but also ..."
Paragraph 4 (188 words): "The ‘Big Problem’ Enter stage left: Martin Kamen and Sam Ruben. This pair of isotope chemists joined Ernest Lawrence’s Rad Lab in the mid-1930s. Kamen sets the scene in a charming autobiography. Lawrence himself and Robert Oppenheimer, affectionately known as Oppie (who goes on to lead the Manhattan..."
Paragraph 5 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Luckily, this embarrassing mishap doesn’t stop Lawrence from receiving the Nobel prize for his pioneering work on cyclotrons in 1939. 3"
Paragraph 6 (19 words) [SHORT]: "This bonding experience cemented a strong friendship between Kamen and Ruben, but also made clear the importance of proper"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "68"
Paragraph 1 (168 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."
Paragraph 2 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Then Ruben had a brainwave. ‘Why are we bothering with rats at all?"
Paragraph 3 (64 words): "Hell, with you and me together we could solve photosynthesis in no time!’ The pair became obsessed with what Kamen called the ‘Big Problem’: finding the first product of CO 2 fixation in plants. If it wasn’t glucose, then what was it? Earlier that year, Krebs had spelled out the individual steps in ..."
Paragraph 4 (62 words): "Photosynthesis was supposed to do more or less the reverse, yet it remained a black box. What were the steps by which thin air was transformed into the substance of life, starlight into matter? This was the ‘Big Problem’, no less than the anatomy of a miracle, to be played out against the hubristic ..."
Paragraph 5 (144 words): "Their idea was simple, even if the execution turned out to be fraught with difficulty. Feed the plant with CO 2 enriched in 11 C, give it a little time to fix the CO 2 to form new organic molecules incorporating the 11 C, then stop the biochemistry dead in its tracks by dropping a leaf into boiling ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "69"
Paragraph 1 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron."
Paragraph 2 (167 words): "When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO 2 from the boron oxides that he had been bombarding with deuterons, no easy task in itself. The precious sample was then dashed across to the lab in the ‘rat house’, where Ruben and Zev Hassid were at the ready..."
Paragraph 3 (20 words) [SHORT]: "They were, after all, physical chemists in a physics lab, not biochemists, and hardly trained for this line of work."
Paragraph 4 (144 words): "But their work was raising the curtain on a new era, and the photosynthesis community could see the raw potential despite all the setbacks. Kamen and Ruben made real progress (though Zev Hassid was obliged to quit for health reasons). The prevailing idea in the late 1930s was that CO 2 bound directl..."
Paragraph 5 (81 words): "Even so, while successfully disproving these earlier ideas of photosynthesis, Kamen and Ruben could only make one positive step towards identifying the actual path of carbon fixation: they showed that the first product was a carboxylic acid, with the same kind of chemistry as Krebs-cycle intermediat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "70"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such."
Paragraph 2 (51 words) [SHORT]: "That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note that the ‘R’ here refers to a (then) unidentified chemical group."
Paragraph 3 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Ruben got so far as suggesting that R was actually a sugar phosphate (correct as it turned out), but soon afterwards history took a tragic turn."
Paragraph 4 (85 words): "Slow disintegration 1940. The war had begun in Europe, but the United States had not yet entered the fray. In that year of loaded tension, Kamen and Ruben made their most momentous discovery of all – ironically, nothing to do with either the war or photosynthesis directly, but a discovery that was t..."
Paragraph 5 (1 words) [SHORT]: "years."
Paragraph 6 (221 words): "In many respects, 14 C was more of an invention than a discovery, although it later turned out to exist naturally, albeit at very low abundance. The first hints that a relatively stable radioisotope of carbon existed came from cloud chamber work with nitrogen gas. A cloud chamber is a mesmerising de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "71"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails."
Paragraph 2 (166 words): "What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to protons, plus some short, stubby trails that had to be formed by much heavier charged particles. As nitrogen normal..."
Paragraph 3 (16 words) [SHORT]: "He knew it could only be 14 C and the theory had to be wrong (again)."
Paragraph 4 (82 words): "Kamen tried all kinds of ways of making 14 C on a larger scale and Lawrence for once gave him as much time as he needed on the largest cyclotrons to do so. Eventually he succeeded. By bombarding ammonium nitrate with neutrons spinning off from the cyclotron, Kamen succeeded beyond his wildest dreams..."
Paragraph 5 (181 words): "It had been far from straightforward. For months, Kamen had been bombarding boron with deuterons, then 13 C-enriched graphite, eventually succeeding in producing a small amount of 14 C. After working around the clock for weeks, Kamen finally finished in the middle of the night, and left his sample o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "72"
Paragraph 1 (34 words) [SHORT]: "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car."
Paragraph 2 (82 words): "Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch of liquid phosgene in the lab, one arm in a sling, a cracked glass tube exploded in some fiercely boiling liquid air, spraying Ruben’s jumper with the deadly gas. Knowing he may have exceeded the lethal d..."
Paragraph 3 (19 words) [SHORT]: "He’d never found the time to fill out the forms that would make them eligible for a federal pension."
Paragraph 4 (158 words): "Kamen was forced to abandon his work on photosynthesis too. An accomplished viola player, he was close friends with the virtuoso violinist Isaac Stern. Kamen had unsuspectingly gone along to a party hosted by the violinist that was also attended by some Russian attachés, with whom he remained briefl..."
Paragraph 5 (158 words): "He was smeared by the press as ‘Atomic Scientist Fired from Army Project after Talking to Reds’, before finally clearing his name more than a decade later. While he did successfully return to science, Kamen never resumed his pioneering work on the path of carbon in photosynthesis, and never put his ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "73"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded."
Paragraph 2 (205 words): "The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of the Japanese surrender Lawrence told Calvin that ‘Now is the time to do something useful with radioactiv..."
Paragraph 3 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin and Benson decided to work on the alga Chlorella , which could photosynthesise much faster than land plants at high light intensity."
Paragraph 4 (162 words): "This was facilitated by Benson’s famous ‘lollipops’, flattened glass flasks that could be illuminated from both sides, with a tap in the base to allow samples to be run off into boiling alcohol, killing the cells for analysis. Perhaps Benson’s most decisive change was to adopt a new method of analys..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "74"
Paragraph 1 (85 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."
Paragraph 2 (218 words): "With this experimental setup, stopping photosynthesis after as little as one minute already produced as many as fifteen spots, giving plenty of scope for confusion. Killing the algae after just ten seconds gave a much cleaner signal – just one spot, meaning that only one product gave rise to all the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "75"
Paragraph 1 (95 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."
Paragraph 2 (120 words): "acceptor picked up a CO 2 , giving a C3 acid. If cells were not to run out of C2 acceptors they would need to regenerate them, or everything would grind to a halt – hence the cycle. They knew that later products included at least two C4 carboxylic acids. So presumably there was another step, in whic..."
Paragraph 3 (61 words): "none of it was true. Starting in 1948 with a paper in Science entitled ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis’, Calvin, Benson and their colleagues published a stream of papers, each one with the same title numbered with a Roman numeral. By 1952, they had got up to number XX, though frankly they were..."
Paragraph 4 (38 words) [SHORT]: "The problem was that they were befuddled by the Krebs-cycle intermediates which kept on cropping up. In the end, it turned out that none of these lay on the one true path of photosynthesis as we know it."
Paragraph 5 (25 words) [SHORT]: "Those Krebs-cycle intermediates appeared so often because they are so central to all metabolism – a salient point that we’ll return to in a while."
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "But here they were just misleading."
Paragraph 7 (62 words): "The key turned out to be Benson’s personal discovery of a five-carbon sugar-phosphate called ribulose bisphosphate (found while Calvin was away, recuperating from a heart attack that he’d had during a budget meeting 7 ). This sugar accumulated when the algae were starved of CO 2 – exactly what a CO ..."
Paragraph 8 (74 words): "molecule at all, but a C5 molecule that split in half when CO 2 was added on, giving two C3 phosphoglycerate molecules. The rest was mostly arithmetic, albeit a strange numbers game. Three complete turns of the cycle produce six C3 molecules. One of these could be siphoned off to be used anywhere in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "76"
Paragraph 1 (11 words) [SHORT]: "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle."
Paragraph 2 (51 words) [SHORT]: "The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence of the cycle: The details needn’t concern us. Suffice to say this is sugar..."
Paragraph 3 (61 words): "Phosphoglycerate is fed hydrogen, derived from the solar-powered splitting of water (which we’ll come to in Chapter 4) to form a three- carbon sugar called glyceraldehyde phosphate. That is converted, by way of other sugary intermediates (let’s just follow Calvin and Benson and call them A and B her..."
Paragraph 4 (88 words): "Does that name ring a bell? Remember the enzyme rubisco, the most abundant breakfast cereal in the world, which technically stands for ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase. What we see here is the carboxylation of ribulose bisphosphate (meaning that CO 2 is added onto it) to form two molecule..."
Paragraph 5 (68 words): "That seminal 1954 paper was the culmination of more than just the cycle. For reasons that were never made explicit, Calvin abruptly dismissed Benson with the words ‘It is time to go.’ Benson had no place to go, and Calvin made no obvious effort on his behalf. What went wrong? Calvin’s own cherished ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "77"
Paragraph 1 (299 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "My point here is not about fairness but personal myth. Calvin was an unusually persuasive and charismatic man. He even featured on a 2011"
Paragraph 3 (117 words): "series of US postage stamps dedicated to great American scientists, alongside Richard Feynman, Barbara McClintock, Linus Pauling and Edwin Hubble. Calvin’s claim to fame was the one true path of carbon in photosynthesis – this was the pathway of autotrophy, and Calvin was king. It was all about suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "78"
Paragraph 1 (55 words) [SHORT]: "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life."
Paragraph 2 (219 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle Berkeley casts a long shadow over the photosynthesis world. Five years after Calvin’s Nobel lecture, another luminary of photosynthesis research, also at Berkeley, published a paper that might as well have come from a parallel universe. Daniel Arnon was Polish. He was drawn t..."
Paragraph 3 (126 words): "With fitting symmetry, the discovery that made Arnon’s name was published in 1954, the same year as the Calvin–Benson cycle – and even in the same journal. Arnon had shown that photosynthesis does more than make new organic molecules: it also provides the energy that’s needed to power their synthesi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "79"
Paragraph 1 (91 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Given that background, picture the reception for Arnon’s 1966 paper."
Paragraph 3 (24 words) [SHORT]: "Working with Mike Evans and Bob Buchanan, Arnon showed that the Calvin–Benson cycle was not the only pathway of CO 2 fixation after all."
Paragraph 4 (187 words): "In fact, they made it look decidedly second rate. Because one turn of the Calvin–Benson cycle incorporates just one molecule of CO 2 , they wrote, ‘One complete turn gives, on balance, a net synthesis of 1/3 molecule of triose phosphate.’ In contrast, they introduced the green sulfur bacterium Chlor..."
Paragraph 5 (29 words) [SHORT]: "It could drive growth like a ... well, like a bacterium. Here’s what they had in mind (I’m just slightly simplifying their original diagram to highlight the key points):"

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "80"
Paragraph 1 (225 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "81"
Paragraph 1 (49 words) [SHORT]: "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else."
Paragraph 2 (134 words): "The idea that the Krebs cycle running in reverse could drive growth through carbon fixation was not new; it had been suggested in the late 1930s, and certainly influenced Ruben and Kamen’s thinking. The ubiquitous appearance of Krebs-cycle intermediates in the autoradiographs of Calvin and Benson al..."
Paragraph 3 (37 words) [SHORT]: "‘I hesitate to say this’, she replied, ‘I am working with an autotrophic, photosynthetic bacterium, which fixes CO 2 but not by the Calvin cycle.’ ‘I don’t believe it’, Calvin retorted with a grin, ending the conversation."
Paragraph 4 (233 words): "It’s no coincidence that the 1966 paper was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA , of which Arnon was a member. That honour meant he could publish in the Academy’s journal without the normal formality of peer review, which might well have killed it in embryo. 10 In..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "82"
Paragraph 1 (121 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."
Paragraph 2 (111 words): "In any case, Chlorobium restored the Krebs cycle to its rightful place, at the metabolic heart of the cell. I admit that to most people, anaerobic sulfur bacteria may seem a little esoteric, even if they do organise their metabolism in an exemplary way. But that’s exactly the problem. They will neve..."
Paragraph 3 (72 words): "How to power growth The problem facing Arnon and Buchanan was not only the unity of biochemistry and the dominating personality of Calvin; the idea of a reverse cycle also seemed to go against thermodynamics. Szent-Györgyi and Krebs knew well that parts of the Krebs cycle could run backwards, even i..."
Paragraph 4 (120 words): "(the C3 to C4 step in the scheme on page 101), which was confirmed in 1940. In 1945 the great Spanish biochemist Severo Ochoa, working in New York, showed that animal cells could carboxylate α-ketoglutarate to make citrate (the C5 to C6 step above). This radical finding was hard to comprehend, as it..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "83"
Paragraph 1 (64 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "This marvellous, mysterious adaptor was named ferredoxin."
Paragraph 3 (180 words): "Ferredoxin is red because it contains iron. Specifically, it binds to itself one or two tiny mineral lattices, each one just a few atoms in size, known as iron–sulfur clusters. When bound to ferredoxin, these clusters have a potent ability to transfer electrons. It’s not easy to force electrons onto..."
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "The basic chemistry is similar for both acetate and succinate, requiring CO 2 to be joined onto a virtually inert carboxylate group."
Paragraph 5 (73 words): "Remember that the carboxylate group has a structure of -CO 2 , so the CO 2 has to be bound onto something very like itself. Ferredoxin (Fd) takes the electrons from the 2H and transfers them onto CO 2 , enabling it to form a carbon-to-carbon bond: Let’s not worry about exactly how that works here (i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "84"
Paragraph 1 (43 words) [SHORT]: "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas."
Paragraph 2 (104 words): "So in the presence of oxygen the reverse Krebs cycle usually grinds to a halt. It’s even worse than that, because when oxygen picks up single electrons from ferredoxin it is itself transformed into a reactive ‘free radical’ (a molecule with one or more unpaired electrons, typically making it more re..."
Paragraph 3 (67 words): "That fact explains a lot. We’ll look into how rising oxygen levels play havoc with the reverse Krebs cycle later. For now, let’s note that the bacteria that use it today are normally restricted to environments with very low oxygen levels. Their sensitivity to oxygen probably explains why the Calvin–..."
Paragraph 4 (97 words): "Plants still depend on ferredoxin, but keep its levels to a strict minimum, transferring its electrons straight to NADP + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) to form NADPH like this: Transfer of electrons from 2H to CO 2 to form organics, C(H 2 O), in photosynthesis, powered by sunlight. T..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "85"
Paragraph 1 (32 words) [SHORT]: "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 ."
Paragraph 2 (199 words): "Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive with oxygen, while retaining just enough power to push its electrons onto other molecules. 11 NADPH doesn’t have the potency to drive the Krebs cycle backwards, but it can p..."
Paragraph 3 (194 words): "The need to prevent ferredoxin reacting with oxygen might also explain the propensity of rubisco to fix O 2 through the apparently futile process of photorespiration. Very little in evolution is genuinely futile; if it survives natural selection there is usually a reason. In the case of rubisco, thi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "86"
Paragraph 1 (11 words) [SHORT]: "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death."
Paragraph 2 (8 words) [SHORT]: "No doubt we’ll find out in due course."
Paragraph 3 (175 words): "All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread on the early Earth before the rise of oxygen. It has even been linked to the origin of life itself, as we’ll s..."
Paragraph 4 (183 words): "Two recent discoveries hint at the antiquity of the reverse Krebs cycle. The first relates to the need for a supply of ATP and ferredoxin for the cycle to spin at all. As a rule, these derive from photosynthesis. None of the most ancient bacteria (or their cousins, known as archaea) are thought to h..."
Paragraph 5 (82 words): "The second critical discovery relates to the purportedly patchy distribution of the reverse Krebs cycle. Look again at the scheme on page 101. The top step that splits citrate into oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA is not catalysed by the familiar ‘citrate synthase’ enzyme from our own Krebs cycle running..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "87"
Paragraph 1 (147 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."
Paragraph 2 (138 words): "Could it be that the origin of life structured metabolism through the reactions of H 2 and CO 2 , to form Krebs-cycle intermediates? That this biosynthetic engine was hard-wired into life from the beginning, the driving force that gave rise to genes and proteins? That billions of years later, as the..."
Paragraph 3 (98 words): "1 The venture failed because in the late 1970s, when Wildman set up a pilot plant in North Carolina to extract large amounts of rubisco from tobacco leaves, the dangers of smoking were becoming universally recognised. Unsurprisingly, the idea of adding a tobacco protein to food gained little commerc..."
Paragraph 4 (93 words): "2 This is sufficiently below the speed of light not to require correction for the effects of relativity. Because E = mc 2 , as particles are accelerated closer to the speed of light their mass and behaviour in electromagnetic fields changes, which has to be taken into consideration in synchronising ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "88"
Paragraph 1 (107 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."
Paragraph 2 (83 words): "4 This unexpected finding took biologists some time to accept, yet CO 2 fixation in the dark had already been shown to occur in autotrophic bacteria. Indeed, Krebs himself had made the bold claim (based on manometry) that even animal tissues could fix CO 2 , but he was unable to prove it using 11 C ..."
Paragraph 3 (162 words): "5 Neutrons? Yes, you heard right. Neutrons are produced from a high-energy beam of protons or deuterons hitting almost any target. They are also produced directly from the cyclotron itself, as particles are accelerated up to higher speeds and energies. At energies above ~10 million electron volts, d..."
Paragraph 4 (151 words): "6 It is worth reflecting that paper after paper published in top journals can be essentially wrong. Please don’t think that these papers were especially bad. Far from it. Science is hard and we are all wrong a lot. The harder the problem, the more wrongness there will be. If you want to take a moral..."
Paragraph 5 (40 words) [SHORT]: "7 Calvin’s wife Genevieve took matters in hand: under her strict dietary regime, Calvin lost 30 kg in weight and quit smoking. It would be unfair to blame the budget meeting for anything but the timing of his heart attack."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "89"
Paragraph 1 (186 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."
Paragraph 2 (187 words): "9 Science is almost always a team effort, frequently with large groups of people, all of whom contribute in important ways, albeit to varying degrees, just as large teams do in making movies. To what extent does one individual’s stamp make a movie or a scientific discovery? We can recognise the crea..."
Paragraph 3 (76 words): "10 Peer review is often lionised as the ‘gold standard’, and at its best can indeed work extremely well. But it is also intrinsically conservative, as long argued by Don Braben (I would strongly recommend his books, notably Scientific Freedom ). The problem is twofold. First, peers are frequently an..."
Paragraph 4 (118 words): "Second, any revolutionary ideas, by definition, overturn the applecart, meaning the lifetime achievements of peers are diminished, even disproved. The greatest of scientists – the greatest human beings – will put their own emotions aside, stand on a soapbox, and proclaim their errors and misinterpre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "90"
Paragraph 1 (126 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "92"
Paragraph 1 (34 words) [SHORT]: "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves."
Paragraph 2 (330 words): "Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on the origin of life. Working with the oceanographers John Baross and Sarah Hoffman, Corliss published a classic paper in 1981, entitled ‘An Hypothesis Concerning the Relationship between Submarine Hot Springs and the Origin o..."
Paragraph 3 (73 words): "Yet by the same token, the absence of oxygen should have made the fixation of CO 2 much easier. By the late 1980s the reverse Krebs cycle was finally gaining credence, as gene sequences made it clear that not all autotrophic bacteria depend on the Calvin–Benson cycle. The time was ripe for a new con..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "93"
Paragraph 1 (70 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."
Paragraph 2 (37 words) [SHORT]: "Two trailblazing scientists, the chemist Günter Wächtershäuser and the geochemist Mike Russell, independently put forward detailed and contrasting ideas on how iron sulfide minerals in vents might catalyse the hydrogenation of carbon dioxide to form carboxylic acids."
Paragraph 3 (242 words): "Wächtershäuser conceived an elaborate scheme that he termed ‘pyrites pulling’, which linked the synthesis of iron pyrites (fool’s gold) to the reverse Krebs cycle. While ingenious, it bore only a cursory resemblance to the pathway in bacteria. Russell, in contrast, thought in terms of the topology o..."
Paragraph 4 (65 words): "These ideas are opposed in virtually every respect: deep oceans versus warm ponds, light energy or chemical disequilibria, metabolism first or genes first, autotrophy or heterotrophy, fast chemistry or slow accumulation, local or planetary scales, and biology or chemistry as the ultimate guide to li..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "94"
Paragraph 1 (224 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."
Paragraph 2 (132 words): "Whatever the answer, these disparate views are far from sterile, but inform practical decisions about where to search for life in the solar system, or further afield. Should NASA and other space agencies back missions to Mars, or to the icy moons of Saturn and Jupiter, Enceladus and Europa? If light..."
Paragraph 3 (92 words): "Arguably even more important are the practical connotations for metabolism and our own health today. Is the Krebs cycle at the heart of metabolism because life was forced into existence that way, by thermodynamics – fate! – or was this chemistry invented later by genes, just a trivial outcome of inf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "95"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first?"
Paragraph 2 (37 words) [SHORT]: "The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning."
Paragraph 3 (17 words) [SHORT]: "In this chapter we’ll explore the evidence for this view, stemming from the origin of life itself."
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "How old is old?"
Paragraph 5 (156 words): "There is little doubt that the reverse Krebs cycle is ancient, but merely being ancient is far removed from extending right back to the very origin of life. What evidence is there? Simply arguing that the Krebs cycle spins at the heart of biochemistry is not enough. There are two reasons why that mi..."
Paragraph 6 (150 words): "The first question is geological plausibility. The reverse Krebs cycle requires the gases CO 2 and H 2 as well as catalysts containing iron–sulfur clusters. Here, we are on relatively safe ground. There was almost certainly a great deal more CO 2 in the atmosphere and oceans around four billion year..."
Paragraph 7 (50 words) [SHORT]: "There was also much less limestone on the early Earth, for this tends to form in relatively alkaline oceans. We know from the geological record that barely any limestone was laid down beneath the acidic oceans of the early Earth. Now, if all the carbon in organic matter plus limestone"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "96"
Paragraph 1 (41 words) [SHORT]: "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level)."
Paragraph 2 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and so be absorbed into the Earth’s crust, but geologists have a hard time accounting for the last 10 bars or so. If only 1 bar lingered, that’s still 25,000 times more than today: there was surely no shortage of CO 2 ."
Paragraph 3 (64 words): "Even when drawn down into the mantle, CO 2 does not remain below for long, but is degassed back into the atmosphere through volcanic eruptions, over a cycle of a few tens of millions of years. The Earth is far from unusual – CO 2 makes up around 95% of the atmospheres of Mars and Venus and is common..."
Paragraph 4 (245 words): "Hydrogen, too, bubbles from the oceans through the hydro-thermal vents advocated by Mike Russell and Bill Martin, which were probably far more common back then. These vents are produced not by volcanic activity, but chemistry – ocean water reacting with minerals such as olivine. Olivine comprises ab..."
Paragraph 5 (36 words) [SHORT]: "That certainly can’t be said for the alternative theories based on gases such as cyanide. While relatively stable forms such as ferricyanide might have accumulated in warm ponds on land, there is little evidence for that"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "97"
Paragraph 1 (16 words) [SHORT]: "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 ."
Paragraph 2 (277 words): "Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty acids from cyanide and related molecules. In contrast, until recently, the exponent..."
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "are ubiquitous, and can react to form Krebs-cycle intermediates."
Paragraph 4 (88 words): "But other factors are more equivocal. Phylogenetics clearly indicates that the earliest cells in the tree of life were auto-trophic, growing from gases such as H 2 and CO 2 (rather than ‘eating’ food) but do not really support the contention that the reverse Krebs cycle is ancestral to life, as woul..."
Paragraph 5 (47 words) [SHORT]: "fixation across the living world. Just one of these, the acetyl CoA pathway, is found in both bacteria and archaea, the two great prokaryotic domains of life, implying that this was the only pathway present in their common ancestor, the last universal common ancestor of all life"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "98"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2"
Paragraph 2 (96 words): "and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway draws on the power of ancient iron–sulfur proteins, including..."
Paragraph 3 (52 words) [SHORT]: "On the other hand, the end product of the acetyl CoA pathway is acetyl CoA itself – a C2 molecule that is also part of the reverse Krebs cycle. While acetyl CoA is a lynchpin of metabolism, it isn’t the direct source for most other molecules containing more than two carbon atoms."
Paragraph 4 (141 words): "Most amino acids, for example, contain three to six carbon atoms. These are not made (as they could be in theory) by joining C2 units together and chopping bits off as necessary, but from Krebs-cycle intermediates by way of more CO 2 fixation, using more H 2 . Likewise sugars. These are formed from ..."
Paragraph 5 (138 words): "There are two possible resolutions to the conundrum. The first is that the reverse Krebs cycle is not ancestral, but a few of the constituent carboxylic acid intermediates are. In particular, five of them are universally conserved across life – acetate (C2), pyruvate (C3), oxaloacetate (C4), succina..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "99"
Paragraph 1 (149 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Thankfully not. There are other ways to approach the question."
Paragraph 3 (171 words): "The cycling law ‘Energy flows, matter cycles.’ This axiom from the legendary biophysicist Harold Morowitz might one day be elevated to a fourth law of thermodynamics, but in the meantime it is more informally known as Morowitz’s cycling law. Born in Poughkeepsie, New York, Morowitz was a child prodi..."
Paragraph 4 (101 words): "Hard work is almost never vice. Hopefulness is a moral imperative. And, a sense of humour helps.’ Biologists can be grateful that Morowitz made the switch: he was one of the most profound and delightful of thinkers, combining a physicist’s rigour with a biologist’s eclecticism. He came to the attent..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "100"
Paragraph 1 (167 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."
Paragraph 2 (243 words): "Morowitz had laid out his cycling theorem in a 1968 book, Energy Flow in Biology : ‘In steady state systems, the flow of energy through the system from a source to a sink will lead to at least one cycle in the system.’ The idea made a pleasing link between living systems (where an organism remains i..."
Paragraph 3 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Always an admirer of the iconic metabolic charts of biochemistry, Morowitz could not help but see the Krebs cycle as the perfect cyclone"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "101"
Paragraph 1 (101 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."
Paragraph 2 (178 words): "Even better than that. As noted in the last chapter, the reverse Krebs cycle is autocatalytic. Starting with one molecule of the C4 oxaloacetate, one spin of the reverse cycle generates two molecules of oxaloacetate; the next spin generates four molecules, then eight, sixteen and so on. Not only is ..."
Paragraph 3 (101 words): "Inevitable versus implausible Morowitz’s conception is beautiful and full of meaning. It suggests that life can’t help but emerge on any wet, rocky planet flooded with light from a nearby star. He even wrote a book, The Emergence of Everything , which explores the limits of inevitability – where doe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "102"
Paragraph 1 (100 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."
Paragraph 2 (136 words): "Orgel had trained as an inorganic chemist at Oxford in the 1940s. He was among the first to see the molecular model of DNA constructed by Crick and Watson in 1953, when the great crystallographer Dorothy Hodgkin told a group of her colleagues that they had to cram into two cars to make the trip to C..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "103"
Paragraph 1 (47 words) [SHORT]: "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others."
Paragraph 2 (30 words) [SHORT]: "This hypothesis argues that RNA can act as both a template and a catalyst, and so could have given rise to both heredity and metabolism at the origin of life."
Paragraph 3 (68 words): "Never shy of confronting the difficulties implicit in his own ideas, Orgel observed that if metabolism were indeed invented by an RNA world, then the structure of biochemistry could give no insight into the origin of life. That’s because metabolism would be a product of genetic information – written..."
Paragraph 4 (54 words) [SHORT]: "Information rules biology, and whatever form of prebiotic chemistry came before genes (said Orgel) could not be read by looking at the products of genes. That would include the reverse Krebs cycle, which Orgel argued had to be a product of genes and selection, and so could give no insight into prebi..."
Paragraph 5 (240 words): "Famous for pithy remarks such as his eponymous Second Law, ‘Evolution is cleverer than you are’, Orgel memorably dismissed self- organising biochemical cycles as ‘an appeal to magic’. He returned to the theme in a final testament, published posthumously, entitled ‘The Implausibility of Metabolic Cyc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "104"
Paragraph 1 (251 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."
Paragraph 2 (85 words): "My point here is more specific. The last thing that prebiotic chemistry needs is the perfect autocatalytic cycle, which makes copies of itself at the expense of all the side reactions that make up living cells. But a cycle that bleeds off material with every spin ceases to be autocatalytic, and so b..."
Paragraph 3 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Where does this leave us? Compromise can be a dirty word in science, but it seems to me that there really is a pattern of mundane, repetitious reactions that form Krebs-cycle intermediates in the right order, but initially just the first few steps, perhaps up to the C3 or C4"
Paragraph 4 (14 words) [SHORT]: "intermediates. Not a cycle, but a straight line, let’s call it the Krebs line."
Paragraph 5 (58 words) [SHORT]: "We’ve seen that there’s strong experimental evidence, from the last few years, that these Krebs line intermediates do indeed form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 . That’s a big deal, because it substantiates a hypothesis that already has unique explanatory power in connecting an omnipresent geologic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "105"
Paragraph 1 (38 words) [SHORT]: "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions."
Paragraph 2 (81 words): "In principle, this means that the sustained disequilibrium in hydrothermal vents – the non-stop replenishment of both H 2 and CO 2 – could drive a continuous reactivity, in which the core components of biochemistry are continually formed and react together to form more complex networks of reactions...."
Paragraph 3 (31 words) [SHORT]: "and CO 2 relative to the rate at which they dissipate – get washed away or diluted or break back down. And that rests, first and foremost, on the chemistry itself."
Paragraph 4 (211 words): "The likelihood of any reaction taking place depends in part on the stability of the products, but most of all on the proclivity of molecules to react at all – the kinetics. In chemistry, the proverb ‘Where there’s a will there’s a way’ is mistaken, because sometimes there just isn’t a way. Not all c..."
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "Magic surfaces Consider what happens close to a charged surface, let’s say a mineral containing iron and sulfur (such as greigite), shown below as a wavy line to keep things simple. Imagine that a CO 2 molecule comes into close apposition with the surface and is held in place by electrical attractio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "106"
Paragraph 1 (100 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."
Paragraph 2 (170 words): "What just happened here? Look at the curly arrows again. A pair of electrons passes directly from the surface onto the carbon atom, which promotes the transfer of a bonding pair of electrons onto the oxygen, giving it a negative charge. Because one of those electrons belonged to oxygen in the first ..."
Paragraph 3 (71 words): "The structure above is stabilised by the transfer of electrons from the mineral surface, in much the same way that ferredoxin stabilises the transfer of electrons onto CO 2 in cells today (see Appendix 1). The parallel between mineral surfaces and enzymes such as ferredoxin is remarkable: the lattic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "107"
Paragraph 1 (53 words) [SHORT]: "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."
Paragraph 2 (70 words): "Now another electron jiggle splits the bound CO 2 into carbon monoxide (CO) and a charged oxygen atom, both still attached to the surface. Knowing exactly how electrons behave during these jiggles is a quantum artform in itself, uncertain in detail even today – electrons ‘tunnel’ (hop) across these ..."
Paragraph 3 (72 words): "binding to a surface is reduced to CO, roughly as depicted here: All this chemistry is promoted by electrons passing from the surface of the mineral onto CO 2 . But as in respiration, protons and electrons can unite to form hydrogen atoms. This happens much more readily in mildly acidic environments..."
Paragraph 4 (13 words) [SHORT]: "They can then follow the electrons onto CO 2 attached to the surface."
Paragraph 5 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Overall, the transfer of electrons and protons onto CO 2 equates to the transfer of hydrogen, even in the absence of hydrogen itself. Here’s a sequence showing roughly what happens:"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "108"
Paragraph 1 (143 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."
Paragraph 2 (75 words): "Rather, it means the electron pair is shared with the proton, while remaining firmly attached to the carbon. If you prefer, you could imagine the electrons crossing to the H + to form H – (a ‘hydride’ ion) leaving a positively charged carbon behind. What would happen next? The H – would immediately ..."
Paragraph 3 (112 words): "There’s an even more important general principle here, which we will return to in a while: it’s much easier to pass electrons onto carbon atoms in an acidic environment, where protons are abundant, than it is in an alkaline environment, where there are hardly any around. Because a proton plus an ele..."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "109"
Paragraph 1 (237 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "110"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP."
Paragraph 2 (76 words): "A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independently to other molecules such as phosphate. The key point here is that the t..."
Paragraph 3 (208 words): "And now for the most startling step. I have to admit I’m amazed that this happens, but it certainly does, as has been known since the 1920s when Franz Fischer and Hans Tropsch pioneered a method for generating synthetic gasoline from coal. This ‘Fischer–Tropsch synthesis’ later fuelled the German wa..."
Paragraph 4 (37 words) [SHORT]: "But now look at the product. This bound molecule is a prebiotic equivalent to acetyl CoA – discovered, if you recall, by Fritz Lipmann, and one of the most important molecules in all metabolism. We have just"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "111"
Paragraph 1 (89 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."
Paragraph 2 (118 words): "Iron–sulfide minerals are semiconducting, which is to say they can transfer electrons across themselves. This means that electrons transferred from the surface onto CO 2 can be replenished, so the process can happen over and over again without any permanent change in the surface – the surface is cat..."
Paragraph 3 (117 words): "Conversely, if the electrons are replenished from elsewhere, then this chemistry can go on and on in remarkably similar steps. If you don’t believe me, look at Appendix 2, where I’ve drawn out the first half of the reverse Krebs cycle step by step, following the same ground rules. As Morowitz observ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "112"
Paragraph 1 (82 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."
Paragraph 2 (245 words): "The driving force Why has it been so difficult, experimentally, to persuade H 2 to react with CO 2 , at least until recently? There are three aspects to this problem: catalysts, pressure and pH (proton concentration). We’ve already discussed catalysts. Iron–sulfide minerals and other surfaces promot..."
Paragraph 3 (26 words) [SHORT]: "But living cells can thrive on H 2 in surface environments at low pressure. Life doesn’t work miracles, so how do cells pull off that trick?"
Paragraph 4 (15 words) [SHORT]: "The explicit problem for cells is: how do they coax trace amounts of H 2"
Paragraph 5 (45 words) [SHORT]: "to transfer their electrons onto ferredoxin, which then passes them onto CO 2 ? There are several ways of doing that, but most of them are complex, and involve multiple enzymes, so don’t seem relevant to prebiotic chemistry. The most intriguing possibility, which connects cells"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "113"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 2 (14 words) [SHORT]: "depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH."
Paragraph 3 (201 words): "We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the charge of electrons and promote dehydration reactions in water. Paradoxically, just the opposite holds true for H 2 gas. H 2 is more reactive in ..."
Paragraph 4 (68 words): "So the dilemma here is that H 2 will push its electrons onto the catalyst in alkaline conditions, but CO 2 will only accept them from the catalyst in acidic conditions. That’s why the reaction doesn’t happen easily at any uniform pH, and instead requires high pressure to ramp up the reactivity of H ..."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Far from it. Virtually all cells pump H + out, making the outside about three pH units more acidic than the inside – which is to say, there’s a thousand-fold difference in H + concentration."
Paragraph 6 (120 words): "In ancient cells such as methanogens, the influx of H + through iron– sulfur proteins associated with the membrane promotes the transfer of electrons from H 2 to CO 2 to form organics. The deepest requirement for the proton-motive force might therefore be CO 2 fixation. The prime example is the ‘ene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "114"
Paragraph 1 (106 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."
Paragraph 2 (76 words): "Here’s how. Alkaline hydrothermal vents are riddled with interconnected pores that have a similar topology to cells – alkaline inside, acid outside. H 2 gas is delivered in alkaline hydrothermal fluids, making it more reactive, whereas CO 2 comes dissolved in acidic ocean water, making it more willi..."
Paragraph 3 (206 words): "on one side to CO 2 on the other. The theory is soundly grounded, but that’s not enough. This is an experimental question, which my lab and others have been struggling to address for years now. We’ve had limited success, because H 2 is difficult to work with under continuous flow at high pressure. B..."
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Small steps, giant leaps"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "115"
Paragraph 1 (116 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Together, these products can take on amazingly life-like properties."
Paragraph 3 (66 words): "Simple mixtures of fatty acids form spontaneously into what can be called ‘protocells’, with a thin bilayer membrane similar to modern cell membranes enclosing a watery internal volume. These are mesmerising entities that fuse together and divide in two, with every appearance of bustling purpose, dr..."
Paragraph 4 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Working in my lab, Sean Jordan and Hanadi Rammu have shown that these protocells self-assemble even more readily under hydrothermal conditions, such as pH 11, 70°C and ocean salinity. In just a few small steps of quite repetitive chemistry, we’ve leapt from strictly inorganic pores to organic protoc..."
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "do what exactly?"
Paragraph 6 (142 words): "The next step is just as pleasing. How could these protocells grow and divide? To do so, they would need to make more organic molecules inside themselves (more fatty acids, more amino acids) using the proton gradient. The million-dollar question is: could a prebiotic version of Ech operate in protoc..."
Paragraph 7 (39 words) [SHORT]: "If you are unusually alert, you may have noticed a discrepancy between organic synthesis in inorganic pores (where I talked about electrons crossing inorganic barriers) and organic synthesis in protocells (where I talked about protons crossing cell membranes). The"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "116"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2"
Paragraph 2 (77 words): "is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two million times faster than hydroxide ions going the other way. That discrep..."
Paragraph 3 (58 words) [SHORT]: "millionths of a millimetre (25 nanometres) in diameter. If so, then inorganic pores and protocells are potentially homologous. Because protocells stick to iron-sulfide barriers on the alkaline side, protons could flow straight across the barriers and into the protocells lining the barrier, before be..."
Paragraph 4 (91 words): "Transfer of protons across an inorganic barrier (left) or the same barrier enclosing a protocell (right) could drive the formation of organics (CH 2 O) within the pore or the protocell. The triangles in the membrane of the protocell (on the arrows) symbolise iron– sulfur clusters bound to amino acid..."
Paragraph 5 (25 words) [SHORT]: "Perhaps the most important property of this system is that it can in principle make copies of itself, and over time can become more complex."
Paragraph 6 (23 words) [SHORT]: "For reasons of physical chemistry, new fatty acids will go straight into the membrane, whereas a proportion of amino acids should interact with"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "117"
Paragraph 1 (125 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."
Paragraph 2 (22 words) [SHORT]: "Positive feedbacks can take us further. We’ve already seen that much of core metabolism just springs into existence in the right conditions."
Paragraph 3 (47 words) [SHORT]: "The first ‘biological’ catalysts must have sped up ‘helpful’ aspects of geochemical flux. But helpful to what? Helpful to whatever is being replicated – protocells in this case. So the first biological catalysts sped up protocell growth, meaning ultimately the conversion of H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 4 (115 words): "into the fabric of new protocells. For my money, the first nucleotides, and eventually RNA and DNA, emerged inside such replicating protocells through positive feedbacks. Nucleotides still function alongside enzymes today, and can catalyse important reactions, notably CO 2 fixation, and the transfer..."
Paragraph 5 (108 words): "Raquel Nunes Palmeira, Stuart Harrison and Aaron Halpern, three PhD students in my lab, are modelling how the genetic code might have emerged in this setting. 8 Assuming that replicating protocells do indeed make nucleotides, the next step is to polymerise them into random sequences of RNA. These ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "118"
Paragraph 1 (79 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."
Paragraph 2 (45 words) [SHORT]: "All this implies that genes arose in protocells, and their initial value was promoting growth from H 2 and CO 2 by way of Krebs-cycle intermediates. This requirement for growth at the heart of metabolism meant that genes could never replace those core biochemical pathways."
Paragraph 3 (102 words): "Information came into being in the context of growing protocells, and to this day genes recreate the ancestral chemistry of their host cells. Far from inventing metabolism, genes built on these deep pathways, ultimately freeing cells from their physical cradle, recreating the same ancestral chemistr..."
Paragraph 4 (82 words): "How to go forwards This book is not about the origin of the genetic heredity but the Krebs cycle. So let’s leave the dense thickets between replicating protocells and the origins of the genetic code for another day, another book. Right now, there are some broad themes that we need to pull out for ou..."
Paragraph 5 (14 words) [SHORT]: "is favoured thermodynamically. In other words, a mixture of H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 6 (103 words): "has a higher overall energy state than cellular biomass, meaning that CO 2 and H 2 will release energy when they react together to form biomass. But some molecules are easier to make than others. If carboxylic acids, amino acids and fatty acids all form spontaneously, RNA synthesis is more difficult..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "119"
Paragraph 1 (31 words) [SHORT]: "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase?"
Paragraph 2 (162 words): "The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl CoA, or simpler prebiotic equivalents. Going back to the reaction steps I outlined earlier, recall that I finished by depicting an acetyl group (as in acetyl CoA), bound to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "120"
Paragraph 1 (156 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."
Paragraph 2 (19 words) [SHORT]: "In terms of reactivity, the difference is about three orders of magnitude, so it’s not to be sneezed at."
Paragraph 3 (149 words): "The bigger picture that emerges is this. Vents provide a steady supply of H 2 and CO 2 , in just the right conditions needed to promote their reaction to make carboxylic acids. These form through chemical mechanisms that resemble steps of the reverse Krebs cycle, implying that this chemistry really ..."
Paragraph 4 (59 words) [SHORT]: "available, the more organic products will be produced, and the further these reactions will be driven from the starting point. You could think of this as gentle waves spreading up a beach; how far up the water travels varies locally with the lie of the land, but ultimately depends on the driving for..."
Paragraph 5 (41 words) [SHORT]: "The beauty of vents is that hydrothermal flow is continuous. If only a tiny proportion of H 2 reacts at any one moment, in the next moment that H 2 is replenished, and the same reaction can happen all over again."
Paragraph 6 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Growth is the non-stop formation of new organics from the continuous flow and reaction of gases in the environment. The inorganic pores within vents are the perfect homes for protocells that nestle in the"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "121"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing."
Paragraph 2 (1 words) [SHORT]: "Growing."
Paragraph 3 (272 words): "Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over time, though this could be repeated simultaneously in millions of vents spread acro..."
Paragraph 4 (115 words): "1 A veteran of many expeditions on the Alvin , typically lasting a full day at a time, John Baross touched a chord with me in this disarmingly human observation: ‘We have to watch what we eat and drink because there is no bathroom on board.’ 2 In fact, we now know that deep-sea vents produce enough ..."
Paragraph 5 (24 words) [SHORT]: "3 The tradition of synthetic chemistry aims to make the products of interest, such as nucleotides, at high yield, ideally uncontaminated by unwanted products."
Paragraph 6 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Synthetic chemists tend to have little interest in the pathways that biochemistry"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "122"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t)."
Paragraph 2 (53 words) [SHORT]: "Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research programme that specifically aimed for low selectivity and low yield would bring mo..."
Paragraph 3 (177 words): "4 Being by then something of a scientific celebrity (and by no means unsympathetic to religion), Morowitz wrote a monthly essay for Hospital Practice for twenty-two years. These eclectic essays range widely across science and society, and were published as five collections with playful titles such a..."
Paragraph 4 (30 words) [SHORT]: "5 Just in case you are confused ... the normal ‘forwards’ Krebs cycle is catalytic, which is to say one complete spin of the cycle will regenerate the starting point."
Paragraph 5 (102 words): "If you add succinate, you will regenerate exactly the same amount of succinate after a turn of the cycle, while making more of the end products CO 2 and 2H. In contrast, the reverse Krebs cycle is autocatalytic. This means that a complete spin of the cycle regenerates the starting point in two copie..."
Paragraph 6 (77 words): "6 That of course raises its own questions about just how RNA acquires information, a problem so severe that thinkers of the calibre of Paul Davies and Sara Walker have argued we need a new law of physics to explain the origin of information. It seems to me that this is less of a knotty problem if en..."
Paragraph 7 (100 words): "7 The picture emerging is reminiscent of the anthropic principle – the idea that the cosmological constants (such as the strength of gravity) had to be very similar to their measured values for the universe we know to exist at all – for stars, planets, organic chemistry and life as we know it to be ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "123"
Paragraph 1 (75 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."
Paragraph 2 (22 words) [SHORT]: "8 That wasn’t the original plan, but cracking the code is exciting and we’re on a roll. How could I stop them?"
Paragraph 3 (207 words): "9 You might be wondering how a random string of RNA could affect protocell growth. The answer depends on biophysical interactions between RNA and amino acids. There is an intriguing ‘code within the codons’, which suggests, for example, that hydrophobic amino acids will preferentially interact with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "125"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself."
Paragraph 2 (243 words): "How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard shells as evidence? The mystery is deepened by their abrupt appearance in the fossil record, in what is called the ‘Cambrian explosion’, when the first rec..."
Paragraph 3 (21 words) [SHORT]: "If the fossils themselves are enigmatic, the context established by geology, physiology and ecology point to part of the answer: oxygen."
Paragraph 4 (152 words): "Remember that O 2 accumulated as a waste product from photosynthesis, and was virtually absent from the atmosphere for life’s first two billion years. That’s no accident. The chances of life starting on an oxygenated planet is arguably close to zero: hydrogen must react with CO 2 to form organic mol..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "126"
Paragraph 1 (150 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."
Paragraph 2 (124 words): "The reason for this balance between stability and reactivity stems from the rules of quantum mechanics, which oblige oxygen to react only with molecules that offer up single electrons, such as rusting iron, and not with molecules that have more stable pairs of electrons. Organic molecules don’t usua..."
Paragraph 3 (124 words): "Respiration is a controlled form of combustion. The energy released is exactly equivalent, but it is released in tiny steps to power the synthesis of ATP. Cell respiration goes to great lengths to extract electrons one at a time from ‘2H’, feeding them individually to the fastidious dragon oxygen (s..."
Paragraph 4 (33 words) [SHORT]: "It’s sobering to realise that without the quantum rules that govern the predominantly two-electron chemistry of carbon, versus the one-electron behaviour of oxygen, the world that we know and love could not exist."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "127"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 2 (157 words): "It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy, such as ATP. In the absence of oxygen (and ‘bystander’ molecules such as nitrate, which only accumulate when oxygen is available) th..."
Paragraph 3 (64 words): "would have 40, 16, 6.4, 2.6 and 1.02 per cent of the energy available in fixed carbon, respectively). Without oxygen, only two trophic levels are possible before we reach 1 per cent. Of course this is a rule of thumb and the reality would depend on the total amount of fixed carbon available, the siz..."
Paragraph 4 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Nonetheless, complex food webs are only likely to exist in a well- oxygenated world. More than anything else, the Cambrian explosion marked the beginning of our modern world, with complex ecosystems, multiple trophic levels, competition between predators and prey, the whole shebang. None of that exi..."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "And in animals, aerobic respiration always spins the Krebs cycle; it is universal. We all descend from those Cambrian beasts, so we can infer that they used the Krebs cycle, linked to aerobic respiration, too."
Paragraph 6 (148 words): "But an older idea that rising oxygen drove the change (as opposed to permitting it) is far from the mark. The fact that animals and plants each arose on just one occasion in the Earth’s long history already hints that developmental constraints, such as a genetic framework, also stood in the way of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "128"
Paragraph 1 (112 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."
Paragraph 2 (204 words): "I confess I was befuddled by this question too until a simple thought crossed my mind. Perhaps bacteria and single-celled protists are indeed obliged to do one thing or another: they switch on and off genes in different environmental contexts to focus on either growth or energy generation. Serial pr..."
Paragraph 3 (126 words): "Plugging into the planet Let’s cast our minds back to the emergence of life in deep-sea hydrothermal vents. With a steady supply of H 2 and free proton gradients, everything that’s needed is already in place. Growth can be continuous, and there are at least no thermodynamic impediments to the emerge..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "129"
Paragraph 1 (113 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "The single biggest problem facing the first cells was the need to generate their own proton gradients, to drive the reaction between H 2"
Paragraph 3 (163 words): "and CO 2 . The topological structure of cells – reduced and alkaline inside, oxidised and acidic outside – is strictly analogous to a vent, nay, to the Earth itself. Cells are mini-batteries that recapitulate the Earth. We saw in the previous chapter that the flow of protons across membranes (the pr..."
Paragraph 4 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Proton pumping is costly; but worse, it draws on the same hydrogen emanating from exactly the same hellish sources."
Paragraph 5 (116 words): "The details of how this works needn’t concern us. 2 What matters is that H 2 is consumed in generating a proton gradient, which powers the synthesis of the ATP and ferredoxin needed for fixing CO 2 . For many bacteria, even proton pumping requires ferredoxin. The enzyme captures electrons from H 2 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "130"
Paragraph 1 (35 words) [SHORT]: "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2"
Paragraph 2 (117 words): "fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens, make 40 times as much waste, by mass, as new cell biomass. In other words, of all the H 2 that a methanogen consumes, only a fortieth is converted into biomass and the rest is used to power pumping. That’s a not a ..."
Paragraph 3 (34 words) [SHORT]: "(We will come to another reason why they might need to pump in the Epilogue.) All this puts a premium on every last drop of hydrogen, and especially that most valuable biological currency, ferredoxin."
Paragraph 4 (34 words) [SHORT]: "We keep coming round to ferredoxin, the red protein, so central to all metabolism. Its deep antiquity and central role in life was most clearly appreciated by the great pioneer of bioinformatics, Margaret Dayhoff."
Paragraph 5 (222 words): "The very same year that Daniel Arnon and colleagues first reported the reverse Krebs cycle, 1966, Margaret Dayhoff (working with Richard Eck) published a paper that launched a thousand ships in the journal Science . Dayhoff had done her degree in maths at New York University before taking a PhD in q..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "131"
Paragraph 1 (234 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."
Paragraph 2 (50 words) [SHORT]: "As more bacterial proteins were sequenced, Dayhoff was able to use ferredoxin and other bioenergetic proteins such as cytochrome c to lay out the history of life. The most ancient cells, her trees indicated, were bacteria such as Clostridium , some of which live from H 2 and CO 2"
Paragraph 3 (75 words): "through exactly the mechanisms we have discussed here (in much the same way as methanogens). She also called attention to the antiquity of ancient forms of photosynthesis in bacteria such as Chromatium and Chlorobium , which use H 2 S as an electron donor rather than water. This trick freed them fro..."
Paragraph 4 (99 words): "In anoxygenic photosynthesis, chlorophyll is used to strip electrons from H 2 S (much easier than stripping them from water) which are then passed onto ferredoxin directly. The waste product is not oxygen but sulfur. The huge advantage here is that the sun now powers the transfer of electrons from a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "132"
Paragraph 1 (30 words) [SHORT]: "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce ferredoxin, but it can’t do both at the same time. That’s because bacteria capable of anoxygenic photosynthesis have a single photosystem, which is capable of either ATP synthesis (via a cyclic flow of..."
Paragraph 3 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Combining both processes together requires wiring the two photosystems in series, which is what happened in oxygenic photosynthesis (we’ll come onto this later). The bottom line is that the early photosynthesisers found only partial freedom from the costs of pumping."
Paragraph 4 (180 words): "Dayhoff went on to show that oxygenic photosynthesis arose before two billion years ago, albeit probably after the evolution of respiration, as had been suggested by Otto Warburg decades earlier. Presumably these ancient forms of respiration either used traces of oxygen generated by physical process..."
Paragraph 5 (94 words): "But I’m getting ahead of myself. The point I want to make here is that before the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis, the living world was extremely constrained energetically, dominated by the availability of gases such as H 2 and H 2 S emanating from volcanoes or hydrothermal systems, which were ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "133"
Paragraph 1 (16 words) [SHORT]: "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion."
Paragraph 2 (244 words): "Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathways can run in either direction. The reason flux goes one way rather than the other reflects the environmenta..."
Paragraph 3 (145 words): "This reversibility of metabolic flux applies to ecosystems rather than single cells. If you are a single cell, the last thing you need is for your metabolic pathways to keep switching direction at the whim of the environment. The first thing you’d want to do is get with the flow; ideally live in a v..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "134"
Paragraph 1 (16 words) [SHORT]: "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location."
Paragraph 2 (276 words): "But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory enzymes to work in only one direction, preventing ‘reflux’ in much the same way as a valve. Plainly, suc..."
Paragraph 3 (147 words): "I had a revelatory insight into how far this principle dominates microbial ecosystems a few years ago, when visiting Shawn McGlynn, then working in Victoria Orphan’s lab at Caltech. He was using a clever technique called nano-SIMS to image the precise location, within a muddy methane seep (where met..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "135"
Paragraph 1 (193 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."
Paragraph 2 (119 words): "I suspect that this reasoning applies to the Krebs cycle itself, which the biochemist Erich Gnaiger has compared to that ancient Egyptian (and later alchemical) symbol, the Oroboros, a serpent or dragon consuming its own tail. 3 This mythical beast is usually interpreted as a symbol of eternal cycli..."
Paragraph 3 (90 words): "But it does speak to thermodynamic efficiency nonetheless. We have been talking about the driving force for metabolic pathways. We’ve seen that optimising the driving force means raising the levels of the substrates that enter the pathway while removing the end products. So the direction of a reacti..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "136"
Paragraph 1 (206 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."
Paragraph 2 (23 words) [SHORT]: "The dawn of photosynthesis Set against the tight constraints of this anaerobic world, imagine the freedom offered by that everyday miracle, oxygenic photosynthesis."
Paragraph 3 (119 words): "Silently humming in trees and algae and cyanobacteria, all use virtually the same machinery to fix CO 2 and generate ATP. Oxygen is the waste product, cast away, the first great pollutant. Please remember that oxygen does not come from CO 2 – it comes from water, which is split apart to extract the ..."
Paragraph 4 (31 words) [SHORT]: "Transiently angry, chlorophyll snatches a replacement from the sacrificial gift offered by the trembling priestly protein. This sacrifice is not some virgin to placate a medieval dragon, but water. Zap. Repeat."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "137"
Paragraph 1 (63 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."
Paragraph 2 (250 words): "So where do all these electrons go? Ultimately the electrons and protons – the 2H – are united on CO 2 , to form organic molecules. We can do better than that: the Calvin–Benson cycle cobbles them onto the C3 molecule phosphoglycerate, to generate the C3 sugar glyceraldehyde phosphate (you can doubl..."
Paragraph 3 (117 words): "This is another Earth-changing instance where small steps produce a giant leap. Think about what has changed here. No longer must cells use a small pool of electrons extracted from H 2 , H 2 S or Fe 2+ (all derived from hydrothermal processes) to power pumping. And no longer must the proton gradient..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "138"
Paragraph 1 (71 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Yet that expansion took two billion years, an unfathomable time."
Paragraph 3 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Oxygenic photosynthesis first arose in cyanobacteria or their predecessors, but exactly when remains uncertain. The first unequivocal evidence is the Great Oxidation Event (familiarly called the ‘GOE’) around 2.3 billion years ago, when the planet turned rusty red and froze."
Paragraph 4 (83 words): "We can attribute both these changes to oxygen, beginning to accumulate in the air. The rusty rocks are mostly composed of iron oxides – red beds and banded iron formations – but other metals became oxidised too, leaching from rocks and accumulating in the environment in colossal ore deposits such as..."
Paragraph 5 (70 words): "Methane reacts with oxygen (either spontaneously or through the auspices of methanotrophs) and methane is a greenhouse gas. Strip it from the air and the planet cools. As oxygen levels rose, more methane was oxidised. So the fine balance tipped, and the Earth plunged into a global glaciation, the fi..."
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "eventually warmed it up again."
Paragraph 7 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Setting aside the drama of the GOE and the Snowball Earth, reconstructing the history of photosynthesis is a dastardly business. Just how long before the GOE did the first photosynthetic bacteria arise?"
Paragraph 8 (128 words): "Molecular clocks based on gene sequences are fraught with difficulties, as there are few calibration points (such as microfossils that everybody can agree are cyanobacteria) and few constraints on the speed at which genes evolved in deep time. There are purportedly ‘whiffs’ of oxygen (slightly oxidi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "139"
Paragraph 1 (211 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."
Paragraph 2 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Luckily, there’s a get-out-of-jail-free card that gives us a proxy: carbon isotopes. We met two of these previously, in Chapter 2: 11 C and 14 C."
Paragraph 3 (71 words): "Here, we’re concerned with a third isotope, 13 C, which happens to be stable. The nucleus of 13 C has six protons and seven neutrons. The fact that it’s stable means that the 12 C to 13 C ratio in the environment does not change over time, or at least not as a result of radioactive decay; but 13 C i..."
Paragraph 4 (93 words): "Remember rubisco, the world’s most abundant protein, responsible for fixing CO 2 in the Calvin–Benson cycle. Rubisco has a slight bias towards the lighter of the two stable forms of carbon, 12 C. I think of these molecules as ping-pong balls, bouncing around and occasionally bumping into enzymes suc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "140"
Paragraph 1 (70 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."
Paragraph 2 (41 words) [SHORT]: "Variations over time in the 13 C content of limestone therefore give a global indication of how much organic carbon got buried – the more 12 C buried, the greater the 13 C abundance in limestone sedimented at the same time."
Paragraph 3 (224 words): "The soaring 13 C peak in the GOE therefore speaks of carbon burial and rising oxygen levels. Converting this trace into an estimate of atmospheric composition is tricky and we don’t need to go there; we can just note that high 13 C corresponds to the many other signs of oxygen, from red beds to mang..."
Paragraph 4 (99 words): "The Shuram conundrum Named after the Shuram Formation in Oman, this carbonate-rich sedimentary rock contains the single largest ‘negative isotope excursion’ in Earth’s history. Beginning in strata dated to 560 million years ago, the 13 C trace falls abruptly from around 5 per mille above the global ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "141"
Paragraph 1 (184 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."
Paragraph 2 (11 words) [SHORT]: "My colleague at UCL, Graham Shields, thinks he’s solved the puzzle."
Paragraph 3 (80 words): "If he’s right (and I think he is) then it has a great deal to say about the evolution of animals. To understand, we need to adjust our view in two ways. First, physical burial in the Earth’s crust is not the only way to sequester organic carbon. It can also simply clog up the water column, giving wh..."
Paragraph 4 (72 words): "When oxygen levels are as low as they were in the deep oceans until the late Precambrian, this material could take long ages to decay. Oxidising it en masse would then simultaneously clear the water column and reintroduce a vast amount of 12 CO 2 back into the system, certainly enough to account for..."
Paragraph 5 (121 words): "The answer, says Shields, lies in geology, not biology. The oxidant was not oxygen at all, or at least not directly, but sulfate . Ever since oxygen levels began to rise, from the GOE onwards, evaporitic sulfate deposits gradually accumulated on land. By the time of the Shuram excursion, sulfate had..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "142"
Paragraph 1 (52 words) [SHORT]: "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."
Paragraph 2 (96 words): "Like oxygen, sulfate is an electron acceptor, albeit feeble in comparison. Whilst bacteria first learnt to use sulfate in the ancient anaerobic days before the dawn of photosynthesis, its abundance increased massively in an oxygenated world. Sulfate-reducing bacteria are heterotrophs, which gain the..."
Paragraph 3 (63 words): "And that settles down to the bottom of the oceans, where it is buried, along with its electrons stripped from dissolved organic carbon. In other words, the peat-bog oceans were oxidised by sulfate, not oxygen, liberating a vast amount of 12 CO 2 back into the system, while burying its long-lost elec..."
Paragraph 4 (216 words): "What does this say about the early evolution of animals? It suggests that the oceans were reeking with hydrogen sulfide for the best part of ten million years, until all the organic carbon clogging up the water column had been oxidised. This wholesale oxidation consumed little if any oxygen, so the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "143"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems."
Paragraph 2 (2 words) [SHORT]: "They died."
Paragraph 3 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550"
Paragraph 4 (245 words): "million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sulfidic seas, unable to breathe. The writing was not on the wall, but in the mud. The first ‘trace fossils’ (literally, the traces of burrowing animals, like those worm casts you still see on beaches) date to around the time..."
Paragraph 5 (133 words): "The view from inside our cells We left the Krebs cycle as an Oroboros, consuming its own tail whilst transforming the gases CO 2 and H 2 into the molecules of life. Just how common the full cycle might be among bacteria and archaea remains uncertain, but one thing is clear – most bacteria and archae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "144"
Paragraph 1 (67 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."
Paragraph 2 (62 words): "So what’s the point of prongs, you may wonder? The answer is they bring balance to the force, Padawan – balance to growth. If oxygen levels are low, one prong consumes NADH (shown here as 2H) while the other generates it. Together, they maintain a poise between the donors and acceptors of 2H, while ..."
Paragraph 3 (48 words) [SHORT]: "The two prongs of the Krebs non-cycle, a common flux pattern in microbes. The prongs balance the formation of 2H against its consumption when oxygen levels are low, allowing metabolism and ATP synthesis to keep going without a large accumulation of NADH or waste products such as lactate."
Paragraph 4 (13 words) [SHORT]: "The two prongs of this pathway meet in the vicinity of the C4"
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "succinate. In the reverse Krebs cycle, the enzyme that converts fumarate into succinate is called fumarate reductase. This is unique in being the only enzyme in the cycle that is still embedded in the mitochondrial membrane, and it can capture electrons from the respiratory chain. In the absence of ..."
Paragraph 6 (39 words) [SHORT]: "Accumulation of succinate is a powerful signal for physiological adaptation to low-oxygen (hypoxic) conditions, switching many genes on and off. Conversely, when oxygen is available fumarate reductase is switched off, and an alternative enzyme is expressed instead – succinate"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "145"
Paragraph 1 (64 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."
Paragraph 2 (143 words): "The idea that oxygen levels rose swiftly (we’ve seen they didn’t) forcing the Krebs cycle into reverse (or rather, our own forwards direction) is far from the mark in every respect. Oxygen levels rose around the time of the GOE, 2.3 billion years ago, but then remained low (in the deep oceans close ..."
Paragraph 3 (94 words): "The prongs point to another interesting balance. Microbes are at the mercy of a changing environment. They must switch genes on and off, adjusting their metabolic state to survive. Each metabolic state equates to a particular flux pattern, and so microbes change states in series, over time, from one..."
Paragraph 4 (91 words): "Cancer cells are sometimes claimed to have ‘reverted’ to a more primitive energy phenotype but that’s misleading. They certainly don’t have a ‘textbook’ Krebs cycle, although not many cells do. The critical point to appreciate now is that while the complete oxidative Krebs cycle might be the most ef..."
Paragraph 5 (53 words) [SHORT]: "So why do textbooks still cling to the oxidative Krebs cycle and ATP synthesis? What is the difference between microbes and multicellular organisms? And what happened in that traumatic age before the Cambrian explosion? Crawling around in the mud, snuffling through the sulfide, growing and reproduci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "146"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too."
Paragraph 2 (196 words): "The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be released slowly when needed, which is just what myoglobin and haemoglobin do. The genes encoding both globins were duplicated r..."
Paragraph 3 (107 words): "Yet the complete oxidative cycle, by its very nature, cannot generate the precursors for biosynthesis. To do so requires flux in and out of the cycle, turning it into a roundabout, and perhaps even calling for reverse flux through some parts of the cycle. Of course, biosynthesis still needs ATP. Tis..."
Paragraph 4 (28 words) [SHORT]: "Different tissues have different needs, some with high ATP demands, others with specific biosynthetic requirements. Each of these states comes with optimal flux patterns through the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 5 (45 words) [SHORT]: "The multicellular organisation of animals allows tissues to change their metabolic states in parallel , with the flux pattern in one tissue balancing that in another. This is the most delicate balance of all, and it could underpin the evolution of complex multicellularity in animals."
Paragraph 6 (32 words) [SHORT]: "We’ve seen that bacteria and archaea often benefit from company, living symbiotically, with a precise stoichiometry in which one cell type consumes the waste products of another. That helps them to stabilise"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "147"
Paragraph 1 (127 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."
Paragraph 2 (76 words): "For them, it was the dead zone. But the burrowing bilaterian ancestors of the vertebrates and invertebrates were already experimenting with a high-wire metabolic balance. By the dawn of the Cambrian they had perfected the art. When the seas cleared to reveal sparkling oxygenated waters, these animal..."
Paragraph 3 (158 words): "We saw in Chapter 1 that Krebs had been lucky in his choice of pigeon-breast muscle in conceptualising his cycle. Other tissues exhibit more complex behaviour. Yet the idea of a simple cycle burning glucose persists as textbook knowledge. So it came as a shock to discover that the regulation of the ..."
Paragraph 4 (63 words): "Hypoxia, infections, inflammation, mutations – all can alter flux patterns through the Krebs cycle, with a knock-on effect that switches on or off hundreds or thousands of genes, changing the stable (epigenetic) state of cells and tissues. Tissue function eventually becomes strained, biosynthetic pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "148"
Paragraph 1 (151 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."
Paragraph 2 (252 words): "2 But I can’t resist telling you anyway. In some of the most important and beautiful work in bioenergetics in the last decade, Rolf Thauer and Wolfgang Buckel finally uncovered a clever sleight of hand whose very name conjures up subterfuge: bifurcation. The two electrons from H 2 are separated deep..."
Paragraph 3 (71 words): "3 Erich Gnaiger is a larger-than-life character, practically a legend in the world of respirometry, who is steeped in the biophysical tradition of Schrödinger and Mitchell, and who formed his own company producing high-resolution fluorespirometers (descendants of the manometers used by Warburg and K..."
Paragraph 4 (37 words) [SHORT]: "4 The eagle-eyed will notice that statement is slightly ambiguous. Citrate is broken down into acetyl CoA plus oxaloacetate, both of which can regenerate citrate. The trouble here is that high levels of oxaloacetate could interfere with"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "149"
Paragraph 1 (101 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."
Paragraph 2 (263 words): "5 But here is a taster, in light of the driving forces we have been discussing in this chapter. There is a startling difference in the NAD + to NADH ratio within the mitochondria compared with the cytosol, which was brought to my attention by Wayne Willis at the University of Arizona. This is possib..."
Paragraph 3 (79 words): "6 Certainly not Shields. He has the bit between his teeth. The Shuram anomaly is not the only conundrum in the carbon isotope record. Several others might well have been confounded by sulfate oxidation too, or even the opposite – sulfate deposition. If the large Shuram negative 13 C excursion can be..."
Paragraph 4 (35 words) [SHORT]: "That could explain why the 13 C signal is so large, yet soon afterwards oxygen levels plummeted to nearly zero. The idea that 13 C variations only reflect carbon burial and oxygenation is clearly misguided."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "151"
Paragraph 1 (102 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."
Paragraph 2 (171 words): "I hardly need to say that this new understanding was developing at a time when it was becoming feasible to sequence genes and pinpoint the mutations involved. Exposing the precise mutation often made it clear exactly how the harm was done. The stars were aligning – the powerful methodology of gene s..."
Paragraph 3 (10 words) [SHORT]: "The idea that mutations cause cancer remains the dominant paradigm."
Paragraph 4 (176 words): "A special issue of Nature from 2020 wrote: ‘Cancer is a disease of the genome, caused by a cell’s acquisition of somatic mutations in key cancer genes.’ Yet over the last decade it has looked as if the juggernaut has rolled too far. It has certainly failed to deliver on its promise in terms of thera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "152"
Paragraph 1 (84 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Yet the evidence against this dismal genetic determinism is startling."
Paragraph 3 (54 words) [SHORT]: "If a cancer is a clone deriving from one rogue cell, then the mutations that caused it to go awry should be written into all its descendants: all the cells in the tumour. That’s not always the case. Different mutations are found in different parts of many tumours, often with little if any overlap."
Paragraph 4 (125 words): "This implies that the mutations accumulated during the growth of the tumour, rather than triggering its inception. In fact, later accumulation is quite plausible, as cancer cells are well known to develop genetic instability, meaning that they accrue new mutations much faster than normal cells. Thes..."
Paragraph 5 (97 words): "It’s quite encouraging that cancer cells can be rewired in this way: the same genetic mutations are not invariably associated with the same cell fate. This view is consistent with older work which shows that transplanting the nucleus from one cell type to another does not alter the phenotype of the ..."
Paragraph 6 (91 words): "I could go on. Many carcinogens do not cause immediate mutations but may take many years to induce cancer, long after they vanished from the body. Perhaps one-third of cancers world-wide are associated with chronic infections such as hepatitis B and C, and schistosomiasis, which can mutate genes (as..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "153"
Paragraph 1 (45 words) [SHORT]: "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects."
Paragraph 2 (166 words): "You might think this risk profile is explained by the steady accumulation of mutations with age, some of which just tragically happen to be in the wrong genes, causing cancer. Yet the build-up of mutations with age seems to be too slow to explain either cancer or ageing as a process. Nor can it expl..."
Paragraph 3 (206 words): "An alternative, and historically controversial, take on the prime cause of cancer has been lurking in the background for nearly a century, going back to Krebs’s own mentor, the great biochemist Otto Warburg. It has risen to prominence in the last decade, in part through the unexpected discovery that..."
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "The Warburg effect"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "154"
Paragraph 1 (163 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."
Paragraph 2 (201 words): "Yet Warburg also illustrates the problem with a simplistic notion of right and wrong in science. He was forceful in his views, and his dogmatism meant that he would argue rather than listen, sometimes for decades. His haughtiness was no doubt attributable in part to his extraordinary upbringing in I..."
Paragraph 3 (48 words) [SHORT]: "It’s striking how many great scientists are also culturally rounded people, though I can’t help calling to mind a quip from the great violinist Fritz Kreisler to his friend Einstein – the two played together in string quartets: ‘You know Albert, your trouble is that you can’t count!’"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "155"
Paragraph 1 (64 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."
Paragraph 2 (173 words): "This irresistible company of physicists surely influenced Otto Warburg’s vision of biology. While not a physicist himself, his perspective on biology always sought the luminous simplicity of a physicist. Biology is rarely so law-abiding. Warburg sustained at least three prolonged arguments about fun..."
Paragraph 3 (217 words): "The same attitude coloured Warburg’s view of photo-synthesis, forming the basis of a long-running dispute with Robert Emerson about the number of photons of light needed to produce one molecule of oxygen. Emerson did his PhD with Warburg before moving to Illinois and assembling the ‘Mid-West gang’ o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "156"
Paragraph 1 (35 words) [SHORT]: "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life."
Paragraph 2 (71 words): "Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yielded an estimate of twelve photons too, yet he never admitted to any error. The problem, as in his prolonged dispute with Keilin, was that Warburg’s vision of nature was coupled to a sense of his own infallibility and ..."
Paragraph 3 (227 words): "We need to interpret Warburg’s forceful pronouncements on cancer in this light. His first experiments were indeed striking, and set the scene for decades. In the early 1920s, Warburg showed that cancer cells produced seventy times as much lactic acid as ‘normal’ cells, even in the presence of oxygen..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "157"
Paragraph 1 (162 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."
Paragraph 2 (234 words): "Warburg was instrumental in piecing together the key reactions of glycolysis, yet cancer was already becoming his obsession. Why on earth would cancer cells switch to a profligate strategy of generating a tenth as much ATP as normal, while throwing away a three-carbon molecule that could be used for..."
Paragraph 3 (38 words) [SHORT]: "But he was swiftly reinstated, under Göring’s declaration ‘I will decide who is a Jew.’ The reasons are shrouded in mystery, but Hitler apparently had a deep-seated fear of cancer. His mother, said to be the only person"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "158"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen."
Paragraph 2 (104 words): "Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as Adolf Hitler’. For some years, Hitler wrote postcards to Dr Bloch, and ..."
Paragraph 3 (164 words): "This context no doubt contributed to the Nazis’ tolerance of Warburg, who was never shy of promising salvation. In 1940 he expressed his hope for a third Nobel nomination, when he predicted the problem of cancer ‘will be resolved within two years’. During the Nazi period, Warburg kept his head down;..."
Paragraph 4 (161 words): "Rewiring metabolism Warburg’s position on cancer owed more to his philosophy than it did to his experiments, just as it did with photosynthesis. The basic problem with the Warburg effect – the propensity of cancers to ferment glucose in the presence of oxygen, or in the conventional shorthand, ‘aero..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "159"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing."
Paragraph 2 (143 words): "Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science paper in 1956. It’s worth spending a moment on this because it shows how truth can lose its way through alienation in science, just as i..."
Paragraph 3 (27 words) [SHORT]: "Yet to dismiss Warburg as a monomaniac, which is what came to pass, overlooks the fact that his vision was coherent, even if it was partly misconstrued."
Paragraph 4 (175 words): "Warburg continued in similar vein: ‘If the explanation of a vital process is its reduction to physics and chemistry, there is today no other explanation for the origin of cancer cells, either special or general.’ This oblique reference to relativity seems intended to call upon physics as the only tr..."
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "Mutations, carcinogens and cancer viruses do indeed all converge on the metabolic machinery. Of course, we wouldn’t know that if thousands of researchers had not dedicated their lives to studying the very details that Warburg dismissed as obscuring the underlying phenomena. But now we know that many..."
Paragraph 6 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg was arguably right that cancer is fundamentally a metabolic rather than a genetic disease, but his focus on cell respiration missed the"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "160"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP."
Paragraph 2 (131 words): "Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all of a cell’s contents, which means new sugars and new amino acids to..."
Paragraph 3 (318 words): "Let me give a single revealing example, from the pioneering cancer biologist Craig Thompson, who has done as much as anyone over the last decades to reinterpret the Warburg effect in terms of metabolic reprogramming. Thompson gives the example of the sixteen-carbon fatty acid palmitate, which is a m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "161"
Paragraph 1 (97 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."
Paragraph 2 (56 words) [SHORT]: "Three molecules of glucose are needed to provide the sixteen carbons for palmitate, which offsets this asymmetry a little, as only four of seven glucose molecules could be completely oxidised in respiration. But even after taking that into consideration, the seven molecules of glucose needed to make..."
Paragraph 3 (39 words) [SHORT]: "ATPs, after siphoning off the carbons and NADPH needed for synthesising palmitate. Recall that just seven of these ATPs are actually needed, so respiring all the glucose not needed for biosynthesis would make twenty-eight times more ATP than needed."
Paragraph 4 (185 words): "Great, you might think, what’s not to like? But in fact, there’s a serious cost. Having excess ATP sloshing around actually switches off the glycolytic breakdown of glucose to form the NADPH and acetyl CoA needed to make palmitate at all. Likewise, flux through the Krebs cycle has to slow down if AT..."
Paragraph 5 (75 words): "This picture is a little exaggerated, because fatty-acid synthesis is especially demanding of NADPH, but the synthesis of amino acids and nucleotides also consumes more NADPH and carbon equivalents than ATP. The synthesis of RNA, DNA and especially proteins has higher ATP demands (joining monomers t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "162"
Paragraph 1 (32 words) [SHORT]: "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all."
Paragraph 2 (150 words): "Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reasons, once cells become differentiated to carry out specific tasks in tissues, they typically switch over to aerobic respiration to provide the ATP necessary. 4 But cancer cells cut back on these costs – they lose their di..."
Paragraph 3 (162 words): "If that were all there was to it, I could stop here. We would have solved cancer long ago. Why would I even write about it in a book on the Krebs cycle, when we’ve seen that metabolic flux diverts towards glycolysis in cancer cells? I hope you’ll guess the answer by now. From the very origins of lif..."
Paragraph 4 (87 words): "An ancient switch The first mutations in genes encoding Krebs-cycle enzymes to be linked with cancer were found in succinate dehydrogenase and fumarate hydratase. Both these mutations block Krebs-cycle flow in the vicinity of the C4 intermediate succinate. I’ve never forgotten hearing about this for..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "163"
Paragraph 1 (26 words) [SHORT]: "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer."
Paragraph 2 (126 words): "Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian explosion. These early worms had to deal with low oxygen and excess hydrogen sulfide in their environment. Think what happens to the Krebs cycle un..."
Paragraph 3 (172 words): "In many animals that need to deal with low oxygen levels, a slight excess of NADH can allow for a little ATP synthesis. This partially explains, for example, how turtles can survive underwater for hours without breathing. When oxygen is not available, fumarate is used as an alternative electron acce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "164"
Paragraph 1 (130 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."
Paragraph 2 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Succinate is therefore far more than a waste product – it is an active signal that switches genes on or off."
Paragraph 3 (281 words): "Once in the cytosol, succinate binds to a class of proteins called prolyl hydroxylases, which blocks their normal action. The most interesting normal action of these prolyl hydroxylases targets another protein, ‘hypoxia-inducible factor’, or HIF 1α , causing it to be degraded. Here’s a fact to conju..."
Paragraph 4 (29 words) [SHORT]: "So how does HIF 1α making it to the nucleus in time save the cell from certain death? Look at the genes that it targets. They include genes for"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "165"
Paragraph 1 (214 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "How could such conditions persist? Let’s return to succinate itself."
Paragraph 3 (211 words): "Our own cells can’t make ATP from the transfer of electrons to form succinate, as the first animals did, because our ancestors lost the gene for fumarate reductase. Presumably they no longer needed to deal with high levels of hydrogen sulfide in their environment. We abandoned those stagnant muds an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "166"
Paragraph 1 (19 words) [SHORT]: "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia."
Paragraph 2 (11 words) [SHORT]: "Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5"
Paragraph 3 (191 words): "You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hydratase will cause an accumulation of succinate in cells that are otherwise perfectly healthy. Plainly, damming metabolic flow will form a reservoir behind the dam: You might call this fake news. The mutation make..."
Paragraph 4 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Increasing the risk ... but nothing is set in stone. More is needed."
Paragraph 5 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Mutations in succinate dehydrogenase promote the switch to aerobic glycolysis, but that’s only half the story. Let’s keep following the money."
Paragraph 6 (64 words): "Cell replication is not only about ATP, NADPH and carbon. There’s also an imperious need for nitrogen to make new amino acids for proteins, and nucleotides for RNA and DNA. While there’s some nitrogen turnover in cells, for the most part, nitrogen is delivered around the body in the form of the amin..."
Paragraph 7 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Another reversal Most cancers need no more than glucose and glutamine to grow. These substrates serve all of their needs. And of the two of them ... give the cancers glutamine. I have a vivid memory of discussing glutamine and"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "167"
Paragraph 1 (120 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."
Paragraph 2 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Cancer cells growing in culture can be checked in their mad career through the cell cycle by depriving them of glucose or glutamine."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Around the time we were talking, Moncada had just shown that depriving cells of glucose did not pause their growth for long, but depriving them of glutamine put paid to their prospects permanently."
Paragraph 4 (106 words): "And now here he was, chalk in hand, eyes sparkling, drawing arrows spiralling out from the Krebs cycle into the cytosol. Flux in reverse to citrate. Export, then break down to acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate. Thence pyruvate and lactate. Not from glucose at all, but glutamine. And on. It was dizzying, a..."
Paragraph 5 (22 words) [SHORT]: "The first wave of the storm came from Navdeep Chandel, Ralph DeBerardinis and colleagues in 2012. They reported in Nature that cells"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "168"
Paragraph 1 (85 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."
Paragraph 2 (64 words): "This reverse flux is the dominant pattern in cancer cells with mutations in fumarate hydratase, or more widely in cells with damaged respiration, caused by mutations or drugs that impair electron transfer. Make a mental note of that: damaged respiration ... roughly as predicted by Warburg. That will..."
Paragraph 3 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Once again, cancer cells take advantage of existing machinery, and in this case subvert a marvellous mechanism, a mechanism that showcases both the glory of natural selection and the cleverness of cancer. For good measure, it also relates to NADPH, the ‘power’ form of hydrogen, which I hope you’ll r..."
Paragraph 4 (49 words) [SHORT]: "The enzyme that catalyses the interconversion of isocitrate into α- ketoglutarate is known as isocitrate dehydrogenase. This comes in two main forms, each of them encoded by a different gene. The standard form does what it says on the tin – it removes 2H, in the form of NADH."
Paragraph 5 (111 words): "The NADH is then fed into the furnace of respiration at complex I; this is the conventional Krebs cycle (see page 286). More intriguingly, the second form of the enzyme does the opposite. But going in this reverse (reductive) direction is more difficult, and so requires the powerful NADPH to cobble ..."
Paragraph 6 (86 words): "What’s the point of that, you may be wondering? Well, it works as both a release valve and a spring-loading mechanism, allowing us to leap into explosive action. Imagine that you’re resting (OK, you’re sitting around reading this book), so demand for ATP is low. What’s going on inside your cells rig..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "169"
Paragraph 1 (55 words) [SHORT]: "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."
Paragraph 2 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Reading, eh!"
Paragraph 3 (83 words): "This combination of high levels of NADH with super-charged membrane potential raises the threat that electrons will escape from the respiratory chain and react directly with oxygen, forming reactive oxygen species (ROS). These can damage lipids, proteins or DNA. I can hear the threatening buzz of el..."
Paragraph 4 (141 words): "Under these conditions, the supercharged membrane potential powers the conversion of NADH into NADPH, through a ‘transhydrogenase’ enzyme sitting in the membrane (which takes its power, like the ATP synthase, from a flow of protons). The transhydrogenase transfers 2H from the excess NADH onto NADP +..."
Paragraph 5 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that high NADPH levels drive this enzyme backwards, meaning it converts α-ketoglutarate to isocitrate and onwards to citrate."
Paragraph 6 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Reverse flow through the Krebs cycle keeps the right balance between NADP + and NADPH. We’ll come back to what happens to the citrate soon, but for now let’s just appreciate that it can be exported out to the cytosol and used for making fats. Reading, eh!"
Paragraph 7 (81 words): "First, let’s consider what happens if there’s now a renewed demand for ATP, a sudden call to action. You decided to go for a run. As ATP is spent, the ATP synthase springs into action, with protons flooding though its rotary motor. As protons flow back inside, membrane potential falls. Now NADH can ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "170"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels."
Paragraph 2 (87 words): "Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase flips direction too, so both forms now work in concert to conve..."
Paragraph 3 (129 words): "But hold on! This magnificent spring-loaded power driver has a weakness that cancer cells exploit – our Bond villain has a final dastardly trick up his sleeve. Think about the problem faced by cancer cells with a mutation in Krebs-cycle enzymes such as fumarate hydratase. The mutation blocks the Kre..."
Paragraph 4 (56 words) [SHORT]: "You can probably see where I’m going with this. When forwards flux through the Krebs cycle is impaired, cancer cells can make citrate by converting α-ketoglutarate into isocitrate, then citrate, through reverse flux. You may be wondering where the α-ketoglutarate comes from, and the answer brings us..."
Paragraph 5 (36 words) [SHORT]: "Glutamine – the amino acid essential for cancer cells to grow. When the nitrogen is transferred from this five-carbon amino acid to make other amino acids and nucleotides, the carbon skeleton that remains is the C5"
Paragraph 6 (51 words) [SHORT]: "α-ketoglutarate. High levels of glutamine push the Krebs cycle into reverse by increasing the concentration of α-ketoglutarate. Mutations in the NADPH-linked form of the enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase reinforce this shift in cancer cells, but these mutations are selected because they lock in a flux..."
Paragraph 7 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Mutations keep the enzyme jammed in reverse mode, so it keeps on making citrate, supporting cancer cell growth. Overall, the flux from glutamine looks something like the diagram on the next page:"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "171"
Paragraph 1 (39 words) [SHORT]: "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect)."
Paragraph 2 (22 words) [SHORT]: "The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhydrogenase, which regenerates NADPH from NADH, so long as there is a membrane potential."
Paragraph 3 (79 words): "We are left with a peculiar situation, in which Krebs-cycle flux is running backwards through large parts of the cycle; nothing like the canonical picture in textbooks. Far from being geared to ATP synthesis, the cycle is now exporting succinate and citrate from the mitochondria out to the cytosol. ..."
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "Turn left (or right) at Krebs junction Once citrate is exported out to the cytosol, it is broken down into the C2"
Paragraph 5 (84 words): "acetyl CoA, plus the C4 oxaloacetate. Acetyl CoA is used for fatty acid synthesis, but it also binds to proteins that control access to DNA, called histones. This enables many genes to be switched on: an ‘epigenetic switch’ known as acetylation. The genes switched on drive cell growth and proliferat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "172"
Paragraph 1 (99 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."
Paragraph 2 (46 words) [SHORT]: "How export of citrate from the mitochondria can drive growth through an epigenetic switch. When NADH is plentiful, the sirtuins are suppressed. Because they would normally switch off the growth signal by deacetylating histones, the combined effect of acetyl CoA and NADH is to promote growth."
Paragraph 3 (46 words) [SHORT]: "The other breakdown product from citrate, oxaloacetate, is equally important. It stands at a unique crossroads in metabolism, where almost every direction is good for cancer, which means the more you make, the better it gets. The choice is a bit overwhelming (see the figure opposite)."
Paragraph 4 (40 words) [SHORT]: "You can pick up nitrogen to become an amino acid called aspartate, needed for nucleotide synthesis and to form urea (via the urea cycle that first brought Krebs to fame in 1932). Or you can be converted to the C4"
Paragraph 5 (74 words): "malate, then stripped of CO 2 and 2H by the malic enzyme, to form the C3 pyruvate, plus (worth its weight in gold) the powerful NADPH, needed for biosynthesis. From pyruvate, you can form lactate and be washed out as waste. Much of the lactate excreted by cancer cells comes from glutamine in this wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "173"
Paragraph 1 (113 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."
Paragraph 2 (27 words) [SHORT]: "That’s the starting point for making glycerol phosphate, which binds to fatty acids to form the main phospholipid components of cell membranes. You can’t grow without membranes."
Paragraph 3 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs junction – oxaloacetate is at a crossroads in metabolism, with paths leading to nitrogen or sugar metabolism, or generating NADPH for biosynthesis and antioxidant defences. This is a key crossroads in energy metabolism; you see why Krebs was uncertain about the fate of oxaloacetate."
Paragraph 4 (63 words): "Glycerol phosphate has another equally important use. It can be used to generate electrical membrane potential in mitochondria, without involving the Krebs cycle. It works like this. Glycerol phosphate is stripped of 2H, which is fed into complex III of the respiratory chain from outside the mitocho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "174"
Paragraph 1 (142 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "No wonder cancer cells are addicted to glutamine! Anything glucose can do, glutamine can do too, and it also brings nitrogen to the table."
Paragraph 3 (41 words) [SHORT]: "Glutamine even works as a self-fulfilling prophecy. I mentioned that one of the uses of oxaloacetate is to make aspartate for the urea cycle. In fact, the urea cycle is the only pathway here that is no use to cancer cells."
Paragraph 4 (204 words): "Quite the opposite. It’s long been puzzling that much of the nitrogen from glutamine is not bound into amino acids or nucleotides in cancer cells, nor is it safely incorporated into urea as a waste product, but rather it bubbles away as toxic ammonia. In a chilling scenario, it seems that the releas..."
Paragraph 5 (60 words): "From the cancer’s point of view, always in the here and now, cachexia maintains a copious supply of free glutamine. It’s as if a state provides free fossil fuels for the filthiest polluters. Cancer cells often acquire mutations in genes for the urea cycle. That way, excess nitrogen is splurged as am..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "175"
Paragraph 1 (26 words) [SHORT]: "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it."
Paragraph 2 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine, comes directly from ammonia."
Paragraph 3 (58 words) [SHORT]: "There are many other ways in which cancer cells can evade textbook metabolic flux. There is no common pattern, although what I’ve described here is arguably as close to an ‘archetypal’ cancer metabolism as one could get. How cancer cells grow depends on what they’re fed and whereabouts they are, eve..."
Paragraph 4 (118 words): "For example, some cancer cells release lactate as a waste product, while others take it up. From lactate you can make pyruvate, then oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA. Everything I’ve just described is now possible, except that these cells must still get their nitrogen from somewhere (and are more likely ..."
Paragraph 5 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Because our physiology links ketone bodies with starvation, their presence tends to switch off growth signals. It’s also notoriously tricky to make sugars from fats (although it can be done via the C3 intermediary acetone). Yet even these metabolic hurdles are not insurmountable for cancer cells."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "176"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous?"
Paragraph 2 (42 words) [SHORT]: "You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can be induced by mutations, infections, low oxygen levels ... or the decline in metabolism associated with ageing itself."
Paragraph 3 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that ageing is the single greatest risk factor for cancer. That’s the main reason why I’ve talked so much about reverse flux through the Krebs cycle. I’m not trying to explain every case of cancer, but why our risk increases with age. Because age hits us all in the end."
Paragraph 4 (138 words): "The rising tide Why, then, are we more likely to get cancer as we get older? I said at the beginning of this chapter that the answer does not lie in the accumulation of mutations with age. We’ve known for decades that they do not accumulate fast enough, nor do they account for the known patterns of ..."
Paragraph 5 (127 words): "How old are you? Can you still run down the street and back as well as you did when you were sixteen? Age catches up even with Olympic athletes. This is not a book about ageing, though we’ll touch on a few of the mechanisms in the next chapter. But for now, let’s just think about one thing – energy ..."
Paragraph 6 (60 words): "We’ll see in the next chapter that the rise in ROS flux can be compensated somewhat through suppression of complex I. That brings us to the second problem. Complex I is the beginning of the longest route through the respiratory chain, and the only entry point for NADH deriving from the Krebs cycle. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "177"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way."
Paragraph 2 (33 words) [SHORT]: "We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH."
Paragraph 3 (115 words): "Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondria. The Krebs cycle must slow down, and there will be a tendency for sections of it to run backwards: if the NADH is not oxidised fast enough, then it will tend to push the reactions that produce it in the opposite direction. What ha..."
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Ferment glucose. Do a Warburg."
Paragraph 5 (111 words): "Meanwhile, forward flux from citrate to α-ketoglutarate and succinyl CoA has to slow down too. Unable to get much further through the forward cycle, citrate dissipates to the cytosol, where it is broken down into acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate. Histones, the gatekeepers to DNA in the nucleus, become ac..."
Paragraph 6 (29 words) [SHORT]: "and other parts of your Krebs cycle will flip backwards. Ironically, you will put on weight by absorbing CO 2 and turning it into fats. Life’s really not fair."
Paragraph 7 (148 words): "I might be in this state now, but to the best of my knowledge, I don’t have cancer yet. Who knows. I worry about it in part because my dear friend Ian Ackland-Snow died from cancer in 2019, at the age of fifty- six, a year or two older than me. We sat together in the garden of the Royal Marsden Hosp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "178"
Paragraph 1 (48 words) [SHORT]: "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes."
Paragraph 2 (26 words) [SHORT]: "But why Ian? Why not others, who may smoke for decades, spurn their greens and yet live to ninety? I can do no better than statistics."
Paragraph 3 (84 words): "Ageing itself raises our risk, by switching metabolism towards aerobic glycolysis, promoting cellular growth. But clearly this state is stable over decades. We are then at the mercy of our own lives – unfortunate genes, one cigarette too many, poor diet, bad sunburn, exhaust fumes, viral infection: ..."
Paragraph 4 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Eat carefully. Don’t fall back on fermentation but oxidise NADH in your mitochondria as far as possible. Keep your Krebs cycle moving forwards. Nothing is failsafe, but there’s no doubt that regular aerobic exercise and a healthy diet will help to protect you against cancer."
Paragraph 5 (167 words): "There’s irony in my advice, for I am asking you to nurture your mitochondria. Don’t let cell respiration run down, which is the underlying cause of cancer as we age. Not because our cells revert to some degenerate state, but because declining respiration perturbs the Krebs cycle. It may not have bee..."
Paragraph 6 (86 words): "2 Warburg actively enjoyed the war, which reminds me of J. B. S. Haldane, who also relished the First World War. Haldane reputedly took a bet that he could cycle safely across no-man’s land, because the Germans would be too surprised to shoot at him – which he duly demonstrated. It would be interest..."
Paragraph 7 (31 words) [SHORT]: "3 The reason NAD P H has more power than NADH has nothing to do with the structure, which is functionally identical, but relates to how far each one has been"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "179"
Paragraph 1 (107 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "4 Conversely, stem cells, which give rise to most new cells in tissues, are typically not differentiated, meaning there’s little to see inside, and they tend to rely on aerobic glycolysis (fermentation) for energy, rather than respiration. In that respect, they are similar to cancer cells. As new ce..."
Paragraph 3 (174 words): "5 My own PhD, back in the 1990s, addressed problems with oxygen delivery in organ transplantation. I found that when a kidney was transplanted after a few days of storage, the reintroduction of oxygen caused the mitochondria to go haywire. NADH was oxidised very slowly, and its electrons didn’t seem..."
Paragraph 4 (68 words): "6 The enzyme that breaks down citrate in the cytosol (in animals) is an ATP citrate lyase – which is related to the enzyme found in bacteria that drives the classic reverse Krebs cycle. There’s nothing new under the sun. Curiously, plants don’t do this – they generate the acetyl CoA needed for fatty..."
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "Picking up endosymbionts such as cyanobacteria (which evolved into chloroplasts) gives the host cell an extra set of metabolic genes, with greater flexibility for compartmentalisation. Some algal cells with chloroplasts lost the ability to photosynthesise altogether, but retained their chloroplast a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "180"
Paragraph 1 (24 words) [SHORT]: "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects)."
Paragraph 2 (15 words) [SHORT]: "7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author."
Paragraph 3 (278 words): "I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in this chapter, but sadly it only made it into this footnote. Probably only a tenth of the material I wanted to write about actually made it into the book. Sweetlove’s 2010 paper ‘Not just a circle: Flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’ opened my eyes ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "182"
Paragraph 1 (161 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."
Paragraph 2 (188 words): "All of this is true, and if there is a picture from evolutionary biology that underpins modern medicine, then this is it. Different alleles predispose us to diverse age-related diseases. They cause their effects primarily in specific organ systems, hence the tendency of one system or another to let ..."
Paragraph 3 (122 words): "But (there’s always a but) there are some serious problems with this view too. Think about ‘our allotted time’. In the most general terms, this is a measure of chronological time. Our lifespan is determined by our likelihood of surviving a certain number of years – a statistical risk determined by o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "183"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable."
Paragraph 2 (236 words): "So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the place to go into detail, but I want to call attention to a few general points here. First, ageing as a phenomenon..."
Paragraph 3 (109 words): "There’s another sense in which a genetically deterministic view of ageing falls short: the problem known as ‘missing heritability’. The term ‘heritability’ refers to the proportion of physical differences (known as the ‘phenotype’) between individuals that can be explained by genetic factors. If the..."
Paragraph 4 (69 words): "That’s not strictly true, as we’ll see, but many complex conditions that run in families, such as epilepsy, might have a heritability in the range of 0.4 to 0.6, perhaps surprisingly low. Even so, if one twin has the condition, then the other twin has about a 50 per cent chance of having it too, reg..."
Paragraph 5 (20 words) [SHORT]: "The problem of missing heritability is more startling in this age of genomics. Genome-wide association studies assign additive risk to"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "184"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5"
Paragraph 2 (78 words): "(from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent of the known risk. Nearly all the known heritability of the disease is ‘mi..."
Paragraph 3 (102 words): "There could be thousands of additional genetic variants, each of which, alone, makes such a trivial contribution to the overall risk that it can be missed altogether in smaller genetic studies; but add them all up and they might account for most of the missing heritability. That may be so. But it’s ..."
Paragraph 4 (46 words) [SHORT]: "The idea is not absurd, for a handful of genes are almost always missing from genome-wide association studies, literally binned on the grounds that they cause more trouble than they’re worth. Because there are so few of them, the assumption is that they are statistically trivial."
Paragraph 5 (39 words) [SHORT]: "That’s a very poor assumption, as these genes have a greater impact on flux state – on our biological age – than any others. What’s more, they interact in elusive and unpredictable ways with the rest of the genome."
Paragraph 6 (17 words) [SHORT]: "And they alone account for why identical twins are not necessarily genetically identical. They are mitochondrial genes."
Paragraph 7 (138 words): "Twin pillars of medicine One voice above all has sung the importance of mitochondria in human health for nearly half a century: Doug Wallace. Wallace trained as a geneticist, completing his PhD in microbiology and human genetics at Yale in 1975. This was already a bold beginning, exploring the resis..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "185"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster."
Paragraph 2 (220 words): "Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the antibiotic resistance worked well; but if they came from distantly related species, such as mice and hamsters, t..."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Taking a cue from physics, Wallace considered ‘energy to be the most important thing’. For any young researcher, setting out in science, choosing your question is perhaps the most important decision of all."
Paragraph 4 (97 words): "What will you do with your life? What do you want to know? Where can you make a real difference? Recalling his own decision, decades later, Wallace’s reasoning was exemplary: ‘And the thing that made the most energy was mitochondrial; it couldn’t be trivial. And if it had its own DNA, it must mutate..."
Paragraph 5 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Touching on his discoveries is to relive some of the highlights of mitochondrial research. In 1980, Wallace was the first to show that, in humans, mitochondrial DNA is inherited strictly from the mother. 1"
Paragraph 6 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Others had already established the idea of ‘uniparental inheritance’ of mitochondrial genes (the father’s mitochondrial genes are usually not passed on) but Wallace used a spanking new method (cutting up mitochondrial DNA into diagnostic chunks using ‘restriction enzymes’,"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "186"
Paragraph 1 (88 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."
Paragraph 2 (194 words): "Most mitochondrial mutations are not obviously detrimental. It can be hard to tell. Unlike nuclear genes, which normally come in two copies (one from each parent), mitochondrial genes come in packs, typically hundreds or thousands of copies per cell. A mature oocyte (egg cell) has nearly half a mill..."
Paragraph 3 (11 words) [SHORT]: "That’s why mitochondrial diseases directly affect only about 1 in 5,000"
Paragraph 4 (62 words): "of us. It’s also why mitochondrial genes tend to evolve much faster than nuclear genes; at least tenfold, and perhaps as much as fifty-fold faster in most animals, including us. Mitochondrial genes are copied far more than nuclear genes, and so they accumulate more mutations. While the most detrimen..."
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "The fact that most mitochondrial variation is not obviously detrimental offered some simplified glimpses into human origins and prehistory. By the 1990s, Wallace was tracking the tell-tale trail of mitochondrial variations in human populations back to an ancestral female, now known as ‘mitochondrial..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "187"
Paragraph 1 (116 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."
Paragraph 2 (48 words) [SHORT]: "These give rise to individuals, each of us with our own slightly different mitochondrial DNA, set against our diverse nuclear genomes. Wallace has argued that this mitochondrial variation could aid adaptation to different climates and diets. That makes a great deal of sense, although the evidence re..."
Paragraph 3 (58 words) [SHORT]: "All of these ideas see mitochondria as somehow different from the rest of the organism, befitting their origin from free-living bacteria two billion years ago. But of course mitochondria are now wholly integrated into their host cells, and their function is central to everything that cells do: not o..."
Paragraph 4 (104 words): "Because energy and biosynthesis necessarily generate a tension at the heart of metabolism, what I’ve called the yin and yang of the Krebs cycle, mitochondria are barometers of physiological stress, coordinating signalling and even programmed cell death. When should a cell kill itself, if not when it..."
Paragraph 5 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Wallace points to Vesalius and Mendel as twin intellectual pillars of medicine. In De Humani Corporis Fabrica , the sixteenth-century Flemish physician Vesalius wrote the foundational tome of anatomy, replete with unforgettable plates depicting dramatically posturing figures in various states of mus..."
Paragraph 6 (39 words) [SHORT]: "Vesalius did not fear to pick a fight with the ancients on points of anatomy. Galen had been undisputed for 1,400 years, but Vesalius not only dared to disagree; he was usually right. His legacy can be seen in"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "188"
Paragraph 1 (67 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."
Paragraph 2 (357 words): "The second pillar of medicine is Mendel, the Augustinian monk who founded genetics – albeit only when his work was rediscovered two decades after his death. Mendelian genetics is textbook stuff. Genes come in pairs, one from each parent. They line up on chromosomes in the nucleus. We inherit differe..."
Paragraph 3 (10 words) [SHORT]: "That signals directly to the nucleus, through succinate and citrate,"

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "189"
Paragraph 1 (56 words) [SHORT]: "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."
Paragraph 2 (51 words) [SHORT]: "In praise of inbreeding (in flies) How can we distinguish between the genetic contribution of the nucleus and the mitochondria? Just as studies with identical twins have given an indication of the heritability of complex diseases, so too ‘genetically identical’ flies give a profound insight into the..."
Paragraph 3 (211 words): "I’m talking about Drosophila melanogaster , the tiny fruit fly (or technically, vinegar fly) that has been the source of grand insights into genetics, going back to the earliest days of the discipline when Hermann Muller first showed that X-rays can induce mutations in Drosophila genes. Muller also ..."
Paragraph 4 (73 words): "Ethical regulations don’t even classify flies as animals, though those who work with them become fond of their antics. Male flies will dance the conga in chasing females, mostly at dawn or dusk, and then sleep it off during the day. And fruit flies love to get drunk; they live on rotting fruit, gain..."
Paragraph 5 (38 words) [SHORT]: "I knew little of this until Flo Camus arrived in the lab next door to mine at University College London. She had done her PhD in fly genetics and mitochondrial function in Melbourne and was now full of"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "190"
Paragraph 1 (285 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."
Paragraph 2 (103 words): "Yet mitochondrial diseases are uncommon, and the difference between the sexes is real but not stark. Selection has found a way to compensate: genes in the nucleus can improve male performance. These have been tailored over many generations to ‘fix’ problems with mitochondrial DNA in males. For this ..."
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "But where should we draw the line? Crosses between species do indeed cause ‘hybrid breakdown’, attributed to incompatibilities between mitochondrial and nuclear genes. So what about crosses between divergent populations within the same species? Falling in love with people from other cultures is as h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "191"
Paragraph 1 (26 words) [SHORT]: "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so."
Paragraph 2 (8 words) [SHORT]: "But there’s plenty else to ponder on here."
Paragraph 3 (174 words): "This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer chromosomes. Each of these fly lines has a particular mitochondrial genome, derived from natural populations around the world (it’s important to emphasise these are not detrimental mutations, ..."
Paragraph 4 (183 words): "You may be wondering what all this has to do with ageing. We hadn’t set out to study ageing at all, but we were taken aback by our initial findings – always a good sign in science. Isaac Asimov (a biochemist, by the way) once said that new discoveries are not accompanied by ‘Eureka!’, but ‘That’s fu..."
Paragraph 5 (38 words) [SHORT]: "The cure seemed obvious: lower the stress. Give the flies an antioxidant. We tried one called NAC (for N -acetylcysteine), but it didn’t affect the males much. Yet it killed most of the females in one fly line!"
Paragraph 6 (14 words) [SHORT]: "Just one line. The other lines looked a bit ropey but seemed OK. We"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "192"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking."
Paragraph 2 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science."
Paragraph 3 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others."
Paragraph 4 (20 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that these were all genetically identical flies, except for the mitochondrial DNA, which differed in just a few SNPs."
Paragraph 5 (229 words): "To generalise: the response to drugs (an antioxidant in this case) can vary dramatically, depending on a few tiny differences in mitochondrial DNA, with big differences in outcome between males and females. Flies have exactly the same mitochondrial genes that we do, and these are inherited in the sa..."
Paragraph 6 (90 words): "Bringing balance to the force So what was killing the female flies? We don’t know for sure, but we did measure one big difference between the males and females, and between the female line that died versus those that seemed fine. The antioxidant NAC suppressed respiration, especially at complex I of..."
Paragraph 7 (50 words) [SHORT]: "The answer seems to be linked to the flux of ROS. A really striking finding was that ROS flux hardly changed, least of all in the powerful flight muscles of the thorax – it remained more or less constant, despite the suppression of respiration by NAC. That’s surprising, because ROS"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "193"
Paragraph 1 (57 words) [SHORT]: "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."
Paragraph 2 (129 words): "If the electrical potential on the mitochondrial membrane is a high- energy force-field, then that ominous electrical crackle is ROS flux. As a rule of thumb, the higher the potential, the greater the ROS flux, the more scope for damage to the surrounding materials. Balancing the force means prevent..."
Paragraph 3 (82 words): "But it’s not out of the question that keeping ROS flux within normal bounds could be more important than respiration specifically through complex I. There are other ways of generating ATP, as we saw in relation to cancer. And the male flies weren’t doing so badly, despite having the same mitochondri..."
Paragraph 4 (200 words): "NAC has a specific effect as an antioxidant, which is to raise the levels of a critical antioxidant molecule, the sulfurous little peptide glutathione. Supplementing the diet of fruit flies with NAC raised glutathione levels in all tissues, which is usually taken to be a good thing. Yet those rising..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "194"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on."
Paragraph 2 (147 words): "The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving water plus oxidised glutathione. When oxidised, glutathione can bind to itself through a di..."
Paragraph 3 (138 words): "To recycle the GSSG back into two GSH requires 2H. These 2H come from the powerful reducing agent NADPH (you might remember that in Chapter 5, I suggested you think of the P as standing for ‘power’, to discriminate it from the weaker NADH). So now there’s a second factor to consider here: if a cell ..."
Paragraph 4 (83 words): "The glutathione pool is therefore a sensitive indicator of the health of the cell. If it becomes more oxidised (so there is more GSSG relative to GSH), that sends a powerful signal: all is not well with the basic metabolism which underpins everything that cells do. There’s a sickness at heart. We we..."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "There are more layers. GSH can also regenerate thiols in proteins. As with GSSG, oxidised thiols in proteins tend to form disulfide bridges. By linking together different bits of a protein, disulfide bridges change the"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "195"
Paragraph 1 (135 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."
Paragraph 2 (186 words): "There’s a final nuance I need to mention. Oxidised glutathione doesn’t only take the form GSSG; there can be a combination of the two processes I’ve mentioned, whereby an oxidised thiol from glutathione binds to an oxidised thiol in a protein, forming a disulfide bridge that binds glutathione itself..."
Paragraph 3 (37 words) [SHORT]: "And that’s what S-glutathionylation seems to do. 4 The price is serious: it suppresses the most efficient form of respiration, the form that pumps ten protons for every 2H, instead of just six. That’s quite a hit."
Paragraph 4 (120 words): "Let’s take stock with our fruit flies. We know that NAC suppressed respiration in some fly lines, but not others. We know that glutathione levels increased in all fly tissues, so NAC was doing what it is supposed to do – promoting the synthesis of glutathione. We know that the glutathione pool was m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "196"
Paragraph 1 (91 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."
Paragraph 2 (127 words): "In sum: tiny differences in respiration between fly lines were amplified by the antioxidant NAC. The flies kept ROS flux within normal bounds by suppressing respiration at complex I, in some cases to the point of death. In the most vulnerable fly line, the males seemed fine, but most females died. W..."
Paragraph 3 (29 words) [SHORT]: "The age-old problem I suggested at the beginning of this chapter that ageing is not linked to chronological time, but to some sort of biological time measured in flux."
Paragraph 4 (52 words) [SHORT]: "You may be familiar with the simplest version of this idea, that our lives are measured in heartbeats, with all animals having roughly the same number of heartbeats in their life, around a billion for both the pygmy shew (squeezed into a year and a half, at an extraordinary rate of 1,300"
Paragraph 5 (51 words) [SHORT]: "beats per minute) and the elephant, with its ponderous twenty-eight beats per minute for around seventy years. You’ll be pleased to know that humans are a modest exception to this rule of thumb, clocking up more than two billion heartbeats at a rate of about sixty per minute over seventy years."
Paragraph 6 (81 words): "There’s at least a grain of truth in this idea, although it won’t bear out the wag who quipped ‘If we have a finite number of heartbeats, I don’t intend to use up any of mine running around doing exercises.’ If they had done so, they would likely have lived a little longer (albeit their heart rate w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "197"
Paragraph 1 (112 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."
Paragraph 2 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Mutations certainly do accumulate, but as we saw with cancer in the previous chapter, not quickly enough to drive ageing. A variant of the mutation accumulation idea relates to mutations specifically in mitochondrial DNA, but they too do not correlate meaningfully with the rate of ageing. 6 The ‘fre..."
Paragraph 3 (14 words) [SHORT]: "The idea is simple enough, but the evidence is equivocal, to put it mildly."
Paragraph 4 (31 words) [SHORT]: "Free radicals (the same ROS escaping from respiration that we’ve been talking about) attack nearby membranes, proteins and DNA, the theory goes, so antioxidants should hinder that damage and prolong lifespan."
Paragraph 5 (42 words) [SHORT]: "But there’s zero evidence that antioxidants can prolong lifespan, and in many studies the very opposite happens: they turn out to shorten lifespan, whereas pro-oxidants (which supposedly exacerbate damage) actually prolong lifespan. As originally formulated, the free-radical theory of ageing is wron..."
Paragraph 6 (128 words): "But there may be truth in more subtle interpretations, which consider the role of signalling and endogenous antioxidant enzymes. While ROS can cause damage, the lurid devastation often attributed to them is exaggerated, while their more subtle physiological role has been harder to understand. Damage..."
Paragraph 7 (76 words): "The answer depends a great deal on the context. How long do you expect to live anyway? What proportion of your resources do you need to invest in reproduction or competing for a mate? How much do you want to spend on cleaning up the mess or preventing the mess from building up in the first place? Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "198"
Paragraph 1 (82 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."
Paragraph 2 (46 words) [SHORT]: "The problem is that we have focused too much on the colourful chemical reactivity of free radicals, and too little on their essential physiological role. ROS are such vital physiological signals that cells go out of their way to keep ROS flux within tight physiological limits."
Paragraph 3 (105 words): "Redox tone – the balance of electron sources and sinks in a cell – is as critical to homeostasis (our normal chemical balance) as temperature or acidity. These limits may be temporarily exceeded in infections or illness, as part of the stress response linked to inflammation and immune activation, ju..."
Paragraph 4 (138 words): "We saw in Chapter 5 that suppression of respiration at complex I slows down the oxidation of NADH, promoting reverse flux through much of the Krebs cycle. Krebs-cycle intermediates such as succinate and citrate begin to leak from the mitochondria into the cytosol, where they can stabilise transcript..."
Paragraph 5 (64 words): "The most reasonable broad-brushstroke answer is surely some level of damage, whether that damage is caused by protein unfolding or cross- linking, oxidation by ROS or glycation (the tendency of sugars such as glucose to react with proteins and lipids, decorating them with ‘sticky’ tails). Presumably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "199"
Paragraph 1 (212 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."
Paragraph 2 (184 words): "Forward flux also depends on the concentration of other reactants, most notably NAD + and NADH. To go from citrate to α-ketoglutarate requires 2H being stripped out and passed to NAD + , to form NADH. So long as there is plenty of NAD + available, and not too much NADH, then everything is fine – flu..."
Paragraph 3 (80 words): "I suspect this difficult trade-off explains in part the ‘handicap principle’ – the idea that sexual ornaments such as the peacock’s tail or the amazing eyes-on-stalks of the imaginatively named stalk-eye fly rests on the relative allocation of resources to growth or energy: the fittest individuals h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "200"
Paragraph 1 (52 words) [SHORT]: "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."
Paragraph 2 (208 words): "Any damage to the respiratory chain will tend to increase ROS flux, most of which derives from the iron–sulfur clusters of complex I. And ultimately, the only way for animals to get this back under control is to suppress complex I. 8 The problem is that suppressing complex I slows down the oxidation..."
Paragraph 3 (138 words): "We’re all individuals Ageing reminds me of that absurd scene in Monty Python’s Life of Brian , where Brian admonishes the crowd that they don’t need to follow anyone – they’re all individuals. The crowd chants back, ‘Yes, we’re all individuals!’ apart from one lone, doleful voice who says ‘I’m not.’..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "201"
Paragraph 1 (160 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."
Paragraph 2 (84 words): "Subtle mitonuclear mismatches probably have little effect in youth but can be amplified by damage or stress as we age. The common denominator is suppressed respiration, altered Krebs-cycle flux and an epigenetic shift, accelerating ageing. What really happens depends on many other factors, including..."
Paragraph 3 (97 words): "Overeating is not good for our mitochondria either. Remember that the biochemical pathways promoting growth, in cancer or sexual maturation, are closed down by too much ATP – instead, we need carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle, and that powerful driver of biosynthesis, NADPH (what I called ‘power..."
Paragraph 4 (81 words): "But however well we live, we can still be undone by unlucky genetic variants. Those variants do not depend on our chronological age, but rather our biological age, and specifically on how these variants respond to the dwindling availability of ATP and the shifting pattern of gene activation in the n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "202"
Paragraph 1 (147 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."
Paragraph 2 (133 words): "Just think about the brain’s addiction to glucose. Although the brain can make do, or even thrive, on other substrates (such as ketones) it much prefers glucose. Positron emission tomography can be used to study metabolic processes. Brightly coloured PET scans depict regions of the brain ‘lighting u..."
Paragraph 3 (167 words): "To understand why membrane potential matters, consider another tissue with an equivalent addiction to glucose: the beta cells in the islets of the pancreas. They’re addicted to glucose because their job is to detect high blood glucose levels (usually after a meal) and secrete the hormone insulin in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "203"
Paragraph 1 (83 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."
Paragraph 2 (91 words): "In a pioneering reconception of the pathology underlying Alzheimer’s disease, Estela Area-Gomez and Eric Schon at Columbia University, New York, have linked neuronal degeneration with the damage accruing to cellular compartments known as mitochondria-associated membranes or MAMs. 9 Perhaps first amo..."
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Here’s how it works."
Paragraph 4 (190 words): "Neurons need to accelerate from zero to sixty in a split second when called upon to fire. Burning glucose maximises the speed and efficiency of ATP synthesis through the classic textbook pathway. Glucose is swiftly broken down to form pyruvate, which is then clipped of CO 2 and 2H by pyruvate dehydr..."
Paragraph 5 (22 words) [SHORT]: "We’ll consider how this relates to consciousness in the Epilogue, but for now let’s just see what goes wrong in Alzheimer’s disease."
Paragraph 6 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Think about the problem here. To fire normally, neurons must take up glucose, but insulin resistance means that they struggle to do so. 10 The MAMs attempt to compensate for this deficit by pumping more Ca 2+ into the mitochondria, activating pyruvate dehydrogenase further and"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "204"
Paragraph 1 (147 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."
Paragraph 2 (86 words): "The brain can’t easily switch to some other fuel or flux pattern when neurons or their ‘symbiotic’ tissues are damaged. The bottom line is that our risk of Alzheimer’s disease depends in part on factors such as diet and exercise, which influence our lifelong exposure to high blood glucose. But under..."
Paragraph 3 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Know thyself The portrait of ageing I have drawn here is fundamentally epigenetic."
Paragraph 4 (183 words): "Ageing is not driven by mutations in genes accumulating over time, but by changes in gene activity – epigenetics. But this word is misleading in two respects. First, ‘epigenetics’ sounds intrinsically reversible, but plainly that’s hardly true with ageing – we might be able to improve our lifestyle ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "205"
Paragraph 1 (14 words) [SHORT]: "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32"
Paragraph 2 (60 words): "reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve been talking about, second by second, day by day, year by year – a..."
Paragraph 3 (156 words): "At the very heart of this metabolic whirl is the Krebs cycle, inextricably intwined with the fabric of our mitochondria. Their electrical membrane potential is bound to the flux of reactive oxygen species, and to our capacity for burning 2H to power a hundred billion trillion reactions each second. ..."
Paragraph 4 (149 words): "In cells, some of these whirling reactions go wrong and damage molecular machinery such as proteins. Not all proteins are replaced effectively, and repairing or replacing them is a drain in itself – one of the most energy-sapping tasks that cells face. Eventually the respiratory machinery itself is ..."
Paragraph 5 (32 words) [SHORT]: "I mentioned that metabolic rate and lifespan only correlate loosely, because organisms can vary how much they invest in restricting or repairing damage. Perhaps the most striking examples are bats and birds."
Paragraph 6 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Animals with the power of flight live as much as ten times longer than their land-lubber cousins with a similar body size or resting metabolic rate. Recent work from Gustavo Barja in Madrid suggests that these longer-lived animals restrict ROS flux from complex I, simply by down-"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "206"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12"
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burning NADH with a Krebs cycle in full forward mode for much longer. That in tu..."
Paragraph 3 (43 words) [SHORT]: "Remember that ROS are less damaging than the lurid language used to label them would have you believe. Even so, a faster pace of living entails more turnover of molecular machinery, and therefore more damage. Longer-lived animals must invest more in damage limitation."
Paragraph 4 (17 words) [SHORT]: "The cost is ultimately fewer offspring per unit time, and we are back into standard evolutionary biology."
Paragraph 5 (224 words): "These changes are the work of selection, even if they are relatively simple and can occur over just a few generations. Our own lifespan is harder to modify, because our physiological limits are set by the genes that we inherited – we can’t mix and match over generations to improve our performance. B..."
Paragraph 6 (72 words): "Over the entrance to the Temple of Apollo at Delphi, the Greeks inscribed three maxims. The first was ‘Know thyself’. They might never have imagined the invisible metabolic flux dancing through genes that defines us as individuals and humans, but they knew well how to live and die. We each need to l..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "207"
Paragraph 1 (38 words) [SHORT]: "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence."
Paragraph 2 (68 words): "Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mitochondria. If you want to make yourself more youthful, if not young again; if you want to trim your biological age and shift your epigenetic state to a more aerobic setting; if you want to live well and die well –..."
Paragraph 3 (22 words) [SHORT]: "You will need to sustain your lifestyle over decades to invigorate your health with age and add good years to your life."
Paragraph 4 (37 words) [SHORT]: "The third Delphic maxim is a little more ambiguous. It is usually translated as ‘Surety brings ruin’. I imagine this to mean that we should never crave certainty, for nothing is certain, least of all in science."
Paragraph 5 (152 words): "Science is not a collection of dusty facts, but a way of exploring the unknown, of making out the contours of a long mysterious coast. I have tried to write this book in that spirit, connecting the first stirrings of life on a geologically restless planet with the glorious pinnacles of evolution, an..."
Paragraph 6 (34 words) [SHORT]: "1 There are occasional examples of mitochondrial DNA inherited from the father too, very rarely in humans but more commonly in some other species. But these examples are really a footnote to the rule."
Paragraph 7 (148 words): "2 In his PhD with me and Andrew Pomiankowski, Marco Colnaghi has done some beautiful mathematical modelling on how the female germline selects for the best mitochondria, a process that involves their transfer from multiple germ cells into a single immature oocyte, followed by the programmed death of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "208"
Paragraph 1 (47 words) [SHORT]: "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all."
Paragraph 2 (108 words): "3 This is a fine example of how solving one evolutionary problem leads to another. Uniparental inheritance made it possible to select for mitochondrial genes: they are always inherited in populations, so it is important to make this population as clonal as possible. In animals, that requires careful..."
Paragraph 3 (237 words): "4 Biology is always more complex than you’d like it to be. It took me a long time to see this relationship, because I already had a hypothesis in mind, which I have written about in previous books, and which has some experimental backing: increased ROS flux signals locally (to the mitochondrial gene..."
Paragraph 4 (130 words): "5 Quite why larger animals usually have a lower metabolic rate is surprisingly abstruse. In part, it relates to the rate of heat loss, which scales with the surface area of animals. An elephant-sized pile of mice produces about twenty-one times more heat than an elephant does; if the elephant produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "209"
Paragraph 1 (85 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."
Paragraph 2 (144 words): "7 It might seem that this problem could be solved by upregulating ‘anaplerotic’ pathways – adding in specific intermediates, modifying them through part of the Krebs cycle, and then removing them again. In other words, the cycle is acting as a roundabout rather than a full cycle, with flux coming in..."
Paragraph 3 (70 words): "8 Plants and simple (tiny) animals don’t need to suppress complex I, as they can short-circuit the respiratory chain (using an alternative oxidase or uncoupling proteins) to generate heat, rather than ATP. Dissipation of heat in this way swiftly oxidises NADH and lowers ROS flux, speeding Krebs-cycl..."
Paragraph 4 (112 words): "9 These are part of an extensive internal membrane system in cells called the endoplasmic reticulum, which is responsible for synthesising, packaging, folding and transporting proteins and other molecules such as lipids around the cell. The endoplasmic reticulum also plays an important role in seque..."
Paragraph 5 (80 words): "10 High glucose in the blood (hyperglycaemia) suppresses the uptake of glucose by neurons, via mechanisms that are not well understood (though glucose can be directly toxic to proteins). For a long time, it was thought that insulin does not affect the uptake of glucose by the brain, hence the brain ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "210"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’."
Paragraph 2 (94 words): "11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who has recently joined us at UCL. Her estimate of one billion metabolic reactions per second is actually for a bacterial cell, not on..."
Paragraph 3 (119 words): "12 Barja argues that this is linked to a programme of ageing: that ROS flux from complex I is deliberate. I agree that it is deliberate, but find the evidence for programmed ageing unpersuasive. To my mind, ROS flux signals respiratory capacity relative to demand, facilitating swift changes in respi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "212"
Paragraph 1 (163 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."
Paragraph 2 (154 words): "The idea is pleasing, but I wouldn’t have given it any more thought but for a visit from a scientific seer. Luca Turin is a biophysicist interested in quantum biology. He has led an unusual life, working for many years on scent and smell, and the possibility that we may be able to detect quantum vib..."
Paragraph 3 (129 words): "Rarely have I met someone who thinks in such clear lines. His papers convey this clarity, coupled with wry amusement. ‘Almost the only thing we know for sure about consciousness is that it is, so to speak, soluble in ether, chloroform and a variety of other solvents.’ Intriguingly, anaesthetics can ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "213"
Paragraph 1 (191 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "One of the few things that general anaesthetics do have in common is that they are lipid soluble – they accumulate in membranes, and the strength of anaesthesia depends on their concentration more than their structure. Anaesthetics accumulate in the mitochondrial membranes too."
Paragraph 3 (11 words) [SHORT]: "So, could they facilitate electron transfer to oxygen in cell respiration?"
Paragraph 4 (171 words): "Turin’s work shows that this might be the case. Electron spin resonance gives a signal associated with oxygen, which shifts under anaesthesia (it’s the only signal that does), but not in mutant flies resistant to anaesthesia. Even more intriguingly, Turin has detected a radiowave signal associated w..."
Paragraph 5 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Let’s get back to xenon. All this suggests that xenon concentrates in the hydrophobic pockets of proteins sitting within the mitochondrial"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "214"
Paragraph 1 (127 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."
Paragraph 2 (129 words): "I mentioned electromagnetic fields. We have long known that the brain generates electrical fields, which we measure in the EEG (electroencephalogram). As with general anaesthetics, we know far more about how to interpret patterns in the EEG associated with epilepsy or sleep than we do about what gen..."
Paragraph 3 (75 words): "The glib assumption is that charges on the cell membrane (or action potentials) are responsible. But if Turin is right, then a big part of the answer might be mitochondrial membrane potentials. Not only is electron transfer to oxygen implicated in consciousness, but the mitochondrial membrane potent..."
Paragraph 4 (102 words): "Moving charge necessarily generates an electromagnetic field, and the mitochondria clearly do so – not only with the transfer of electrons to oxygen but even more dramatically in the circuit of protons across the membrane, looping from the respiratory complexes to the ATP synthase and back round. Do..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "215"
Paragraph 1 (172 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."
Paragraph 2 (238 words): "This kind of statement might have pushed the boundaries of respectable science until recently, but the extraordinary work of the developmental biologist Michael Levin and others shows that electric fields can control the development of small animals such as the flat worms known as planarians. I susp..."
Paragraph 3 (39 words) [SHORT]: "Let’s put aside multicellular organisms with their nervous systems and think about protists such as paramecium, which also generate electrical fields on their mitochondrial membranes. Just watch their amazing behaviour under the microscope, the way they move around, explore,"

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "216"
Paragraph 1 (88 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."
Paragraph 2 (74 words): "As with our own nervous systems, I’m arguing that the electrical fields in protists are mostly generated by mitochondria, deep within the cell. So why would these internal electrical fields become associated with the self, the life, the potentialities, of an organism as a whole? They’re only a bit o..."
Paragraph 3 (122 words): "To understand why – why the language of mitochondrial electrical fields became bound to the ephemeral states of cells – you need to know that mitochondria were bacteria once. They were engulfed by other cells nearly two billion years ago. I explored the extraordinary ramifications of that relationsh..."
Paragraph 4 (163 words): "Let me give you an example of how important this membrane potential is to bacteria. In the ocean there are about ten times as many viruses that attack bacteria (phages) as there are bacteria. You might have seen pictures of these viruses attaching themselves in droves to bacteria. Phages are remarka..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "217"
Paragraph 1 (96 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."
Paragraph 2 (67 words): "I have long wondered if that collapsing membrane potential ‘feels’ like something to a bacterium. More than anything else, the humming electrical potential on the membrane betokens the living force. And if it feels like something for a bacterium to die, its living force sucked away, what about other..."
Paragraph 3 (219 words): "They can die by wear and tear too – damage caused by overexposure to bright light, or too little iron for the photosynthetic systems to work properly, or toxins squirted out by neighbouring cells. Each of these can trigger waves of death through marine blooms of cyanobacteria. All operate through mu..."
Paragraph 4 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Shrink yourself down to the size of a molecule in the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 5 (81 words): "Succinate. The cell you’re part of is the size of a city, a metropolis on the scale of London, Tokyo or New York. What connects you with another molecule of succinate across the city, twenty miles away? In what sense are you part of the same entity, the same self? You won’t even be succinate for lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "218"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you."
Paragraph 2 (65 words): "Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there is of you compared with the next molecule. You are bound to the flow of electrons, to the pumping of protons, to the electrical charge on th..."
Paragraph 3 (116 words): "Protons scuttle instantaneously around the membrane, equalising the charge at each location, cohering an electromagnetic field that exerts its force everywhere in the cell. The water bound to surfaces inside the cell oscillates in phase, uniting the molecules of metabolism in the symphony. Changes i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "219"
Paragraph 1 (88 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."
Paragraph 2 (16 words) [SHORT]: "Were we mistaken? What does it matter if it is the movement that negates the form?"
Paragraph 3 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Even though we give (give up) ourselves to this mortal process of continuing, it is the movement that creates the form."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "220"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "221"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "222"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "A PPENDIX 1"
Paragraph 2 (203 words): "RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon in photosyn..."
Paragraph 3 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Let’s think about a specific example – how acetate (a C2 molecule) is activated to react with CO 2 , to form the C3 pyruvate. In other words, the ‘R’ depicted in the example above corresponds to a methyl group (- CH 3 ). The first step goes like this:"

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "223"
Paragraph 1 (249 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "224"
Paragraph 1 (86 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."
Paragraph 2 (113 words): "But that leaves the carbon short of electrons, which it must pick up from somewhere else instantaneously or the reaction won’t happen at all: The curly black arrow shown here denotes the movement of a pair of electrons, in this case the pair of electrons that form the C–S bond. The electrons move wh..."
Paragraph 3 (97 words): "Short of an immediate back-reaction (which would just revert to the starting point), where could the positively charged carbon atom pick up the pair of electrons it needs to regain stability? Not from CO 2 , because that faces a similar problem. CO 2 is not very reactive, as it has a stable bond str..."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "225"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below."
Paragraph 2 (44 words) [SHORT]: "This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure depicted at the right in the reaction on the previous page."
Paragraph 3 (145 words): "You can imagine that the positive charges on the acetate shown above and the CO 2 shown here would not go anywhere near each other; but the pair of electrons transferred from ferredoxin makes a new C–C bond possible, joining the two positively charged carbon atoms together, by giving each one a sing..."
Paragraph 4 (27 words) [SHORT]: "There’s only one other thing to notice here. In the first scheme above, water is shown as a product. Yet that seems to have gone missing in"

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "226"
Paragraph 1 (140 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Biology magics water away."

=== NEW SECTION: 5 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "227"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "A PPENDIX 2"
Paragraph 2 (117 words): "THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA pathway. The ste..."
Paragraph 3 (142 words): "Acetyl CoA is not only the end-product of the acetyl CoA pathway; it’s also a key constituent of the reverse Krebs cycle. Rather than a closed cycle, I talked about a Krebs line in Chapter 3, which is to say, a linear pathway that continues the same repetitive chemistry as the acetyl CoA pathway, ex..."
Paragraph 4 (68 words): "This really is more of the same. Here’s what happens if an acetyl group is bound on near to another CO (check back to Chapter 3 if you can’t recall where the CO comes from). Once again, the acetyl group hops across to join the CO (the same Fischer–Tropsch-type chemistry), this time giving pyruvate (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "228"
Paragraph 1 (145 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "The next few steps build on what we’ve already seen, but alter the pattern slightly, because pyruvate possesses an extra double-bonded oxygen on the first carbon atom next to the carboxylate group, a so- called ‘alpha carbon’. This arrangement is unusually reactive. Here’s"

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "229"
Paragraph 1 (14 words) [SHORT]: "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry."
Paragraph 2 (141 words): "Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that branching point in metabolism. In effect, the voracious, electron-hungry oxygen atom dra..."
Paragraph 3 (85 words): "In the absence of a phosphate, the likelihood of a stable enol form persisting is greater if a neighbouring molecule (be it an enzyme or mineral surface) can abstract a proton from the methyl group, as shown here. In this case, I’m not going to draw the pyruvate with its normal Cheshire Cat smile, b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "230"
Paragraph 1 (97 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."
Paragraph 2 (138 words): "The reactivity of the enol stems from its shape-changing behaviour, specifically the tendency of the carbon–carbon double bond to react with other molecules. In general, carbon–carbon double bonds are not especially reactive: if one of the electron pairs reacted with something else, it would leave a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "231"
Paragraph 1 (66 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."
Paragraph 2 (12 words) [SHORT]: "I’ve shown that at the top of the opposite page for completeness."
Paragraph 3 (123 words): "We’re nearly there. We’ve now synthesised three of the most deeply conserved molecules in all of metabolism (acetate, pyruvate and oxaloacetate) through a repetitious series of reactions that demands little more than CO 2 binding onto a surface that can transfer electrons. The last few steps take us..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "232"
Paragraph 1 (29 words) [SHORT]: "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side)."
Paragraph 2 (287 words): "The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is favoured in the acidic environment because it can immediately react with a proton to form water, helping to neutralise the acidic conditions. As before, water is formed easi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "233"
Paragraph 1 (23 words) [SHORT]: "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule."
Paragraph 2 (59 words) [SHORT]: "ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate leaves adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) plus inorganic phosphate ( P i ), which provides the energy needed to drive many reactions in the cell. The ATP synthas..."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "CoA Coenzyme A. A complex molecule containing a reactive thiol ( -SH ) that can bind to acetate (vinegar) to form acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all of metabolism."
Paragraph 4 (31 words) [SHORT]: "CO 2 Carbon dioxide. The ‘Lego brick’ from which almost all organic molecules are made in biochemistry via photosynthesis or by reacting with gases such as H 2 in hydrothermal vents."
Paragraph 5 (33 words) [SHORT]: "-COOH Carboxylic acid group. Characteristic of all Krebs cycle molecules, which can have two or three such groups. The proton (H + ) dissociates easily, giving the carboxylate ( -COO – ) group."
Paragraph 6 (43 words) [SHORT]: "DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid. The hereditary material. Forms the famous double helix, composed of long chains of millions of letters (nucleotides) that pair together to form complementary strands. When prised apart, each strand acts as a template, allowing the precise sequence to be copied."
Paragraph 7 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Ech Energy-converting hydrogenase. A membrane protein that uses the flow of protons (H + ) to power the transfer of electrons from H 2 to ferredoxin, which in turn passes them on to CO 2 . A prebiotic version could have driven CO 2 fixation at the origin of life."
Paragraph 8 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Fd Ferredoxin. The red protein. An iron–sulfur protein with a unique power to transfer electrons onto CO 2 to form organic molecules. The form that transfers electrons is shortened to Fd 2– ."
Paragraph 9 (31 words) [SHORT]: "FeS cluster One of several different types of small inorganic clusters of iron and sulfur, containing just a few atoms, with structures similar to minerals. The classic is the 4Fe4S cluster."
Paragraph 10 (31 words) [SHORT]: "GSH Glutathione. GSH is the reduced form (containing H) and GSSG is the oxidised form (where an H has been extracted from each of two GSH molecules). An important cellular antioxidant."

=== NEW SECTION: 13 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "234"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases."
Paragraph 2 (26 words) [SHORT]: "H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "H 2 Hydrogen gas, composed of two hydrogen atoms covalently bound together."
Paragraph 4 (21 words) [SHORT]: "MAM Mitochondria-associated membranes. Part of an intracellular membrane system called the endoplasmic reticulum, where it is closely appositioned with the mitochondria."
Paragraph 5 (17 words) [SHORT]: "NAC N-acetyl cysteine. An antioxidant that can be taken as a dietary supplement. Too much is toxic."
Paragraph 6 (95 words): "NADH Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. One of the most important carriers of 2H, NADH is the form loaded with 2H, whereas NAD + has passed on its 2H (becoming oxidised). NAD + picks up 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates and then passes on the electrons to complex I in respiration. Technically, I sho..."
Paragraph 7 (76 words): "NADPH Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. A 2H carrier used in biosynthesis. NADP + is the oxidised form (lacking 2H). The ratio of NADPH to NADP + is pushed far from equilibrium, giving NADPH more power to force its 2H onto other molecules than NADH. Note that, as with NADH, NADPH actually..."
Paragraph 8 (58 words) [SHORT]: "pH A log scale for measuring the concentration of protons in water. Water ( H 2 O ) splits into H + and OH – ions. At neutral pH (7) their concentration is equal. At acidic pH (< 7) there is an excess of H + ions; at alkaline pH (> 7) there are more OH – ions."
Paragraph 9 (50 words) [SHORT]: "RNA Ribonucleic acid. A working copy of a gene, composed of a single strand of nucleotides linked together in a chain. Can fold into complex shapes and catalyse reactions (as a ribozyme) as well as acting as a hereditary molecule (in some viruses and in a hypothetical early ‘RNA world’)."
Paragraph 10 (30 words) [SHORT]: "ROS Reactive oxygen species. Reactive forms of oxygen that mostly form when oxygen grabs single electrons from FeS clusters in the respiratory chain to form ‘free radicals’ and related molecules."
Paragraph 11 (14 words) [SHORT]: "-SH A thiol, containing a sulfur joined to a hydrogen, which is quite reactive."
Paragraph 12 (16 words) [SHORT]: "Found in coenzyme A, the amino acid cysteine (and so many proteins) and the antioxidant glutathione."

=== NEW SECTION: 2 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "235"
Paragraph 1 (27 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "236"
Paragraph 1 (130 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."
Paragraph 2 (99 words): "Introduction: Life itself Leeuwenhoek and the inscrutability of cells Clifford Dobell, Antony van Leeuwenhoek and his ‘Little Animals’ (New York, Russell & Russell, 1958). A delightful if antiquated biography of van Leeuwenhoek by a distinguished protistologist who learnt Dutch to read Leeuwenhoek’s..."
Paragraph 3 (70 words): "Brian J. Ford, Single Lens: The Story of the Simple Microscope (New York, Harper & Row, 1985). A remarkable story by a master of microscopy, in which Ford rediscovers nine of Leeuwenhoek’s original samples hidden in the library of the Royal Society. He uses single-lens microscopes designed by Hooke ..."
Paragraph 4 (62 words): "N. Lane, ‘The unseen world: reflections on Leeuwenhoek (1677) “Concerning little animals”’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 370 (2015), 20140344. My own attempt to assess what van Leeuwenhoek’s discoveries mean for biologists today, written for the 350th anniversary edition of the ..."
Paragraph 5 (30 words) [SHORT]: "The paradox of information in biology Paul Davies, The Demon in the Machine: How Hidden Webs of Information are Finally Solving the Mystery of Life (London, Penguin, 2019). An eloquent"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "237"
Paragraph 1 (27 words) [SHORT]: "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life."
Paragraph 2 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical or informational (or the same thing)."
Paragraph 3 (63 words): "Erwin Schrödinger, What Is Life? (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1967). An ageless classic; one of the most influential science books of the twentieth century, which still rewards reading today. Wrong on plenty of details, but an unparalleled example of how far vision and clear thinking can ..."
Paragraph 4 (74 words): "L. D. Hansen, R. S. Criddle and E. H. Battley, ‘Biological calorimetry and the thermodynamics of the origination and evolution of life’, Pure and Applied Chemistry 81 (2009) 1843–1855. A technical paper that disagrees with Schrödinger’s take on the entropy of living systems – it is not nearly as low..."
Paragraph 5 (63 words): "The dynamic side Hopkins & Biochemistry 1861–1947. Papers concerning Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, OM, PRS, with a selection of his addresses and a bibliography of his publications. (Cambridge, W. Heffer & Sons, 1949). The title says it all. Many of Gowland Hopkins’s addresses and papers obsess abo..."
Paragraph 6 (68 words): "The unity of biochemistry D. D. Woods, ‘Albert Jan Kluyver’, Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 3 (1957) 109–128. A wonderful resource from the Royal Society – short biographical obituaries of their fellows since 1932, freely available here: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/journ..."
Paragraph 7 (30 words) [SHORT]: "H. C. Friedmann, ‘From “butyribacterium” to “E. coli”: an essay on unity in biochemistry’, Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , 47 (2004) 47–66. An entertaining history of a slippery idea."
Paragraph 8 (65 words): "R. Y. Stanier and C. B. van Niel, ‘The concept of a bacterium’, Archiv für Mikrobiologie 42 (1962) 17–35. A paper of wonderful insight, which to my mind brought to an end the classical era of microbiology, ceding precedence to the power of genetic information. Ironically, the scrambling power of lat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "238"
Paragraph 1 (59 words) [SHORT]: "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."
Paragraph 2 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Matthew Cobb, Life’s Greatest Secret. The Race to Crack the Genetic Code (London, Profile Books, 2015). A fascinating and authoritative history, which despite being further removed from the events than Judson, combines excitement with the benefit of (wise) hindsight, while bringing the genetics righ..."
Paragraph 3 (123 words): "F. H. C. Crick, J. S. Griffith and L. E. Orgel, ‘Codes without commas’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 43 (1957) 416–427. One of the most brilliantly wrong papers in the history of science, which explained how a triplet code that could encompass 64 amino acids actually coded the..."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "David S. Goodsell, The Machinery of Life (New York, Copernicus Books, 2009)."
Paragraph 5 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Goodsell is a wonderful artist, whose utterly precise images bring the molecular machinery of life alive in a unique and instantly recognizable way; he even writes well. Is there a biochemist unaware of his work?"
Paragraph 6 (37 words) [SHORT]: "The molecular genetic paradigm of medicine David Weatherall, Science and the Quiet Art. Medical Research and Patient Care (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1995). An eloquent and thoughtful introduction to the molecular genetic paradigm that underpins modern medicine."
Paragraph 7 (55 words) [SHORT]: "James D. Watson, Tania A. Baker, Stephen P. Bell, Alexander Gann, Michael Levine and Richard Losick, Molecular Biology of the Gene , 7th edn (Pearson, 2013). The classic molecular biology textbook, originally by Watson and now a larger group; as close to the paradigm of molecular medicine as it poss..."
Paragraph 8 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Deep unity of biochemistry – the conserved city-centre plan E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, ‘Universality in intermediary metabolism’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101 (2004) 13168–13173."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "239"
Paragraph 1 (18 words) [SHORT]: "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life."
Paragraph 2 (24 words) [SHORT]: "W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362"
Paragraph 3 (29 words) [SHORT]: "(2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably influenced my own thinking more than any other. Manages to be thrillingly original while remaining always balanced and scholarly. A masterpiece."
Paragraph 4 (42 words) [SHORT]: "The Krebs cycle Steven Rose, The Chemistry of Life , new edn (London, Penguin, 1999). A classic introduction to biochemistry that caught my imagination when I was at school, and to which I pay oblique homage in the subtitle of this book."
Paragraph 5 (44 words) [SHORT]: "Philip Ball, Molecules: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2003). Originally published as Stories of the Invisible , Ball covers the Krebs cycle and some basic metabolic biochemistry in brief as part of a wider canvas. Ball just doesn’t do small canvases."
Paragraph 6 (87 words): "Harold Baum, The Biochemists’ Songbook , 2nd edn (London Taylor and Francis, 1995). A classic, witty setting of intermediary biochemistry to music, through which generations of biochemistry students desperately crammed for exams. Just to give you a feel, the Krebs cycle is set to Waltzing Matilda an..."
Paragraph 7 (45 words) [SHORT]: "Konrad Bloch, Blondes in Venetian Paintings, the Nine-Banded Armadillo and Other Essays in Biochemistry (New Haven, CT, Yale University Press, 1997). Seriously! An enjoyable and informative read from a distinguished biochemist, who makes it very clear why most biochemical pathways don’t run in both ..."
Paragraph 8 (73 words): "If pigs could fly chemistry L. Orgel, ‘The implausibility of metabolic cycles on the prebiotic Earth’, PLoS Biology 6 (2008) e18. Orgel didn’t mince his words, also describing the idea that metal ions or minerals could catalyse a whole suite of prebiotic reactions as ‘an appeal to magic’. He died in..."
Paragraph 9 (30 words) [SHORT]: "Chapter 1: Discovering the nanocosm Hopkins’s biochemistry lab F. Gowland Hopkins, ‘Atomic physics and vital activities’, Nature 130 (1932) 869–871. The text of Gowland Hopkins’s anniversary address to the Royal"

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "240"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Society in 1932."
Paragraph 2 (85 words): "H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder about the value ..."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "Hans Krebs, Reminiscences and Reflections (Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1981). An enjoyable and interesting read, published just after Krebs died, and perhaps for that reason containing a number of uncharacteristic errors in the equations."
Paragraph 4 (60 words): "Soňa Štrbáňová, Holding Hands with Bacteria. The Life and Work of Marjory Stephenson (Berlin, Springer, 2016). A really worthwhile biography of one of the most brilliant and influential female scientists in Britain in the first half of the twentieth century. (But why is it so expensive?) Krebs in Ca..."
Paragraph 5 (20 words) [SHORT]: "(suppl) (1980) K11–K15. Very charming recollections of the young Hans Krebs from a lifelong friend in both Germany and Britain."
Paragraph 6 (12 words) [SHORT]: "H. Kornberg and D. H. Williamson, ‘Hans Adolf Krebs, 25 August 1900–22"
Paragraph 7 (35 words) [SHORT]: "November 1981’, Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 30 (1984) 349–385. Concludes with an appraisal of Krebs’s approach to science, asking how he attracted the affection and lifelong loyalty of so many people."
Paragraph 8 (91 words): "From personal experience, they write ‘It was in a sense reassuring, and endearing, to discover that Hans was not an accomplished experimenter or even a very practical person. ... Above all, there shone through all his writings and actions a burning passion for truth, a distrust and dislike of all th..."
Paragraph 9 (32 words) [SHORT]: "Otto Warburg and respirometry Otto Warburg, The Oxygen-Transferring Ferment of Respiration, Nobel Lecture, 10 December 1931. Available from: www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1931/warburg/lecture/. A marvellous and inspiring piece, which captures all that is best about Warburg."
Paragraph 10 (44 words) [SHORT]: "P. Oesper, ‘The history of the Warburg apparatus. Some reminiscences on its use’, Journal of Chemical Education 41 (1964) 294–296. An enjoyably breezy short history that explains how Warburg’s name came to be associated with an instrument invented by T. G. Brodie and others."

=== NEW SECTION: 13 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "241"
Paragraph 1 (39 words) [SHORT]: "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard."
Paragraph 2 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘Lost in the Twentieth Century’, Annual Review of Biochemistry 32 (1963) 1–15. A short autobiography of one of the most brilliant and restless characters in biochemistry, including an account of his spying exploits in the second world war."
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "Albert Szent-Györgyi, The Living State. With Observations on Cancer (London and New York, Academic Press, 1972). Some mesmerising lines but I have to say a bit of an eccentric book. He thought about life in the right way, but to my mind never took Peter Mitchell’s thinking about electrical membrane ..."
Paragraph 4 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Albert Szent-Györgyi, The Crazy Ape (New York, Philosophical Library, 1970)."
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Quite a disturbed book with short, revolutionary essays."
Paragraph 6 (44 words) [SHORT]: "Albert Szent-Györgyi, Oxidation, Energy Transfer, and Vitamins, Nobel Lecture, 11 December 1937. Available from: www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/szent- gyorgyi-lecture.pdf. Szent-Györgyi won the Nobel prize in 1937, the same year that Krebs published his cycle. Here Szent-Györgyi ponders how it a..."
Paragraph 7 (17 words) [SHORT]: "J. J. Farmer, B. R. Davis, W. B. Cherry, D. J. Brenner, V. R. Dowell and A."
Paragraph 8 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Balows, ‘50 years ago: the theory of Szent-Györgyi’, Trends in Biochemical Sciences 10 (1985) 35–38. A short but dense dip into biochemical history. Puts Szent-Györgyi’s conception of carboxylic acids being the carriers of 2H to oxygen into context."
Paragraph 9 (67 words): "Discovery of the Krebs cycle H. A. Krebs and W. A. Johnson, ‘The role of citric acid in intermediary metabolism in animal tissues’, Enzymologica 4 (1937) 148–156. The classic non- Nature paper on the Krebs cycle, written with W. A. Johnson, who did most of the experimental work. Johnson’s contributi..."
Paragraph 10 (39 words) [SHORT]: "(1993) 61–62, ‘William Arthur Johnson – a postgraduate’s contribution to the Krebs cycle.’ H. A. Krebs, ‘The intermediate metabolism of carbohydrates’, Lancet 230 (1937) 736–738. An immediate perspective on the cycle, written by Krebs alone and aimed at medics."
Paragraph 11 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: The Formation of a Scientific Life 1900–1933 ."
Paragraph 12 (11 words) [SHORT]: "Volume 1 (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991). A monumental tome of"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "242"
Paragraph 1 (27 words) [SHORT]: "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle."
Paragraph 2 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1993). The second monumental volume of Holmes’s scientific biography, covering the Krebs cycle itself, more or less experiment by experiment. Hard work, but captures a lot of ..."
Paragraph 3 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Hans A. Krebs, The Citric Acid Cycle, Nobel Lecture, 11 December 1953. Available from: https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/medicine/1953/krebs/lecture/."
Paragraph 4 (119 words): "A nice history, including thoughts on the role of the cycle in biosynthesis as well as the evolution of energy metabolism. He finishes with the prescient lines: ‘The presence of the same mechanism of energy production in all forms of life suggests two other inferences, firstly, that the mechanism of..."
Paragraph 5 (56 words) [SHORT]: "J. M. Buchanan, ‘Biochemistry during the life and times of Hans Krebs and Fritz Lipmann’, Journal of Biological Chemistry 277 (2002) 33531–33536. Some interesting recollections on these two pioneers of intermediary metabolism from another distinguished biochemist, John Buchanan, who was an early pio..."
Paragraph 6 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Fritz Lipmann and acetyl CoA G. D. Novelli and F. Lipmann, ‘The catalytic function of coenzyme A in citric acid synthesis’, Journal of Biological Chemistry 182 (1950) 213–228. The paper that finally made sense of the first step of the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 7 (74 words): "Fritz Lipmann, Wanderings of a Biochemist (New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1971). Lipmann’s autobiography mixed with essays and papers. An eclectic read, full of interest both historical and scientific. Includes his paper on the origin of life, which begins with ‘My basic motivation for entering into..."
Paragraph 8 (36 words) [SHORT]: "W. P. Jenks and R. V. Wolfenden, ‘Fritz Albert Lipmann’, Biographical Memoirs 88 (2006) 246–266. The US National Academy of Sciences equivalent to the Royal Society Memoirs . Features the memorable closing line that Lipmann died"

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "243"
Paragraph 1 (24 words) [SHORT]: "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed."
Paragraph 2 (128 words): "Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, 8 December 1978. Available here: https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/mitchell-lecture.pdf. The fascinating story of Mitchell’s own thinking, pa..."
Paragraph 3 (67 words): "John Prebble and Bruce Webber, Wandering in the Gardens of the Mind (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2003). A fascinating, detailed biography of Mitchell, scholarly, sympathetic, and extremely knowledgeable, from two biochemists steeped in membrane bioenergetics and its history. They have also publ..."
Paragraph 4 (52 words) [SHORT]: "R. E. Davies and H. A. Krebs, ‘Biochemical aspects of the transport of ions by nervous tissue’, Proceedings of the Biochemical Society 50 (1952) xxi. An abstract that captures the essence of the chemiosmotic idea nearly a decade before Mitchell; but I’m not surprised Mitchell missed it. This is a st..."
Paragraph 5 (48 words) [SHORT]: "A. T. Jagendorf, ‘Chance, luck and photosynthesis research: an inside story’, Photosynthesis Research 57 (1998) 215–229. An entertaining personal account of bioenergetics around the time of Mitchell’s hypothesis, and Jagendorf’s own seminal experiment that first persuaded a sceptical field. Jagendor..."
Paragraph 6 (72 words): "Mitchell and Moyle P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Stoichiometry of proton translocation through the respiratory chain and adenosine triphosphatase systems of rat liver mitochondria’, Nature 208 (1965) 147–151. One of the classic papers published by Mitchell and Moyle in Nature in the mid-1960s, less ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "244"
Paragraph 1 (34 words) [SHORT]: "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis."
Paragraph 2 (27 words) [SHORT]: "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemiosmotic hypothesis of oxidative phosphorylation’, Nature 213 (1967) 137–139. A detailed rebuttal of criticisms, containing a summary of Moyle’s experimental evidence."
Paragraph 3 (18 words) [SHORT]: "Paul Boyer and the ATP synthase Paul D. Boyer, Energy, Life and ATP, Nobel Lecture, 8 December 1997."
Paragraph 4 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Available here: https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/boyer-lecture.pdf. A remarkable story of how Boyer conceived the mechanism of rotational catalysis of the ATP synthase, including his early drawings. Sir John Walker shared the prize that year for his X-ray crystallography structure showing ..."
Paragraph 5 (40 words) [SHORT]: "J. N. Prebble, ‘Contrasting approaches to a biological problem: Paul Boyer, Peter Mitchell and the mechanism of the ATP synthase’, Journal of the History of Biology 46 (2013) 699–737. Another fine piece on the history of bioenergetics from John Prebble."
Paragraph 6 (89 words): "The mechanism of proton pumping M. Wikström, ‘Recollections. How I became a biochemist’, IUBMB Life 60 (2008) 414–417. A memoir of the later ‘ox phos wars’, over the mechanism of proton pumping, especially cytochrome oxidase. Mitchell resisted the idea of conformational change in proteins for eight ..."
Paragraph 7 (14 words) [SHORT]: "Franklin M. Harold, The Vital Force: A Study of Bioenergetics (New York, W. H."
Paragraph 8 (79 words): "Freeman, 1986). An unusually personable textbook from one of the pioneers of membrane bioenergetics, which gives a clear view of the chemiosmotic hypothesis. Harold has written several books for the general public which are eloquent, thoughtful and nuanced attempts to confront the biggest questions ..."
Paragraph 9 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Evolution of the Krebs cycle J. E. Baldwin and H. A. Krebs, ‘The evolution of metabolic cycles’, Nature 291"
Paragraph 10 (14 words) [SHORT]: "(1981) 381–382. An influential paper that stands out in my mind for not even"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "245"
Paragraph 1 (20 words) [SHORT]: "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic text in biochemistry, this is a detailed molecular exploration, which benefits from Hans Kornberg’s microbiological perspectiv..."
Paragraph 3 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Endosymbiosis and mitochondria Nick Lane, The Vital Question: Why Is Life the Way it Is? (London, Profile Books, 2015). Published by W. W. Norton in the US with the subtitle Energy, Evolution and the Origins of Complex Life . My own take on how bioenergetics shaped the origin of life and the evoluti..."
Paragraph 4 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Nick Lane, Power, Sex, Suicide: Mitochondria and the Meaning of Life (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2018). Reprinted with a new introduction as part of the Oxford Landmark Science series (quite an honour). An older take on the importance of mitochondria, but with more background on both Mitchell ..."
Paragraph 5 (65 words): "Chapter 2: The path of carbon Rubisco S. G. Wildman, ‘Along the trail from Fraction I protein to Rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase’, Photosynthesis Research 73 (2002) 243– 250. Or how rubisco got its name. A fascinating historical piece in Photosynthesis Research , which under the..."
Paragraph 6 (80 words): "R. J. Ellis, ‘The most abundant protein in the world’, Trends in Biochemical Sciences 4 (1979) 241–244. A delightfully precise piece that explores why rubisco is so inefficient. John Ellis is one of the clearest thinkers I know, and I strongly recommend his short book on evolution, How Science works..."
Paragraph 7 (37 words) [SHORT]: "R. J. Ellis, ‘Tackling unintelligent design’, Nature 463 (2010) 164–165. An interesting commentary from John Ellis on attempts to improve the activity of Rubisco by refolding the cyanobacterial version using chaperone proteins – discovered by Ellis himself."
Paragraph 8 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Lawrence and the Rad Lab Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). A remarkable and absorbing scientific biography, with many memorable character portraits of the leading"

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "246"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record."
Paragraph 2 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a planetary scale with a compelling analysis of how to counter the climate emergency."
Paragraph 3 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Angela N. H. Creager, Life Atomic: A History of Radioisotopes in Science and Medicine (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2015). A scholarly history of the development of radioisotopes in relation to the emergence of Cold War science and the ‘porous civilian–military divide’."
Paragraph 4 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Early carbon isotope work S. Ruben, W. Z. Hassid and M. D. Kamen, ‘Radioactive carbon in the study of photosynthesis’, Journal of the American Chemical Society 61 (1939) 661–663."
Paragraph 5 (26 words) [SHORT]: "The first publication from Sam Ruben, Zev Hassid and Martin Kamen on the (crazy) use of 11 C for tracking the path of carbon in photosynthesis."
Paragraph 6 (74 words): "C. B. Van Niel, S. Ruben, S. F . Carson, M. D. Kamen and J. W. Foster, ‘Radioactive carbon as an indicator of carbon dioxide utilization: VIII. The role of carbon dioxide in cellular metabolism’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 28 (1942) 8–15. A thoughtful exploration of how CO 2..."
Paragraph 7 (36 words) [SHORT]: "S. Ruben, ‘Photosynthesis and phosphorylation’, Journal of the American Chemical Society 65 (1943) 279–282. Sam Ruben gets so far as to suggest that the molecule that accepts CO 2 in photosynthesis could be a sugar phosphate."
Paragraph 8 (25 words) [SHORT]: "S. Ruben and M. D Kamen, ‘Long-lived radioactive carbon: C14’, Physical Review 59 (1941) 349–354. The paper that first introduced 14 C to the world."
Paragraph 9 (23 words) [SHORT]: "The path of carbon in photosynthesis J. A. Bassham, A. A. Benson, L. D. Kay, A. Z. Harris, A. T. Wilson and M."
Paragraph 10 (64 words): "Calvin, ‘The path of carbon in photosynthesis. XXI. The cyclic regeneration of carbon dioxide acceptor’, Journal of the American Chemical Society 76 (1954) 1760–1770. Number 21! Finally they nailed it. It should be said this is not slow for a major breakthrough. The road less travelled is easily los..."
Paragraph 11 (45 words) [SHORT]: "A. A. Benson, ‘Following the path of carbon in photosynthesis: a personal story’, Photosynthesis Research 73 (2002) 29–49. Benson said little about his time with Calvin until decades later, when he finally broke his silence. One senses he was trying hard not to be bitter."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "247"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson."
Paragraph 2 (107 words): "T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An excellent, detailed scientific outline of the whole period of discovery with a balanced final analysis of the rift between Calvin and Benson. While noting that Benson was not blameless in ..."
Paragraph 3 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Photophosphorylation D. I. Arnon, F. R. Whatley and M. B. Allen, ‘Photosynthesis by isolated chloroplasts. II. Photosynthetic phosphorylation, the conversion of light into phosphate bond energy’, Journal of the American Chemical Society 76 (1954) 6324–6329. The paper that made Daniel Arnon’s name; t..."
Paragraph 4 (14 words) [SHORT]: "Published in the same volume as the paper that led to Calvin’s Nobel prize."
Paragraph 5 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Reverse Krebs cycle K. V. Thimann, ‘The absorption of carbon dioxide in photosynthesis’, Science 88 (1938) 506–507. A beautiful short hypothesis from Kenneth Thimann, who more or less predicts the reverse Krebs cycle as the mechanism of CO 2 fixation in photosynthesis, just a year after Krebs propos..."
Paragraph 6 (56 words) [SHORT]: "D. I. Arnon, ‘Ferredoxin and photosynthesis’, Science 149 (1965) 1460–1470. Ferredoxin was discovered in the early 1960s and in this paper Arnon brought together an impressive set of experimental observations, ending with the teaser ‘Evidence for the participation of bacterial ferredoxin in bacteria..."
Paragraph 7 (51 words) [SHORT]: "M. C. Evans, B. B. Buchanan and D. I. Arnon, ‘A new ferredoxin-dependent carbon reduction cycle in a photosynthetic bacterium’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 55 (1966) 928–934. An all-time classic paper, which somehow remained controversial or ignored over the following quarter..."
Paragraph 8 (15 words) [SHORT]: "B. B. Buchanan, R. Sirevåg, G. Fuchs, R. N. Ivanovsky, Y. Igarashi, M. Ishii, F."
Paragraph 9 (34 words) [SHORT]: "R. Tabita and I. A. Berg, ‘The Arnon–Buchanan cycle: a retrospective, 1966– 2016’, Photosynthesis Research 134 (2017) 117–131. A fascinating compendium of recollections from the main protagonists of the reverse Krebs cycle, fifty years"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "248"
Paragraph 1 (18 words) [SHORT]: "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known."
Paragraph 2 (38 words) [SHORT]: "B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his friend and long-term colleague Bob Buchanan."
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "B. B. Buchanan, ‘Thioredoxin: an unexpected meeting place’, Photosynthesis Research 92 (2007) 145–148. Bob Buchanan’s account of the difficult relationship between Calvin and Arnon, and how Andrew Benson later bridged the intellectual gap."
Paragraph 4 (103 words): "The problems with peer review Don Braben, Scientific Freedom: The Elixir of Civilization (San Francisco, Stripe Press, 2020). A fine book that makes the case for rethinking how science is funded. Peer review is deeply conservative and tends to oppose toppling the status quo. Radical new ideas do exa..."
Paragraph 5 (79 words): "Ferredoxin and photorespiration J. Ormerod, ‘“Every dogma has its day”: a personal look at carbon metabolism in photosynthetic bacteria’, Photosynthesis Research 76 (2003) 135–143. Yes, I stole his phrase. A very personable account from an experimentalist and deep thinker, who started out doing mano..."
Paragraph 6 (79 words): "Y. Shomura, M. Taketa, H. Nakashima et al. , ‘Structural basis of the redox switches in the NAD + -reducing soluble [NiFe]-hydrogenase’, Science 357 (2017) 928–932. A neat paper, which shows that an H 2 -oxidising bacterium can survive exposure to oxygen by switching its hydrogenase enzymes to an in..."
Paragraph 7 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Widespread reverse Krebs cycle A. Mall, J. Sobotta, C. Huber et al ., ‘Reversibility of citrate synthase allows autotrophic growth of a thermophilic bacterium’, Science 359 (2018) 563–567. A"

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "249"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all."
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "So do dogmas fall."
Paragraph 3 (15 words) [SHORT]: "L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I."
Paragraph 4 (73 words): "A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive the TCA cycle backwards towards autotrophy’, Nature 592 (2021) 784–788. Another paper from Ivan Berg’s group, this time showing that high atmospheric CO 2 (as on the early Earth) tends to drive the normal oxidative cycle in reverse, to fix CO 2 . From being restricte..."
Paragraph 5 (53 words) [SHORT]: "I. A. Berg, ‘Ecological aspects on the distribution of different autotrophic CO 2 fixation pathways’, Applied and Environmental Microbiology 77 (2011) 1925– 1936. One of the pioneers of alternative CO 2 fixation pathways reflects on their distribution and ecology; now a little dated by his own recen..."
Paragraph 6 (71 words): "Chapter 3: From gases to life Discovery of black smoker vents J. B. Corliss, J. A. Baross and S. . Hoffman, ‘An hypothesis concerning the relationship between submarine hot springs and the origin of life on earth’, Oceanologica Acta Special Issue (1981) 0399-1784. Hot on the heels of the discovery o..."
Paragraph 7 (50 words) [SHORT]: "J. A. Baross and S. E. Hoffman, ‘Submarine hydrothermal vents and associated gradient environments as sites for the origin and evolution of life’, Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 15 (1985) 327–345. A serious wrestling with how steep chemical gradients in hydrothermal environments could p..."
Paragraph 8 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Discovering Hydrothermal Vents. A wealth of interesting information on the discovery of black smokers on the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute: https://www.whoi.edu/feature/history-hydrothermal-vents/index.html. WHOI commissioned the Alvin submersible in 1964, and have maintained it over nearly 60 ..."
Paragraph 9 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Reanalysis of early Earth hydrothermal systems W. Martin, J. Baross, D. Kelley and M. J. Russell, ‘Hydrothermal vents and the origin of life’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 805–814. A good overview of the different types of vent system and their roles at the origin of life, from two distingui..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "250"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems."
Paragraph 2 (43 words) [SHORT]: "N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excellent article that considers how the geological record constrains hydrothermal theories for the origin of life."
Paragraph 3 (28 words) [SHORT]: "N. T. Arndt and E. G. Nisbet, ‘Processes on the young Earth and the habitats of early life’, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 40 (2012) 521–49."
Paragraph 4 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Gives a good sense of how geologists’ understanding of the Hadean has shifted in recent decades; no longer is the early Earth thought of as a hellhole of boiling magma and asteroid impacts, but rather as a relatively tranquil waterworld."
Paragraph 5 (58 words) [SHORT]: "F. Westall, K. Hickman-Lewis, N. Hinman, P. Gautret, K. A. Campbell, J. G. Breheret, F. Foucher, A. Hubert, S. Sorieul, A. V. Dass, T. P. Kee, T. Georgelin and A. Brack, ‘A hydrothermal-sedimentary context for the origin of life’, Astrobiology 18 (2018) 259–293. A well-balanced overview of geologica..."
Paragraph 6 (86 words): "Mike Russell and Gunter Wächtershäuser G. Wächtershäuser, ‘Evolution of the first metabolic cycles’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 87 (1990) 200–204. One of the first papers to take the reverse Krebs cycle seriously as prebiotic chemistry, giving a detailed exposition of how it..."
Paragraph 7 (47 words) [SHORT]: "G. Wächtershäuser, ‘Groundworks for an evolutionary biochemistry: the iron– sulphur world’, Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology 58 (1992) 85– 201. An exhaustive, revolutionary thesis, detailing much of Wächtershäuser’s early thinking on an autotrophic origin of life. More of a whole book th..."
Paragraph 8 (77 words): "M. J. Russell and A. J. Hall, ‘The emergence of life from iron monosulphide bubbles at a submarine hydrothermal redox and pH front’, Journal of the Geological Society 154 (1997) 377–402. Mike Russell and Allan Hall had been writing papers on alkaline hydrothermal vents for nearly a decade at this po..."
Paragraph 9 (30 words) [SHORT]: "W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells’, Philosophical"

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "251"
Paragraph 1 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science."
Paragraph 2 (37 words) [SHORT]: "J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitly, in this case even including a photoshopped image of Russell as the renaissance man Erasmus."
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Quite a tribute."
Paragraph 4 (76 words): "Discovery of Lost City D. S. Kelley, J. A. Karson, D. K. Blackman, G. L. Früh-Green, D. A. Butterfield, M. D. Lilley, E. J. Olson, M. O. Schrenk, K. K. Roe, G. T. Lebon, P. Rivizzigno; AT3-60 Shipboard Party, ‘An off-axis hydrothermal vent field near the Mid- Atlantic Ridge at 30 degrees N’, Nature ..."
Paragraph 5 (24 words) [SHORT]: "D. S. Kelley, J. A. Karson, G. L. Früh-Green et al ., ‘A serpentinite-hosted ecosystem: the Lost City hydrothermal field,’ Science 307 (2005) 1428–1434."
Paragraph 6 (21 words) [SHORT]: "More on Lost City from Deborah Kelley and colleagues, linking the geology to the chemistry and microbiology of this iconic system."
Paragraph 7 (57 words) [SHORT]: "D. S. Kelley, ‘From the mantle to microbes: the Lost City hydro-thermal field’, Oceanography 18 (2005) 32–45. A personal piece by Deborah Kelley, who captained the Alvin submersible on that serendipitous discovery of Lost City in 2000. Richly illustrated and with an exciting early view of the signif..."
Paragraph 8 (118 words): "Terrestrial geothermal systems David W. Deamer, Assembling Life: How Can Life Begin on Earth and Other Habitable Planets? (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2019). David Deamer has worked on the origin of life over several decades and did pioneering work on lipid membranes and proto-cells, including ..."
Paragraph 9 (75 words): "A. Y. Mulkidjanian, A. Y. Bychkov, D. V. Dibrova, M. Y. Galperin, E. V. Koonin, ‘Origin of first cells at terrestrial, anoxic geothermal fields’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 109 (2012) E821–830. Armen Mulkidjanian is a distinguished bioenergeticist who has had some strikingly..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "252"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading."
Paragraph 2 (127 words): "J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a prominent chemist who has developed an impressive network of prebiotic chemistry to synthesise many of the core building blocks of life, including nucleotides,..."
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "J. Szostak, ‘How did life begin?’, Nature 557 (2018) S13–S15. Jack Szostak won the Nobel prize for his work on telomeres and since then has focused on the origin of life, producing many fine papers. He works closely with John Sutherland on prebiotic chemistry and has little sympathy with the idea of..."
Paragraph 4 (70 words): "This article includes the line: ‘Strikingly, many of the chemical intermediates on the way to RNA crystallize out of re action mixtures, self-purifying and potentially accumulating on the early Earth as organic minerals – reservoirs of material waiting to come to life when conditions change.’ This c..."
Paragraph 5 (69 words): "Protometabolism using life as a guide Christian De Duve, Singularities. Landmarks on the Pathways of Life (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2005). I didn’t mention de Duve’s thinking much in this book but I should have done. Like Morowitz, de Duve focused on how geochemistry could give rise to..."
Paragraph 6 (85 words): "M. Preiner, K. Igarashi, K. B. Muchowska, M. Yu, S. J. Varma, K. Kleinermanns, M. K. Nobu, Y. Kamagata, H. Tüysüz, J. Moran and W. F. Martin, ‘A hydrogen- dependent geochemical analogue of primordial carbon and energy metabolism’, Nature Ecology and Evolution 4 (2020) 534–542. Three different groups..."
Paragraph 7 (15 words) [SHORT]: "The immediate electron donor here is hydrogen, not raw iron – as happens in life."
Paragraph 8 (50 words) [SHORT]: "S. J. Varma, K. B. Muchowska, P. Chatelain and J. Moran, ‘Native iron reduces CO 2 to intermediates and end-products of the acetyl-CoA pathway’, Nature Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018) 1019–1024. Joseph Moran’s group is unusual in that they trained as synthetic chemists, yet are thinking from a bioche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "253"
Paragraph 1 (54 words) [SHORT]: "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."
Paragraph 2 (23 words) [SHORT]: "K. B. Muchowska, S. J. Varma and J. Moran, ‘Synthesis and breakdown of universal metabolic precursors promoted by iron’, Nature 569 (2019) 104–107."
Paragraph 3 (67 words): "Some wild loops around the Krebs cycle driven by glyoxylate, a two-carbon intermediate that ‘short-circuits’ the Krebs cycle in plants and some bacteria (the glyoxylate cycle was also discovered by Krebs, working with Hans Kornberg and published in Nature in 1957). I’m not sure how close to life’s c..."
Paragraph 4 (115 words): "M. Ralser, ‘An appeal to magic? The discovery of a non-enzymatic metabolism and its role in the origins of life’, Biochemical Journal 475 (2018) 2577–2592. An expert on metabolic biochemistry in health, Markus Ralser has published a number of important papers on how metabolic pathways arose before g..."
Paragraph 5 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Michael Madigan, Kelly Bender, Daniel Buckley, W. Matthew Sattley and David Stahl, Brock Biology of Microorganisms , 15th edn (London, Pearson, 2018). One of the few microbiology textbooks that grapples in a serious way with the origin of life. Given the parallels between vent chemistry and microbia..."
Paragraph 6 (54 words) [SHORT]: "H. Hartman, ‘Speculations on the origin and evolution of metabolism’, Journal of Molecular Evolution 4 (1975) 359–70. An old but still penetrating paper, one of the first to think through metabolic chemistry starting from CO 2 in terms of the Krebs cycle, not so long after the early papers on the re..."
Paragraph 7 (81 words): "The physiology of LUCA M. C. Weiss, F. L. Sousa, N. Mrnjavac, S. Neukirchen, M. Roettger, S. Nelson- Sathi and W. F. Martin, ‘The physiology and habitat of the last universal common ancestor’, Nature Microbiology 1 (2016) 16116. A controversial paper that attempts to tack around the knotty problem o..."
Paragraph 8 (26 words) [SHORT]: "While some details have been decried, the paper reinforces the idea that LUCA lived from H 2 and CO 2 using proton gradients and iron–sulfur proteins."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "254"
Paragraph 1 (92 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."
Paragraph 2 (55 words) [SHORT]: "F. L. Sousa, T. Thiergart, G. Landan, S. Nelson-Sathi, I. A. C. Pereira, J. F. Allen, N. Lane and W. F. Martin, ‘Early bioenergetic evolution’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 368 (2013) 20130088. A detailed paper that attempts to constrain the earliest steps of evolution in terms ..."
Paragraph 3 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Acetyl CoA pathway M. J. Russell and W. Martin, ‘The rocky roots of the acetyl-CoA pathway’, Trends in Biochemical Sciences 29 (2004) 358–363. A little gem of a paper, which points to the ubiquity of metal ion clusters, notably iron–sulfur clusters, in the most ancient metabolic pathways."
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "G. Fuchs, ‘Alternative pathways of carbon dioxide fixation: insights into the early evolution of life?’, Annual Review of Microbiology 65 (2011) 631–658."
Paragraph 5 (51 words) [SHORT]: "There are only six known pathways of CO 2 fixation, and this authoritative and detailed paper from Georg Fuchs (who had a hand in discovering three of them) considers what they say about the earliest stages of life. In essence, they point to the centrality of both acetyl CoA and ferredoxin."
Paragraph 6 (65 words): "W. Nitschke, S. E. McGlynn, J. Milner-White and M. J. Russell, ‘On the antiquity of metalloenzymes and their substrates in bioenergetics’, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Bioenergetics 1827 (2013) 871–881. Wolfgang Nitschke trained as a physicist before turning to molecular biology. He has profound in..."
Paragraph 7 (37 words) [SHORT]: "Harold Morowitz and the reverse Krebs cycle Harold J. Morowitz, Energy Flow in Biology (New York, Academic Press, 1968). A classic work, where Morowitz introduces the idea that energy flows, matter cycles. Difficult and mathematical but worthwhile."
Paragraph 8 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Eric Smith and Harold J. Morowitz, The Origin and Nature of Life on Earth: The Emergence of the Fourth Geosphere (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2016). A magisterial volume, and fitting final testament of Morowitz, written with his long-term collaborator, the equally brilliant Eric Smith. De..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "255"
Paragraph 1 (25 words) [SHORT]: "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive."
Paragraph 2 (49 words) [SHORT]: "J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213. A fine short piece that is serious but accessible, with an enjoyable title that puns on thermodynamics and Darwin’s Descent of Man ."
Paragraph 3 (73 words): "Leslie Orgel and an appeal to magic L. Orgel, ‘Self-organizing biochemical cycles’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 97 (2000) 12503–12507. Orgel wrote this paper as a direct refutation of Morowitz, describing the idea of self-organising cycles as ‘an appeal to magic’. He warmed t..."
Paragraph 4 (91 words): "Nucleotide synthesis using life as a guide S. A. Harrison and N. Lane, ‘Life as a guide to prebiotic nucleotide synthesis’, Nature Communications 9 (2018) 5176–5177. Stuart Harrison did his PhD in my lab and is now working with me as a post-doc. This little paper laid out our ideas for how nucleotid..."
Paragraph 5 (19 words) [SHORT]: "Magic surfaces G. D. Cody, N. Z. Boctor, R. M. Hazen, J. A. Brandes, H. J. Morowitz, H. S."
Paragraph 6 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Yodor Jr, ‘Geochemical roots of autotrophic carbon fixation: hydrothermal experiments in the system citric acid, H 2 O-(±FeS)-(±NiS)’, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 65 (2001) 3557–3576. Early work on the propensity of iron- sulfide minerals to catalyse the chemistry of the Krebs cycle from George ..."
Paragraph 7 (47 words) [SHORT]: "E. Camprubi, S. F. Jordan, R. Vasiliadou and N. Lane, ‘Iron catalysis at the origin of life’, IUBMB Life 69 (2017) 373–381. A theoretical chemistry paper that details the reverse Krebs cycle (or rather, line) as we imagine it occurring across the surface of semiconducting iron–nickel–sulfur minerals..."
Paragraph 8 (50 words) [SHORT]: "Methanogens as a guide R. K. Thauer, A.-K. Kaster, H. Seedorf, W. Buckel and R. Hedderich, ‘Methanogenic archaea: ecologically relevant differences in energy conservation’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 579–591. A treasure-trove of data and mechanisms on the energetics of making a living at t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "256"
Paragraph 1 (75 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."
Paragraph 2 (66 words): "pH gradients N. Lane, J. F. Allen and W. Martin, ‘How did LUCA make a living? Chemiosmosis in the origin of life’, BioEssays 32 (2010) 271–280. Wrestling with the problems of how and when chemiosmotic coupling might have arisen in early cells. In retrospect I think we focused too much attention on A..."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "N. Lane, ‘Why are cells powered by proton gradients?’, Nature Education 3"
Paragraph 4 (41 words) [SHORT]: "(2010) 18. A concise account of the problem and possible solutions, as part of a series of really valuable short articles aimed at students and a general scientific readership. Do take a look at Scitable , home of this educational resource."
Paragraph 5 (40 words) [SHORT]: "N. Lane and W. Martin, ‘The origin of membrane bioenergetics’, Cell 151 (2012) 1406–1416. A paper with some important ideas, if I say so myself, forged in the exciting crucible of discussion with Bill Martin. I’m proud of this paper."
Paragraph 6 (15 words) [SHORT]: "B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi, C. Watson, L. Dartnell, J. Ward, J. R. G."
Paragraph 7 (58 words) [SHORT]: "Evans and N. Lane, ‘An origin-of-life reactor to simulate alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Journal of Molecular Evolution 79 (2014) 213–227. Our early attempts to build an ‘origin-of-life’ reactor, many of which failed. This was a mixed bag of a paper that included some of the highlights of a system th..."
Paragraph 8 (80 words): "N. Lane, ‘Proton gradients at the origin of life’, BioEssays 39 (2017) 1600217. A riposte to the criticisms of Baz Jackson, a fine bioenergeticist, who sadly died of cancer soon afterwards. Towards the end of his life, he took an interest in the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents, raisin..."
Paragraph 9 (75 words): "R. Vasiliadou, N. Dimov, N. Szita, S. Jordan and N. Lane, ‘Possible mechanisms of CO 2 reduction by H 2 via prebiotic vectorial electrochemistry’, Royal Society Interface Focus 9 (2019) 20190073. A detailed theoretical paper with some experimental results, showing that protons can cross iron–sulfur ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "257"
Paragraph 1 (17 words) [SHORT]: "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M."
Paragraph 2 (69 words): "A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton gradients across semiconducting barriers really can promote the transfer of elec..."
Paragraph 3 (69 words): "Formation of protocells in hydrothermal vents T. M. McCollom, G. Ritter and B. R. Simoneit, ‘Lipid synthesis under hydrothermal conditions by Fischer–Tropsch-type reactions’, Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 29 (1999) 153–166. Starting with formate at high pressure and high temperature, M..."
Paragraph 4 (68 words): "S. F. Jordan, H. Rammu, I. Zheludev, A. M. Hartley, A. Marechal and N. Lane, ‘Promotion of protocell self-assembly from mixed amphiphiles at the origin of life’, Nature Ecology & Evolution 3 (2019) 1705–1714. Rather surprisingly, we found that alkaline hydrothermal conditions actually favour the spo..."
Paragraph 5 (60 words): "S. F. Jordan, E. Nee and N. Lane, ‘Isoprenoids enhance the stability of fatty acid membranes at the emergence of life potentially leading to an early lipid divide’, Royal Society Interface Focus 9 (2019) 20190067. Amazingly, protocells with membranes composed mostly of fatty acids (like bacteria) te..."
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Something to do with curvature."
Paragraph 7 (63 words): "S. F. Jordan, I. Ioannou, H. Rammu, A. Halpern, L. K. Bogart, M. Ahn, R. Vasiliadou, J. Christodoulou, A. Maréchal and N. Lane, ‘Spontaneous assembly of redox-active iron–sulfur clusters at low concentrations of cysteine’, Nature Communications 12 (2021) 5925. Our own demonstration that the biologic..."
Paragraph 8 (89 words): "T. West, V. Sojo, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The origin of heredity in protocells’, Philosphical Transactions of the Royal Society B 372 (2017) 20160419. I think this is an important paper, but it has stayed under the radar. We show that positive feedbacks between organic molecules (fatty acids a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "258"
Paragraph 1 (52 words) [SHORT]: "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."
Paragraph 2 (71 words): "Energy flow in hydrothermal vents J. P. Amend and T. M. McCollom, ‘Energetics of biomolecule synthesis on early Earth’, in L. Zaikowski et al. (eds), Chemical Evolution II: From the Origins of Life to Modern Society (American Chemical Society, 2009) pp. 63–94. I still find this mind-blowing. Which i..."
Paragraph 3 (76 words): "J. P. Amend, D. E. LaRowe, T. M. McCollom and E. L. Shock, ‘The energetics of organic synthesis inside and outside the cell’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 368 (2013) 20120255. More on the thermodynamics of prebiotic chemistry in hydrothermal systems from Amend and McCollom, with..."
Paragraph 4 (15 words) [SHORT]: "W. F. Martin, F. L. Sousa and N. Lane, ‘Energy at life’s origin’, Science 344"
Paragraph 5 (21 words) [SHORT]: "(2014) 1092–1093. A short take on why life itself points to hydrothermal vents as the site of its origin. Occam’s razor."
Paragraph 6 (59 words) [SHORT]: "A. Whicher, E. Camprubi, S. Pinna, B. Herschy and N. Lane, ‘Acetyl phosphate as a primordial energy currency at the origin of life’, Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 48 (2018) 159–179. Our first experiments on acetyl phosphate as a prebiotic energy currency. It works quite well at phospho..."
Paragraph 7 (69 words): "S. Pinna, C. Kunz, S. Harrison, S. F. Jordan, J. Ward, F. Werner and N. Lane, ‘A prebiotic basis for ATP as the universal energy currency’, BioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.06.463298 (2021). Amazingly, acetyl phosphate is unique in that it will phosphorylate ADP to ATP in water, but can’t do ..."
Paragraph 8 (54 words) [SHORT]: "Chapter 4: Revolutions Cambrian explosion Stephen Jay Gould, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the History of Nature (New York, W. W. Norton, 1989). A heady book that must have drawn a generation of young minds into palaeontology. But it has not weathered so well, and pushes its central thesis a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "259"
Paragraph 1 (58 words) [SHORT]: "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."
Paragraph 2 (34 words) [SHORT]: "M. A. S. McMenamin, ‘Cambrian chordates and vetulicolians’, Geosciences 9 (2019) 354. A useful update on the early Cambrian chordates, which frustratingly lacks even estimated dates (you’ll have to look into the references cited)."
Paragraph 3 (117 words): "J. Y. Chen, D. Y. Huang and C. W. Li, ‘An early Cambrian craniate-like chordate’, Nature 402 (1999) 518–522. A flavour of new discoveries of early chordates in the Maotianshan Shale in China; observes coyly that ‘These findings will add to the debate on the evolutionary transition from invertebrate ..."
Paragraph 4 (52 words) [SHORT]: "Oxygen Donald E. Canfield, Oxygen: A Four Billion Year History (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2014). A fine book by one of the leading protagonists of early- Earth history, rolling up his sleeves on how we can know anything at all about the composition of the air and oceans billions of year..."
Paragraph 5 (61 words): "Nick Lane, Oxygen: The Molecule that Made the World (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2002). My own take on the evolutionary history of oxygen, written in 2002. Given how much has changed in two decades it hasn’t weathered badly, though I no longer agree with all that I wrote. (Others do and think I..."
Paragraph 6 (66 words): "Andrew H. Knoll, Life on a Young Planet: The First Three Billion Years of Life on Earth (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2003). An authoritative, personable and engaging first-hand take on the difficulty of knowing anything about the world as it was billions of years ago. Andy Knoll combines ..."
Paragraph 7 (34 words) [SHORT]: "N. J. Butterfield, ‘Oxygen, animals and oceanic ventilation: an alternative view’, Geobiology 7 (2009) 1–7. Quite a diatribe against the lazy ascription of dramatic environmental change to the simple gas oxygen. A valuable corrective."
Paragraph 8 (25 words) [SHORT]: "O. Judson, ‘The energy expansions of evolution’, Nature Ecology and Evolution 1 (2017) 0138. A sweeping take from Olivia Judson on how a succession of"

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "260"
Paragraph 1 (19 words) [SHORT]: "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire."
Paragraph 2 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as electron acceptors: a historical review’, Frontiers in Microbiology 9 (2018) 401."
Paragraph 3 (39 words) [SHORT]: "A clear historical review of one of the most important advances in bioenergetics, nay, in all microbiology, by two great pioneers of the field who had been wrestling with the problem for the best part of half a century."
Paragraph 4 (67 words): "Margaret Dayhoff and Lynn Margulis M. O. Dayhoff, R. V. Eck, E. R. Lippincott and C. Sagan, ‘Venus: atmospheric evolution’, Science 155 (1967) 556–558. One of Margaret Dayhoff’s collaborations with Carl Sagan, calculating the equilibrium composition of Venus’s atmosphere, and ruling out the possibil..."
Paragraph 5 (26 words) [SHORT]: "R. V. Eck and M. O. Dayhoff, ‘Evolution of the structure of ferredoxin based on living relics of primitive amino acid sequences’, Science 152 (1966) 363–366."
Paragraph 6 (11 words) [SHORT]: "One of my favourite papers, an utter masterpiece of scientific deduction."
Paragraph 7 (50 words) [SHORT]: "R. M. Schwartz and M. O. Dayhoff, ‘Origins of prokaryotes, eukaryotes, mitochondria, and chloroplasts. A perspective is derived from protein and nucleic acid sequence data’, Science 199 (1978) 395–403. Margaret Dayhoff getting into her stride, dealing with the origin of just about everything that ma..."
Paragraph 8 (52 words) [SHORT]: "J. Barnabas, R. M. Schwartz and M. O. Dayhoff, ‘Evolution of major metabolic innovations in the Precambrian’, Origins of Life 12 (1982) 81–91. A late classic from Margaret Dayhoff, sketching the deep roots of the tree of life, and supporting the inferences of Lynn Margulis on bacterial ancestry of m..."
Paragraph 9 (13 words) [SHORT]: "L. Sagan, ‘On the origin of mitosing cells’, Journal of Theoretical Biology 14"
Paragraph 10 (45 words) [SHORT]: "(1967) 225–274. A wonderful paper that reconceptualised the evolution of cells on a planetary scale. Revelatory and justly famous, if not correct about everything (as is normal in science). Note that Lynn Margulis had recently divorced Carl Sagan, hence the name Sagan on this paper."
Paragraph 11 (56 words) [SHORT]: "N. Lane, ‘Serial endosymbiosis or singular event at the origin of eukaryotes?’, Journal of Theoretical Biology 434 (2017) 58–67. My own appraisal of Lynn Margulis’s contribution to cell evolution, written for a special fiftieth anniversary issue of the journal in which she published her classic 1967..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "261"
Paragraph 1 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."
Paragraph 2 (25 words) [SHORT]: "S. E. McGlynn, G. L. Chadwick, C. P. Kempes and V. J. Orphan, ‘Single cell activity reveals direct electron transfer in methanotrophic consortia’, Nature 526"
Paragraph 3 (33 words) [SHORT]: "(2015) 531–535. A beautiful paper harnessing stunning technology, which shows that tight-knot consortia of cells form clumps with regular numbers of specific types of cell (an optimal stoichiometry), which transfer electrons between cells."
Paragraph 4 (43 words) [SHORT]: "E. Libby, L. Hébert-Dufresne, S.-R. Hosseini and A. Wagner, ‘Syntrophy emerges spontaneously in complex metabolic systems’, PLoS Computational Biology 15 (2019) e1007169. A clever paper showing how metabolic syntrophy (mutual reliance) can arise simply through mutations causing the partial degenerat..."
Paragraph 5 (66 words): "Paul G. Falkowski, Life’s Engines: How Microbes made the Earth Habitable (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2015). An engaging take on the history of life from the point of view of life’s engines – both the protein machines and the bacterial consortia that power evolution. Aimed at the general ..."
Paragraph 6 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Dawn of photosynthesis J. Allen and W. Martin, ‘Out of thin air’, Nature 445 (2007) 610–612. A sparkling piece that elaborates on John Allen’s ‘redox switch’ hypothesis for how the Z-scheme that enabled oxygenic photosynthesis came to be."
Paragraph 7 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Nick Lane, Life Ascending: The Ten Great Inventions of Evolution (London, Profile Books and New York, W. W. Norton, 2009). If you’re confused by my references to the Z-scheme here, then try my chapter on photosynthesis in Life Ascending , where I devote a chapter to its evolution, focusing on John A..."
Paragraph 8 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Nick Lane, Building with Light: Primo Levi, Science and Writing (Centro internazionale di studi Primo Levi, 2012). Available here: www.primolevi.it/en/primo-levi-science-writer. An unusual story, told in the piece itself, at the invitation of Levi’s son, Renzo. Primo Levi was a wonderful writer and ..."
Paragraph 9 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Tim Lenton and Andrew Watson, Revolutions that Made the Earth (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2013). A detailed overview of how the Earth system (or Gaia) can flip from one stable state to another as conditions change, sometimes abruptly. The intellectual son and grandson of James Lovelock (using ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 13 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "262"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak."
Paragraph 2 (18 words) [SHORT]: "H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D."
Paragraph 3 (82 words): "Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018) 1556–1562. The Bristol group comprises some of the best phylogeneticists in the world today, and this paper uses sophisticated methods to uncover a wealth o..."
Paragraph 4 (12 words) [SHORT]: "T. Oliver, P. Sánchez-Baracaldo, A. W. Larkum, A. W. Rutherford and T."
Paragraph 5 (77 words): "Cardona, ‘Time-resolved comparative molecular evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis’, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Bioenergetics 1862 (2021) 148400. I can’t help but cite this radically different take on the early origin of oxygenic photosynthesis by the fearless Tanai Cardona and some distinguished..."
Paragraph 6 (61 words): "Shurum conundrum G. A. Shields, ‘Carbon and carbon isotope mass balance in the Neoproterozoic Earth system’, Emerging Topics in Life Sciences 2 (2018) 257–265. Mass balance might sound dull but if we can’t add up then nothing makes sense. Graham Shields uses it as the basis for an important reanalys..."
Paragraph 7 (37 words) [SHORT]: "G. A. Shields, B. J. W. Mills, M. Zhu, T. D. Raub, S. J. Daines and T. M. Lenton ‘Unique Neoproterozoic carbon isotope excursions sustained by coupled evaporite dissolution and pyrite burial’, Nature Geoscience 12 (2019) 823–827."
Paragraph 8 (31 words) [SHORT]: "Graham Shields’s thinking about the role of sulfate in the Neoproterozoic oxygenation and the Cambrian explosion makes some explicit predictions about the burial of iron pyrites, which seem to be true."
Paragraph 9 (16 words) [SHORT]: "S. K. Sahoo, N. J. Planavsky, G. Jiang, B. Kendall, J. D. Owens, X. Wang, X."
Paragraph 10 (40 words) [SHORT]: "Shi, A. D. Anbar and T. W. Lyons, ‘Oceanic oxygenation events in the anoxic Ediacaran ocean’, Geobiology 14 (2016) 457–468. A fine-grained geological analysis of the precise timing of oxygenation events during the Neoproterozoic and into the Cambrian. Exquisite detail."
Paragraph 11 (22 words) [SHORT]: "G. Shields-Zhou and L. Och, ‘The case for a Neoproterozoic oxygenation event: geochemical evidence and biological consequences’, GSA Today 21 (2011) 4–11."
Paragraph 12 (24 words) [SHORT]: "A marshalling of the evidence that the rise in oxygen in the late Neoproterozoic was linked to the Cambrian explosion. Not a straightforward case!"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "263"
Paragraph 1 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."
Paragraph 2 (63 words): "S. D. Evans, I. V. Hughes, J. G. Gehling and M. L. Droser, ‘Discovery of the oldest bilaterian from the Ediacaran of South Australia’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 7845–7850. Trace fossils of small bilaterians (a few millimetres in length) crawling through the mud a..."
Paragraph 3 (55 words) [SHORT]: "William F. Martin, Aloysius G. M. Tielens and Marek Mentel, Mitochondria and Anaerobic Energy Metabolism in Eukaryotes: Biochemistry and Evolution (Berlin, De Gruyter, 2020). A comprehensive treatment of the biochemistry and physiology of eukaryotes (including animals) that live in the absence or ne..."
Paragraph 4 (16 words) [SHORT]: "S. Song, V. Starunov, X. Bailly, C. Ruta, P. Kerner, A. J. M. Cornelissen and G."
Paragraph 5 (51 words) [SHORT]: "Balavoine, ‘Globins in the marine annelid Platynereis dumerilii shed new light on hemoglobin evolution in bilaterians’, BMC Evolutionary Biology 20 (2020) 165. Shows that the ‘Ur-bilaterian’ (the common ancestor of all bilaterally symmetrical animals) already had at least five haemoglobin genes, lon..."
Paragraph 6 (65 words): "Forked Krebs cycle Laurence A. Moran, Robert Horton, Gray Scrimgeour and Marc Perry, Principles of Biochemistry , 5th edn (London, Pearson, 2011). One of the few biochemistry textbooks that deals with evolution in a serious way. Larry Moran also writes an excellent, hugely informative and good-humou..."
Paragraph 7 (45 words) [SHORT]: "C. Da Costa and E. Galembeck, ‘The evolution of the Krebs cycle: a promising subject for meaningful learning of biochemistry’, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Education 44 (2016) 288–296. A thoughtful and balanced piece that should be read by everyone who ever teaches the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 8 (77 words): "D. G. Ryan, C. Frezza and L. A. J. O’Neill, ‘TCA cycle signalling and the evolution of eukaryotes’, Current Opinion in Biotechnology 68 (2021) 72–88. I read this paper after finishing the book and would have said more about it if had I spotted it earlier. Argues that Krebs-cycle intermediates were c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "264"
Paragraph 1 (72 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."
Paragraph 2 (16 words) [SHORT]: "Because plants can generate ATP in their chloroplasts, they often use their mitochondria as biosynthetic organelles."
Paragraph 3 (56 words) [SHORT]: "Chapter 5: To the dark side Oncogenes and tumour-suppressor genes Robert A. Weinberg, One Renegade Cell: The Quest for the Origins of Cancer (Science Masters Series) (New York, Basic Books, 1998). A classic text, which conveys the selfishness of cancer cells and the multiple genetic hits that turn a..."
Paragraph 4 (69 words): "D. Hanahan and R. A. Weinberg, ‘The hallmarks of cancer’, Cell 100 (2000) 57– 70 . The kind of paper that gives journals like Cell their high ‘impact factor’: this paper has nearly 40,000 citations, and its successor published eleven years later (‘Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation’, Cell 144 ..."
Paragraph 5 (79 words): "Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes. ‘A collection of research and related content from the ICGC/TCGA consortium on whole-genome sequencing and the integrative analysis of cancer’, Nature Special (5 February 2020). Mostly open access articles, including a ‘flagship article’ with the same title; but..."
Paragraph 6 (102 words): "Robin Hesketh, Betrayed by Nature: The War on Cancer (New York, Palgrave Macmillan, 2012). An enjoyable book that tackles the science of cancer in a serious but good-humoured way, aimed at those who need to know more. This is as clear an account of the genetic basis of cancer as you are likely to re..."
Paragraph 7 (75 words): "Evidence against mutations driving cancer P. Rous, ‘Surmise and fact on the nature of cancer’, Nature 183 (1959) 1357– 1361. Quite a diatribe against the somatic mutation theory of cancer, written in the same year that Rous received the Nobel prize for his work on viruses as a cause of cancer, and w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "265"
Paragraph 1 (182 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."
Paragraph 2 (46 words) [SHORT]: "A. M. Soto and C. Sonnenschein, ‘The somatic mutation theory of cancer: growing problems with the paradigm?’, BioEssays 26 (2004) 1097–1107. After pointing out a few of the problems, offers an alternative hypothesis dubbed the ‘tissue organisation field theory’. None of these ideas are mutually excl..."
Paragraph 3 (16 words) [SHORT]: "The fact that one idea does not explain everything does not mean it is completely wrong."
Paragraph 4 (38 words) [SHORT]: "Robin Holliday, Understanding Ageing (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995). A really fine book that gives an excellent overall view of ageing, including the evidence against an accumulation of somatic mutations driving ageing or age-related diseases such as cancer."
Paragraph 5 (55 words) [SHORT]: "C. A. Rebbeck, A. M. Leroi and A. Burt, ‘Mitochondrial capture by a transmissible cancer’, Science 331 (2011) 303. A bit of an oddity, this paper, and very wacky. Some cancers can be transmitted through bites, especially between dogs, wolves and coyotes; but to take hold, tumours often need to steal..."
Paragraph 6 (27 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg H. A. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. I cited this in Chapter 1 as well."
Paragraph 7 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs at his most gentlemanly in highlighting his mentor’s greatest accomplishments, while finding kind words to allay Warburg’s less appealing side."
Paragraph 8 (25 words) [SHORT]: "A. M. Otto, ‘Warburg effect(s)—a biographical sketch of Otto Warburg and his impacts on tumor metabolism’, Cancer & Metabolism 4 (2016) 5. A lively and"

=== NEW SECTION: 11 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "266"
Paragraph 1 (19 words) [SHORT]: "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer."
Paragraph 2 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s worth another mention here for Kamen’s description of meeting Warburg, on his postwar visit to the United States, at the behe..."
Paragraph 3 (35 words) [SHORT]: "G. M. Weisz, ‘Dr Otto Heinrich Warburg – survivor of ethical storms’, Rambam Maimonides Medical Journal 6 (2015) e0008. An interesting short piece that asks how Warburg survived the Nazi period despite his Jewish ancestry."
Paragraph 4 (63 words): "John N. Prebble, Searching for a Mechanism: A History of Cell Bioenergetics (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2019). Another fine piece of historical science from John Prebble, including an account of the long dispute between Warburg and David Keilin, which arguably cost the latter a Nobel prize tha..."
Paragraph 5 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Michael S. Rosenwald, ‘Hitler’s mother was “the only person he genuinely loved.” Cancer killed her decades before he became a monster’, Washington Post , 20 April 2017. An interesting partial explanation of why Hitler had such a fear of cancer, allowing Warburg to survive in Germany, as well as faci..."
Paragraph 6 (54 words) [SHORT]: "Govindjee, ‘On the requirement of minimum number of four versus eight quanta of light for the evolution of one molecule of oxygen in photosynthesis: a historical note’, Photosynthesis Research 59 (1999) 249–254. Fascinating history from Govindjee in Photosynthesis Research again, this time of the fe..."
Paragraph 7 (58 words) [SHORT]: "E. Höxtermann, ‘A comment on Warburg’s early understanding of biocatalysis’, Photosynthesis Research 92 (2007) 121–127. Valuable historical context, giving insight into why Warburg was so hostile to more complex ideas of enzymatic catalysis, both for respiration and photosynthesis. He ended up with ..."
Paragraph 8 (16 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg and his critics on cancer Otto Warburg, Über den Stoffwechsel der Tumoren (Berlin, Springer, 1926)."
Paragraph 9 (36 words) [SHORT]: "Translated as The Metabolism of Tumours (London, Arnold Constable, 1930). Warburg’s first publication on cancer, showing extreme accumulation of lactate in cancer cells, which became the basis for his work on cancer over the following decades."
Paragraph 10 (29 words) [SHORT]: "O. Warburg, ‘On the origin of cancer cells’, Science 123 (1956) 309–314. A searing piece that I quote from in some detail in my chapter. Worth taking a look"

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "267"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "at the original for the full context."
Paragraph 2 (65 words): "Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and translated into English with the help of Wa..."
Paragraph 3 (57 words) [SHORT]: "B. Chance, ‘Profiles and legacies. Was Warburg right? Or was it that simple?’, Cancer Biology & Therapy 4 125–(2005) 126. A withering critique of Warburg from Britton Chance, one of the few biochemists who could match Warburg’s inventive skill in the laboratory (and an Olympic gold medallist in sail..."
Paragraph 4 (67 words): "S. Weinhouse, ‘The Warburg hypothesis fifty years later’, Zeitschrift für Krebsforschung 87 (1976) 115–126. A detailed critique of Warburg’s theory written fifty years later, after Warburg’s death. Weinhouse and Chance were arguably more responsible than anyone for the collapse in popularity of Warb..."
Paragraph 5 (28 words) [SHORT]: "Reinterpretation of the Warburg effect M. G. Vander Heiden, L. C. Cantley and C. B. Thompson, ‘Understanding the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell proliferation’, Science 324"
Paragraph 6 (56 words) [SHORT]: "(2009) 1029–1033. A masterful paper, which to my mind captures the key to the Warburg effect, which Warburg himself had missed: growth. For reasons that I discuss in my chapter, mild suppression of respiration with age produces a metabolic rewiring leading to a growth phenotype. We put on weight and..."
Paragraph 7 (61 words): "P. S. Ward and C. B. Thompson, ‘Metabolic reprogramming: a cancer hallmark even Warburg did not anticipate’, Cancer Cell 21 (2012) 297–308. Craig Thompson again, this time discussing evidence that metabolites such as Krebs- cycle intermediates ‘can be oncogenic by altering cell signalling and blocki..."
Paragraph 8 (62 words): "D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondria and cancer’, Nature Reviews Cancer 12 (2012) 685–698. I neglected to say much about Doug Wallace’s work on cancer in this chapter, in part because I discussed his ideas at some length in Chapter 6. I hardly need to say that he was one of the strongest voices calling atte..."
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "An ancient switch"

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "268"
Paragraph 1 (57 words) [SHORT]: "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."
Paragraph 2 (97 words): "D. G. Ryan, M. P. Murphy, C. Frezza, H. A. Prag, E. T. Chouchani, L. A. O’Neill and E. L. Mills, ‘Coupling Krebs cycle metabolites to signalling in immunity and cancer’, Nature Metabolism 1 (2019) 16–33. Regrettably, I barely touched on the immune system in this book. But Krebs-cycle intermediates a..."
Paragraph 3 (77 words): "O’Neill, ‘Mitochondria are the powerhouses of immunity’, Nature Immunology 18 (2017) 488–498.) C. Frezza and E. Gottlieb, ‘Mitochondria in cancer: not just innocent bystanders’, Seminars in Cancer Biology 19 (2009) 4–11. A fine historically grounded overview of the Warburg effect, with a balanced ap..."
Paragraph 4 (31 words) [SHORT]: "C. Frezza, ‘Metabolism and cancer: the future is now’, British Journal of Cancer 122 (2020) 133–135. A call to arms from Christian Frezza. Time the metabolic basis of cancer became mainstream."
Paragraph 5 (72 words): "Hypoxia in cancer E. T. Chouchani, V. R. Pell, E. Gaude et al. , ‘Ischaemic accumulation of succinate controls reperfusion injury through mitochondrial ROS’, Nature 515 (2014) 431–435. A barnstorming paper that finally makes sense of reperfusion injury, from heart attacks to organ transplants. Not e..."
Paragraph 6 (70 words): "I. H. Jain, L. Zazzeron, R. Goli et al. , ‘Hypoxia as a therapy for mitochondrial disease’, Science 352 (2016) 54–61. A revelatory paper from Vamsi Mootha and colleagues. Strong evidence that reactive oxygen species really do cause problems in damaged mitochondria, which can be offset by living in a..."
Paragraph 7 (47 words) [SHORT]: "Glutamine in cancer H. Eagle, ‘Nutrition needs of mammalian cells in tissue culture’, Science 122 (1955) 501–514. One of the first papers to point to the addiction of cancer cells to glutamine, in this case in HeLa cells. On that count, I feel obliged to point you"

=== NEW SECTION: 15 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "269"
Paragraph 1 (28 words) [SHORT]: "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong."
Paragraph 2 (12 words) [SHORT]: "S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S."
Paragraph 3 (34 words) [SHORT]: "Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the differential use of glucose and glutamine in cell proliferation as revealed by synchronized HeLa cells’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 108 (2011) 21069–21074."
Paragraph 4 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Proof that cancer cells can still grow without glucose but won’t if deprived of glutamine. They need mitochondria. HeLa cells again."
Paragraph 5 (41 words) [SHORT]: "S. Ochoa, ‘Isocitrate dehydrogenase and carbon dioxide fixation’, Journal of Biological Chemistry 159 (1945) 243–244. A paper for the ages from the great Spanish biochemist Severo Ochoa, showing that animals can fix CO 2 by reversing bits of the Krebs cycle."
Paragraph 6 (52 words) [SHORT]: "A. Mullen, W. Wheaton, E. Jin et al. , ‘Reductive carboxylation supports growth in tumour cells with defective mitochondria’, Nature 481 (2012) 385–388. A major paper which showed for the first time that parts of the Krebs cycle can operate in reverse in cancer, fixing CO 2 to generate citrate from ..."
Paragraph 7 (37 words) [SHORT]: "Should have been less of a revelation, given that CO 2 fixation in animals and the reverse Krebs cycle were not exactly news. Critically, this only occurred in tumour cells with defective mitochondria, preventing normal forwards flux."
Paragraph 8 (17 words) [SHORT]: "S. M. Fendt, E. L. Bell, M. A. Keibler, B. A. Olenchock, J. R. Mayers, T. M."
Paragraph 9 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Wasylenko, N. I. Vokes, L. Guarente, M. G. Vander Heiden and G."
Paragraph 10 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Stephanopoulos, ‘Reductive glutamine metabolism is a function of the α- ketoglutarate to citrate ratio in cells’, Nature Communications 4 (2013) 2236."
Paragraph 11 (26 words) [SHORT]: "Ratios matter in biochemistry. Which way will the Krebs cycle operate? You can predict on the basis of how much α-ketoglutarate there is relative to citrate."
Paragraph 12 (17 words) [SHORT]: "A. R. Mullen, Z. Hu, X. Shi, L. Jiang, L. K. Boroughs, Z. Kovacs, R. Boriack, D."
Paragraph 13 (75 words): "Rakheja, L. B. Sullivan, W. M. Linehan, N. S. Chandel and R. J. DeBerardinis, ‘Oxidation of alpha-ketoglutarate is required for reductive carboxylation in cancer cells with mitochondrial defects’, Cell Reports 7 (2014) 1679–1690. Complications! To convert α-ketoglutarate to citrate requires oxidisin..."
Paragraph 14 (52 words) [SHORT]: "NADPH-linked power drivers L. A. Sazanov and J. B. Jackson, ‘Proton-translocating transhydrogenase and NAD- and NADP-linked isocitrate dehydrogenases operate in a substrate cycle which contributes to fine regulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle activity in mitochondria’, FEBS Letters 344 (1994) 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "270"
Paragraph 1 (80 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."
Paragraph 2 (44 words) [SHORT]: "Sirtuins and epigenetic shifts S.-i. Imai and L. Guarente, ‘It takes two to tango: NAD + and sirtuins in aging/longevity control’, Aging and Mechanisms of Disease 2 (2016) 16017. A nice update on how sirtuins control gene expression in relation to NAD + levels."
Paragraph 3 (29 words) [SHORT]: "Challenges the notion that the ratio of NAD + to NADH matters, although I’m suspicious of this conclusion in relation to the low-calorie diets that tend to activate sirtuins."
Paragraph 4 (99 words): "M. S. Bonkowski and D. A. Sinclair, ‘Slowing ageing by design: the rise of NAD + and sirtuin-activating compounds’, Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 17 (2016) 679–690. An excellent detailed overview of the science behind the hot topic of NAD + precursors as activators of sirtuins to extend life..."
Paragraph 5 (77 words): "D. V. Titov, V. Cracan, R. P. Goodman, J. Peng, Z. Grabarek and V. K. Mootha, ‘Complementation of mitochondrial electron transport chain by manipulation of the NAD + /NADH ratio’, Science 352 (2016) 231–235. The activation of sirtuins depends on the NAD + /NADH ratio (probably!) which in turn depend..."
Paragraph 6 (87 words): "Respiring with glycerol phosphate A. E. McDonald, N. Pichaud and C. A. Darveau. ‘“Alternative” fuels contributing to mitochondrial electron transport: Importance of non-classical pathways in the diversity of animal metabolism’, Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology B: Biochemistry & Molecular Biol..."
Paragraph 7 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Erich Gnaiger, Mitochondrial Pathways and Respiratory Control. An Introduction to OXPHOS Analysis (Innsbruck, Bioenergetics Communications,"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "271"
Paragraph 1 (61 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."
Paragraph 2 (67 words): "Glutamine cycle in muscles R. DeBerardinis and T. Cheng, ‘Q’s next: the diverse functions of glutamine in metabolism, cell biology and cancer’, Oncogene 29 (2010) 313–324. Puts forward the disturbing notion that cancers ‘deliberately’ release the ammonia from glutamine, which provokes the breakdown ..."
Paragraph 3 (79 words): "Ketogenic diet and cancer D. D. Weber, S. Aminzadeh-Gohari, J. Tulipan, L. Catalano, R. G. Feichtinger and B. Kofler, ‘Ketogenic diet in the treatment of cancer – where do we stand?’, Molecular Metabolism 33 (2020) 102–121. A good balanced analysis. I’ve not said much about ketogenic diets in this b..."
Paragraph 4 (21 words) [SHORT]: "Chapter 6: The flux capacitor Evolutionary ideas of ageing Peter Medawar, An Unsolved Problem of Biology (London, H. K. Lewis, 1952)."
Paragraph 5 (24 words) [SHORT]: "The book from his inaugural lecture at UCL, which put forward a new theory of ageing that is still more or less current today."
Paragraph 6 (73 words): "T. Niccoli and L. Partridge, ‘Ageing as a risk factor for disease’, Current Biology 22 (2012) R741–R752. Dame Linda Partridge has been one of the most authoritative voices in the ageing field for decades, and recently stepped down from running the Institute of Healthy Ageing at UCL. Fix ageing and w..."
Paragraph 7 (19 words) [SHORT]: "George C. Williams, Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some Current Evolutionary Thought (Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1966)."
Paragraph 8 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Williams independently put forward a similar view of ageing to Medawar’s, known forbiddingly as antagonistic pleiotropy (meaning that genes can have positive benefits in youth that outweigh disadvantages with older age). While this book does not focus on ageing it is one of the finest and most influ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "272"
Paragraph 1 (14 words) [SHORT]: "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all."
Paragraph 2 (37 words) [SHORT]: "André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natural history with a theoretical underpinning."
Paragraph 3 (78 words): "Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) Carl Zimmer, She Has Her Mother’s Laugh: The Powers, Perversions and Potential of Heredity (London, Penguin Random House, 2018). A magisterial volume on the history and future of genetics, with excellent coverage of its murky past grounded in the warped ideas o..."
Paragraph 4 (24 words) [SHORT]: "V. Tam, N. Patel, M. Turcotte, Y. Bossé, G. Paré and D. Meyre, ‘Benefits and limitations of genome-wide association studies’, Nature Reviews Genetics 20"
Paragraph 5 (20 words) [SHORT]: "(2019) 467–484. A recent comprehensive review of GWAS that does a good job of addressing pervasive criticisms in the literature."
Paragraph 6 (58 words) [SHORT]: "Missing heritability T. A. Manolio, F. S. Collins, N. J. Cox et al. , ‘Finding the missing heritability of complex diseases’, Nature 461 (2009) 747–753. One of the first papers to spell out the problem which has only partially been solved since then. For me the bottom line is most GWAS studies negle..."
Paragraph 7 (72 words): "Adam Rutherford, A Brief History of Everyone Who Ever Lived: The Stories in Our Genes (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017). Adam Rutherford takes up the mantle of Steve Jones for the rising generation, finding his range in this sprawling, opinionated and cogent take on human genetics. Well worth re..."
Paragraph 8 (39 words) [SHORT]: "G. Pesole, J. F. Allen, N. Lane, W. Martin, D. M. Rand, G. Schatz and C. Saccone, ‘The neglected genome’, EMBO Reports 13 (2012) 473–474. A short and heartfelt plea to the GWAS community to stop discarding mitochondrial DNA."
Paragraph 9 (43 words) [SHORT]: "Doug Wallace and advances in mitochondrial research D. C. Wallace, Y. Pollack, C. L. Bunn and J. M. Eisenstadt, ‘Cytoplasmic inheritance in mammalian tissue culture cells’, In Vitro 12 (1976) 758–776. The paper from Doug Wallace’s PhD thesis on cybrids treated with antibiotics."

=== NEW SECTION: 12 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "273"
Paragraph 1 (72 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."
Paragraph 2 (15 words) [SHORT]: "D. A. Merriwether, A. G. Clark, S. W. Ballinger, T. G. Schurr, H. Soodyall, T."
Paragraph 3 (68 words): "Jenkins, S. T. Sherry and D. C. Wallace, ‘The structure of human mitochondrial DNA variation’, Journal of Molecular Evolution 33 (1991) 543–55. One of the earlier papers tracing human ancestry and migrations using mitochondrial DNA. Unlike others, Wallace never thought of mitochondrial DNA as ‘neutr..."
Paragraph 4 (36 words) [SHORT]: "D. C. Wallace, M. D. Brown and M. T. Lott, ‘Mitochondrial DNA variation in human evolution and disease’, Gene 238 (1999) 211–230. A later contribution from Wallace and colleagues, taking mitochondrial diseases into more explicit consideration."
Paragraph 5 (29 words) [SHORT]: "D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondrial diseases in man and mouse’, Science 283 (1999) 1482–1488. A seminal paper on mitochondrial diseases, comparing mouse models with human conditions. Wallace in his pomp."
Paragraph 6 (16 words) [SHORT]: "W. Fan, K. G. Waymire, N. Narula, P. Li, C. Rocher, P. E. Coskun, M. A."
Paragraph 7 (80 words): "Vannan, J. Narula, G. R. Macgregor and D. C. Wallace, ‘A mouse model of mitochondrial disease reveals germline selection against severe mtDNA mutations’, Science 319 (2008) 958–962. An important paper that reconciled a paradox in Wallace’s thinking – how could a fast mitochondrial mutation rate faci..."
Paragraph 8 (13 words) [SHORT]: "N. Lane, ‘Biodiversity: on the origin of bar codes’, Nature 462 (2009) 272–274."
Paragraph 9 (23 words) [SHORT]: "My own attempt to reconcile adaptation, mitochondrial mutations and the surprisingly sharp distinctions between species (so-called bar-codes in mitochondrial DNA), discussing Wallace’s work."
Paragraph 10 (48 words) [SHORT]: "M. Colnaghi, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The need for high-quality oocyte mitochondria at extreme ploidy dictates mammalian germline development’, eLife 10 (2021) e69344. A mathematical model showing that the architecture of the female germline can be understood in terms of selection against detri..."
Paragraph 11 (25 words) [SHORT]: "D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondria as chi’, Genetics 179 (2008) 727–735. Pushing the boundaries of Western medicine, with its twin pillars grounded in the work of"

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "274"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students."
Paragraph 2 (41 words) [SHORT]: "Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summary of some sticky issues."
Paragraph 3 (22 words) [SHORT]: "P. Innocenti, E. H. Morrow and D. K. Dowling, ‘Experimental evidence supports a sex-specific selective sieve in mitochondrial genome evolution’, Science 332"
Paragraph 4 (21 words) [SHORT]: "(2011) 845–848. A seminal paper from Damian Dowling’s group, showing that maternal inheritance of mitochondria really does cause problems in males."
Paragraph 5 (54 words) [SHORT]: "M. F. Camus, D. J. Clancy and D. K. Dowling, ‘Mitochondria, maternal inheritance, and male aging’, Current Biology 22 (2012) 1717–1721. More from Damian Dowling, this time with my UCL colleague Flo Camus, showing that the maternal inheritance of mitochondria might even account for the shorter lifesp..."
Paragraph 6 (71 words): "A. L. Radzvilavicius, N. Lane and A. Pomiankowski, ‘Sexual conflict explains the extraordinary diversity of mechanisms regulating mitochondrial inheritance’, BMC Biology 15 (2017) 94. Our modelling take on why there are so many different ways of enforcing maternal inheritance of mitochondria. It boi..."
Paragraph 7 (75 words): "Hybid breakdown does not vary with genetic distance M. F. Camus, M. O’Leary, M. Reuter and N. Lane, ‘Impact of mitonuclear interactions on life-history responses to diet’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 375 (2020) 20190416C. The most striking finding here is that there is no relat..."
Paragraph 8 (52 words) [SHORT]: "L. Carnegie, M. Reuter, K. Fowler, N. Lane and M. F. Camus, ‘Mother’s curse is pervasive across a large mitonuclear Drosophila panel’, Evolution Letters 5 (2021) 230–239. A large panel of 81 different fly lines, in which the mitochondria are systematically mismatched against the nuclear background, ..."
Paragraph 9 (55 words) [SHORT]: "Redox stress caused by the antioxidant N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) E. Rodríguez, F. Grover Thomas, M. F. Camus and N. Lane, ‘Mito-nuclear interactions produce diverging responses to mild stress in Drosophila larvae’, Frontiers in Genetics 12 (2021) 734255. Larvae just eat and grow, placing the mitochond..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "275"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA."
Paragraph 2 (93 words): "M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.02.10.479862). The paper I dwelt on at length in this chapter. A shock to me. Flies keep..."
Paragraph 3 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Glutathione, redox stress and S-glutathionylation P. Korge, G. Calmettes and J. N. Weiss, ‘Increased reactive oxygen species production during reductive stress: the roles of mitochondrial glutathione and thioredoxin reductase’, Biochimica Biophysica Acta 1847 (2015) 514–525."
Paragraph 4 (46 words) [SHORT]: "Glutathione is considered the ‘master antioxidant’ but there can be too much of a good thing. The problem here is called ‘reductive stress’, where there are (in effect) too many electrons to stay in balance. They end up dribbling onto oxygen to form reactive oxygen species."
Paragraph 5 (46 words) [SHORT]: "R. J. Mailloux and W. G. Willmore, ‘ S -Glutathionlylation reactions in mitochondrial function and disease’, Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 2 (2014) 68. A nice review of the redox regulatory system whereby oxidised glutathione binds to proteins ( S -glutathionylation), which can suppres..."
Paragraph 6 (44 words) [SHORT]: "R. J. Mailloux, ‘Protein S -glutathionylation reactions as a global inhibitor of cell metabolism for the desensitization of hydrogen peroxide signals’, Redox Biology 32 (2020) 101472. Ryan Mailloux shows that S -glutathionylation suppresses hydrogen peroxide signalling – by suppressing all metabolis..."
Paragraph 7 (73 words): "Number of heartbeats Raymond Pearl, The Rate of Living. Being an Account of some Experimental Studies on the Biology of Life Duration (London, University of London Press, 1928). Raymond Pearl’s rate of living theory fell out of fashion because there seemed to be many exceptions; birds, for example, ..."
Paragraph 8 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Geoffrey West, Scale: The Universal Laws of Life and Death in Organisms, Cities and Companies (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017). West is a physicist who has published revolutionary papers on fractal scaling, with Brian Enquist and James Brown, which I’m not citing individually here. There are pl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "276"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane."
Paragraph 2 (102 words): "Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 899 (2000) 136–147. The gurus of free radical biology, and authors of a famous textbook ( Free Radicals in Biology..."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "M. W. Moyer, ‘The myth of antioxidants’, Scientific American 308 (2013) 62–67."
Paragraph 4 (35 words) [SHORT]: "A clear presentation showing that antioxidants don’t work, in either animal models or humans. Large human trials show that, if anything, antioxidant supplementation is associated with worse outcomes and a slightly higher risk of death."
Paragraph 5 (14 words) [SHORT]: "M. P. Murphy, A. Holmgren, N. G. Larsson, B. Halliwell, C. J. Chang, B."
Paragraph 6 (76 words): "Kalyanaraman, S. G. Rhee, P. J. Thornalley, L. Partridge, D. Gems, T. Nyström, V. Belousov, P. T. Schumacker and C. C. Winterbourn, ‘Unraveling the biological roles of reactive oxygen species’, Cell Metabolism 13 (2011) 361–366. A bit of a ‘Hollywood’ lineup, aiming for a consensus on the role of fr..."
Paragraph 7 (102 words): "N. Lane, ‘A unifying view of ageing and disease: the double-agent theory’, Journal of Theoretical Biology 225 (2003) 531–540. A hypothesis sketched out for the general reader in Oxygen (Oxford University Press, 2002) and developed more formally here. I attempt to reconcile the paradox that (were bot..."
Paragraph 8 (89 words): "Hyperfunction M. V. Blagosklonny, ‘Aging is not programmed’, Cell Cycle 12 (2013) 3736– 3742. A clarification of his own influential thinking. Ageing is driven by ‘quasi- programs’ that keep on running too long; sometimes called the ‘bloated soma theory’. According to this theory there is no program..."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "277"
Paragraph 1 (71 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."
Paragraph 2 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Glycation damage M. Fournet, F. Bonté and A. Desmoulière, ‘Glycation damage: a possible hub for major pathophysiological disorders and aging’, Aging and Disease 9 (2018) 880– 900. A good review of the targets of glycation (the decoration of proteins, lipids and DNA with sticky, sugary tails) with ag..."
Paragraph 3 (57 words) [SHORT]: "Variations in mitochondrial proteome between tissues S. E. Calvo and V. K. Mootha, ‘The mitochondrial proteome and human disease’, Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics 11 (2010) 25–44. How much do the proteins in mitochondria differ from one tissue to another? More than you might think: near..."
Paragraph 4 (83 words): "Insulin secretion depends on membrane potential E. Heart, R. F. Corkey, J. D. Wikstrom, O. S. Shirihai and B. E. Corkey, ‘Glucose-dependent increase in mitochondrial membrane potential, but not cytoplasmic calcium, correlates with insulin secretion in single islet cells’, American Journal of Physiol..."
Paragraph 5 (57 words) [SHORT]: "A. A. Gerencser, S. A. Mookerjee, M. Jastroch and M. D. Brand, ‘Positive feedback amplified the response of mitochondrial membrane potential to glucose concentration in clonal pancreatic beta cells’, Biochimica Biophysica Acta: Molecular Basis of Disease 1863 (2017) 1054–1065. More details on how gl..."
Paragraph 6 (52 words) [SHORT]: "Links between diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease S. M. de la Monte and J. R. Wands, ‘Alzheimer’s disease is type 3 diabetes – evidence reviewed’, Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 2 (2008) 1101– 1113. The evidence is mounting that Alzheimer’s disease is a form of diabetes. I need to mind my d..."
Paragraph 7 (35 words) [SHORT]: "P. I. Moreira, ‘Sweet mitochondria: a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease 62 (2018) 1391–1401. Never was there a more sinister use of the term ‘sweet mitochondria’ (the term ‘diabetes mellitus’ means sweet"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "278"
Paragraph 1 (15 words) [SHORT]: "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease."
Paragraph 2 (88 words): "D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable Barry Halliwell agrees, there is little room for doubt. As an aside, science is based on trust: when on unfamiliar gr..."
Paragraph 3 (53 words) [SHORT]: "Mitochondrial-associated membranes and Alzheimer’s disease E. Area-Gomez and E. A. Schon, ‘On the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease: the MAM hypothesis’, FASEB Journal 31 (2017) 864–867. An extremely coherent explanation for Alzheimer’s disease, linking mitochondrial damage in diabetes with calciu..."
Paragraph 4 (78 words): "E. Area-Gomez, C. Guardia-Laguarta, E. A. Schon and S. Przedborski, ‘Mitochondria, OxPhos, and neurodegeneration: cells are not just running out of gas’, Journal of Clinical Investigation 129 (2019) 34–45. My favourite paper on the MAM hypothesis. Not just a coherent explanation for Alzheimer’s dise..."
Paragraph 5 (31 words) [SHORT]: "Powering up mitochondria by calcium activation of pyruvate dehydrogenase A. P. Wescott, J. P. Y. Kao, W. J. Lederer and L. Boyman, ‘Voltage-energized calcium-sensitive ATP production by mitochondria’, Nature Metabolism 1"
Paragraph 6 (57 words) [SHORT]: "(2019) 975–984. Just a wonderful paper. Calcium floods into the mitochondria (from the MAMs, though the authors don’t explicitly make the link) and ramps up the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase, which cranks up the Krebs cycle, mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP synthesis. The membrane poten..."
Paragraph 7 (72 words): "Biology by the numbers Ron Milo and Rob Phillips, Cell Biology by the Numbers (New York, Garland Science, 2016). Engaging, quantitative answers to all the questions you never knew you had about cells. I’m citing this book in relation to Joana Xavier’s calculations on the number of metabolic reaction..."
Paragraph 8 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Epilogue: Self"

=== NEW SECTION: 9 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "279"
Paragraph 1 (63 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."
Paragraph 2 (80 words): "L. Turin and E. M. C. Skoulakis ‘Electron spin resonance (EPR) in Drosophila and general anesthesia’, Methods in Enzymology 603 (2018) 115–128 ... But they do in this paper, albeit in a less visible place. A couple of clever tricks allow them to show that general anaesthetics short-circuit the flow ..."
Paragraph 3 (47 words) [SHORT]: "A. Gaitanidis, A. Sotgui and L. Turin, ‘Spontaneous radiofrequency emission from electron spins within Drosophila : a novel biological signal’, arXiv :1907.04764 (2019). A tough paper for anyone who is not a biophysicist, but this is radical material that is opening the doors to real twenty-first-ce..."
Paragraph 4 (69 words): "EEG and mitochondria M. X. Cohen, ‘Where does EEG come from and what does it mean?’, Trends in Neurosciences 40 (2017) 208–218. Well worth a read. The fact that we’ve known about the electroencephalogram for a century, and can measure changes with great precision in sleep and many disease states, sh..."
Paragraph 5 (42 words) [SHORT]: "Actually, it shouldn’t be embarrassing. Sing it from the rooftops! Science is about what we don’t know; the fact we don’t understand the EEG means there’s exciting work to be done. Never be fooled into thinking we know most of the answers."
Paragraph 6 (15 words) [SHORT]: "T. Yardeni, A. G. Cristancho, A. J. McCoy, P. M. Schaefer, M. J. McManus, E."
Paragraph 7 (75 words): "D. Marsh and D. C. Wallace, ‘An mtDNA mutant mouse demonstrates that mitochondrial deficiency can result in autism endophenotypes’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 118 (2021) e2021429118. A specific mitochondrial mutation in mice leads to behavioural changes that are reminiscent ..."
Paragraph 8 (28 words) [SHORT]: "Electrical fields in development M. Levin and C. J. Martyniuk, ‘The bioelectric code: an ancient computational medium for dynamic control of growth and form’, Biosystems 164 (2018) 76–93."

=== NEW SECTION: 10 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "280"
Paragraph 1 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology."
Paragraph 2 (23 words) [SHORT]: "Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so."
Paragraph 3 (57 words) [SHORT]: "M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020. Here Levin teams up with Daniel Dennett, who has a very acute nose for what is important in biology, especially in relation to consciousness. We are about to make serious progress on the most exciting and important ope..."
Paragraph 4 (39 words) [SHORT]: "D. Ren, Z. Nemati, C. H. Lee, J. Li, K. Haddadi, D. C. Wallace and P. J. Burke, ‘An ultra-high bandwidth nano-electronic interface to the interior of living cells with integrated fluorescence readout of metabolic activity’, Scientific Reports 10"
Paragraph 5 (38 words) [SHORT]: "(2020) 10756. Doug Wallace is still at it, teaming up with a group of nanotechnologists on the vibrant campus in Philadelphia to measure electrical fields from mitochondria in single cells. The first steps towards addressing a tough question."
Paragraph 6 (63 words): "Consciousness and self Derek Denton, The Primordial Emotions. The Dawning of Consciousness (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2006). Denton worked for many years on salt balance and thirst, which led him to explore the ‘imperious states of arousal and compelling intentions to act’ found across the an..."
Paragraph 7 (36 words) [SHORT]: "Now in his nineties, Denton is still active; and others, including Mark Solms and Peter Godfrey-Smith (who has written two fine books on consciousness, Other Minds and Metazoa ) are beginning to argue along similar lines."
Paragraph 8 (135 words): "Mark Solms, The Hidden Spring: A Journey to the Source of Consciousness (London, Profile Books, and New York, W. W. Norton, 2021). I was going to discuss Solms’s recent ideas in my Epilogue but they didn’t quite fit. Where he writes about the central nervous system, I think about cells. Solms develo..."
Paragraph 9 (59 words) [SHORT]: "M. Solms and K. Friston, ‘How and why consciousness arises: some considerations from physics and physiology’, Journal of Consciousness Studies 25 (2018) 202–238. Solms’s ideas on consciousness were developed with Karl Friston, whose concept of free energy in this context is sometimes called ‘Friston..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "281"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016."
Paragraph 2 (35 words) [SHORT]: "Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his cemi field theory. I need to talk to him about mitochondria ..."
Paragraph 3 (73 words): "Membrane potential in bacteria and cell death E. S. Lander, ‘The heroes of CRISPR’, Cell 164 (2016) 18–28. I mentioned CRISPR (now widely used for clever gene editing) in relation to the bacterial immune system. This paper covers some of the backstory, tracing several decades of curiosity-driven res..."
Paragraph 4 (89 words): "D. Refardt, T. Bergmiller and R. Kümmerli, ‘Altruism can evolve when relatedness is low: evidence from bacteria committing suicide upon phage infection’, Proceedings of the Royal Society B 280 (2013) 20123035. This paper is really about kin selection in bacteria, proving it is worth their while to k..."
Paragraph 5 (15 words) [SHORT]: "Death is the permanent loss of membrane potential; plainly that kills the conscious mind too."
Paragraph 6 (127 words): "H. Strahl and L. W. Hamoen, ‘Membrane potential is important for bacterial cell division’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 107 (2010) 12281–12286. How do bacteria divide down the middle to form two daughter cells? It turns out that oscillator proteins move rapidly from one end of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 3 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "282"
Paragraph 1 (305 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."
Paragraph 2 (134 words): "I must thank, too, my fantastic lab group at UCL. They have had to fight their way through Covid, with the lab closed for several months and disrupted for much longer, leaving them worried about how to finish their PhDs, or compete for post-doc positions. Thankfully, none faced personal tragedy. Som..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "283"
Paragraph 1 (236 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."
Paragraph 2 (155 words): "Many friends and colleagues have also read either chapters or the whole book. While on the theme of Covid, I want to thank in particular Diego Maria Bertini. Diego emailed me from his hospital bed in Italy, while recovering from severe Covid during that traumatic Italian spring of 2020. Lacking much..."
Paragraph 3 (87 words): "A few words of thanks to other friends, who have read chapters or the whole book and given me feedback on pitch, content and style. Mike Carter has read all my books, chapter by chapter, and never fails to keep me going through darker days with unreasonably enthusiastic comments, to say nothing of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 7 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "284"
Paragraph 1 (21 words) [SHORT]: "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry."
Paragraph 2 (124 words): "She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the current title put my mind at rest. I am indebted to the legendary film editor Walter Murch, who is the only person I know who uses scientific m..."
Paragraph 3 (12 words) [SHORT]: "I can only hope that I have warmed the offending waters appropriately."
Paragraph 4 (48 words) [SHORT]: "Thanks as well to Emily MacKay, who fought her way through several chapters laced with chilly depths, having returned to university to take a degree in nutrition and medical sciences. She had to capitulate to the demands of serious study before finding her way back to warmer waters."
Paragraph 5 (23 words) [SHORT]: "And thanks to Wai Mun Yoon, who bubbles over with his own profligate ideas, always seeing the logical implications and the way ahead."
Paragraph 6 (257 words): "I need to thank a few specialist colleagues and friends for reading over specific chapters. I treasure their comments, in part for confirming that I had not made any egregious errors (though they all found a few trivial mistakes), in part for pointing me in new directions, and best of all for being ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 6 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "285"
Paragraph 1 (107 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."
Paragraph 2 (78 words): "While on the subject of cancer, I must thank Prof. Frank Sullivan, formerly of the US National Cancer Institute, and now returned to clinical practice in Galway. Frank brings a tough hands-on perspective to the difficulty of treating patients with prostate cancer, and has long seen metabolism and en..."
Paragraph 3 (59 words) [SHORT]: "Franklin Harold for detailed comments on much of my book. Frank is in his nineties, yet is still writing books himself, books that continue to brim with insight and poetry. We have been discussing bioenergetics and evolution by email and occasionally in person for two decades. I will never forget ou..."
Paragraph 4 (122 words): "Frank taught me the value of open-minded scepticism in science, and he is unyielding in applying this philosophy to my writings too. But he has also allowed himself to be somewhat caught up in the ideas presented here. And I thank Prof. Mårten Wikström, veteran of the later ‘Ox Phos wars’, who after..."
Paragraph 5 (76 words): "A short note on consciousness. I wrote a chapter on consciousness in Life Ascending in 2009, which failed to answer the question (I’m hardly alone in that). That led me into a long and enjoyable correspondence with Prof. Derek Denton, now in his nineties, yet still overflowing with energy and plans...."

=== NEW SECTION: 8 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "286"
Paragraph 1 (109 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."
Paragraph 2 (119 words): "Happily, that has renewed correspondence with Prof. Dan Dennett too, as well as Doug Wallace, Luca Turin and Michael Levin. I have the feeling we are about to make real progress. As Dan wrote, ‘What interesting times!’ I would like to thank Bill Gates and his team, especially Dr Trevor Mundel and Dr..."
Paragraph 3 (43 words) [SHORT]: "It remains for me to thank my family, especially my father, the historian Anthony Lane, who as always has read every chapter and commented on infelicities of style, signposting and historical context, despite harbouring little love of molecules. Love is the watchword here."
Paragraph 4 (83 words): "Some find science too cold and rational for their taste, and seek meaning in religion or spirituality. I can find plenty of meaning in science, but it would be little solace without the love of my family: my parents, brother and sister-in-law in Yorkshire, and my family in Spain and Italy. I have al..."
Paragraph 5 (25 words) [SHORT]: "Despite our best efforts to inculcate a love of science in Eneko and Hugo, it’s already clear that they will follow different paths through life."
Paragraph 6 (8 words) [SHORT]: "I look forward to seeing where they lead."
Paragraph 7 (91 words): "On the subject of family and meaning, I want to thank Mary Jane Ackland-Snow for allowing me to share a few lines about Ian, and to dedicate this book to his memory. Perhaps our best and most lasting legacy is to influence the lives of others for the better. Ian had an immense impact on my life. He ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 4 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "287"
Paragraph 1 (22 words) [SHORT]: "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane."
Paragraph 2 (243 words): "Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline for her unwavering belief and encouragement, and for reading and commenting on the whole book as she always does. Thanks to Ed Lake at..."
Paragraph 3 (49 words) [SHORT]: "Finally, I thank Cliff Hanks for bringing the poem ‘Like Most Revelations’ to my attention, and Richard Howard for his gracious permission to reprint the poem. It somehow captures the essence of what I have tried to say in this book, yet in a few lines from another dimension."

=== NEW SECTION: 28 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "288"
Paragraph 1 (29 words) [SHORT]: "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations."
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1"
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "conversion to succinate 295–301"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 105–6"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "acetyl CoA from citrate 223"
Paragraph 8 (2 words) [SHORT]: "discovery 56"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "prebiotic equivalent 139"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "acetyl CoA pathway 122–3, 294"
Paragraph 11 (6 words) [SHORT]: "acetyl phosphate 56, 173n4, 289–90, 293"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "ATP formation from 151–2"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "acetylation, epigenetic 223"
Paragraph 14 (7 words) [SHORT]: "acid conditions see pH Ackland-Snow, Ian 231"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "ADP (adenosine diphosphate) 66 , 151, 214, 289"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "ageing accumulation of mutations 257, 269"
Paragraph 17 (8 words) [SHORT]: "diet and 25, 232, 233, 264, 268, 272"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "diseases of 233–5, 243, 263"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "and flux capacitance 245"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "free radical theory 257–9, 262"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "glycolysis and carbon fixation 230–31"
Paragraph 22 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle reversal and 111, 259"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "mechanism of 260–67"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "predisposing to cancer 25, 195, 229–32"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "suppression of respiration 230, 259–60, 262, 264"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "alleles compensatory 247"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and individuality 234–6, 238, 243"

=== NEW SECTION: 32 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "289"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299"
Paragraph 2 (10 words) [SHORT]: "see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115"
Paragraph 4 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280"
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215"
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226"
Paragraph 7 (2 words) [SHORT]: "chirality 277"
Paragraph 8 (7 words) [SHORT]: "prebiotic formation 114, 116, 120–22, 132, 145"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "RNA and hydrophobicity of 149n9"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "single-letter code 165"
Paragraph 11 (12 words) [SHORT]: "see also arginine; aspartate; cysteine; glutamine ammonia 39, 70, 113–14, 222, 226–7"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "anaesthetics and consciousness 276–8"
Paragraph 13 (4 words) [SHORT]: "anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–1n7"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "antibiotic resistance 238"
Paragraph 15 (7 words) [SHORT]: "antioxidant defences 205–7, 218–19, 225 , 251"
Paragraph 16 (11 words) [SHORT]: "see also glutathione; vitamins antioxidant dosing 26, 225 , 249–50, 258"
Paragraph 17 (7 words) [SHORT]: "see also NAC antiviral defences, bacteria 282"
Paragraph 18 (12 words) [SHORT]: "apoptosis see cell death, programmed archaea (specifically) methanogens 143, 164, 166, 170"
Paragraph 19 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle in 110–11, 122–3"
Paragraph 20 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also bacteria and archaea Area-Gomez, Estela 266"
Paragraph 21 (2 words) [SHORT]: "arginine 52–3"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Arnon, Daniel 98–100, 102, 164"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "artificial intelligence (AI) 13, 274"
Paragraph 24 (7 words) [SHORT]: "ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 44–5, 48, 252"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Asimov, Isaac 248"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "aspartate 179n5, 224–7"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "assembly line analogy 170, 208"
Paragraph 28 (7 words) [SHORT]: "atmospheres early/primordial 76, 109–10, 114, 119, 165"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "of other planets 165"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "atmospheric oxygen balance 177"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "see also GOE"

=== NEW SECTION: 33 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "290"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in cellular respiration 56–7, 64"
Paragraph 3 (6 words) [SHORT]: "formation without ATP synthase 144, 151"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8"
Paragraph 5 (7 words) [SHORT]: "yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207"
Paragraph 6 (7 words) [SHORT]: "ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6"
Paragraph 7 (7 words) [SHORT]: "ATP synthase absent from first cells 151"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "effects of excess ATP 208, 218"
Paragraph 9 (11 words) [SHORT]: "as a machine 66 , 67, 69, 99, 150–51, 211, 218"
Paragraph 10 (7 words) [SHORT]: "autocatalysis 100, 126–7, 128 , 130, 132"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "autoradiographs 91–2, 102–3"
Paragraph 12 (6 words) [SHORT]: "autotrophs autotrophic bacteria 85n4, 102, 114"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin’s contribution 98"
Paragraph 14 (7 words) [SHORT]: "carbon fixation without light 85n4, 100, 288"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "origins of life and 116, 121–2, 153, 169"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "plants as 77, 103"
Paragraph 17 (10 words) [SHORT]: "bacteria carbon fixation in 69, 100, 123, 143, 167, 283"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "ecosystems and cell culture 171"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "infection causing hypoxia 213"
Paragraph 20 (3 words) [SHORT]: "membrane potentials 282"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "membrane transfer 61"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "response to phage attacks 282"
Paragraph 23 (10 words) [SHORT]: "see also cyanobacteria bacteria, anaerobic ATP and ferredoxin generation 153n2"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "sulfur bacteria 100, 103–5, 114, 166"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "vent bacteria 110, 163n2"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "bacteria, ancient molecular phylogenetics 166"
Paragraph 27 (2 words) [SHORT]: "non-photosynthetic 110"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "origins of mitochondria 68–9, 167, 281"
Paragraph 29 (7 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 73, 78, 100, 101"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "rubisco in 108"
Paragraph 31 (5 words) [SHORT]: "bacteria, autotrophic 85n4, 102, 114"
Paragraph 32 (9 words) [SHORT]: "bacteria and archaea acetyl CoA pathway in 122–3, 151"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "291"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "symbiosis among 170, 188"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Baldwin, Ernest 59"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Barja, Gustavo 271"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Baross, John 113–14"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Bassham, James 97"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3"
Paragraph 9 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9"
Paragraph 10 (7 words) [SHORT]: "the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "bilaterians 157, 183, 189"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "biochemistry defence of 22–3"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "indirect measurements 34"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "structural diagrams explained 40"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "synthetic chemistry contrasted 116"
Paragraph 16 (10 words) [SHORT]: "biological, opposed to chronological time 236–8, 256, 264, 269, 273"
Paragraph 17 (8 words) [SHORT]: "biosynthesis amino acids 72, 101, 122, 208, 215"
Paragraph 18 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle and its reversal 73, 188, 208"
Paragraph 19 (5 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 78, 101–2"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "role of NADPH 108n11, 206"
Paragraph 21 (6 words) [SHORT]: "together with energy generation 161, 260–61"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Bloch, Eduard 202–3"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Bohr, Niels 82"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Boyer, Paul 68n13"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Braben, Don 103n10"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "brain electrical fields in 280"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glucose preference 265–8, 280"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "oxidative Krebs cycle in 187"
Paragraph 29 (6 words) [SHORT]: "radio emissions and EEG signals 277–9"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Buchanan, Bob 100, 104"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Buckel, Wolfgang 163n2"
Paragraph 32 (11 words) [SHORT]: "building blocks of life, molecular as fundamental 4, 6, 9–10, 131"
Paragraph 33 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle as source 20, 33, 115, 161"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "prebiotic 24, 275"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "292"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2"
Paragraph 3 (6 words) [SHORT]: "in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105"
Paragraph 5 (18 words) [SHORT]: "see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102–4"
Paragraph 8 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Calvin–Benson cycle alternative as reversed Krebs 99–100, 102–5, 114"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "other carbon fixation pathways 121–2"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen levels and 107–9, 169, 175"
Paragraph 11 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 95, 107, 174"
Paragraph 12 (9 words) [SHORT]: "the ‘Cambrian explosion’ 5, 157–61, 168, 179, 187, 210"
Paragraph 13 (13 words) [SHORT]: "Cambrian period emergence of animals and predation 25, 156–7, 160, 180, 182, 189"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "preceded by Shuram excursion 180"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Camus, Flo 246, 248"
Paragraph 16 (9 words) [SHORT]: "cancer age as a predisposing factor 25, 195, 229–32"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "altered Krebs cycle enzymes, 196, 209–10"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "archetypal metabolism 227"
Paragraph 19 (2 words) [SHORT]: "cachexia 226–7"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in the Cambrian 156"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "death rates 192, 193"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "drug treatments 15–16"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "genetic mutations explanation 192–4, 229"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "hypoxia response and 213"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle flux and 20–21, 111, 186"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "as metabolic, rather than genetic 2–5"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "use of radioisotopes 80"
Paragraph 28 (7 words) [SHORT]: "cancer cells effect of glutamine deprivation 216"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "effect of transplanting 25, 194"
Paragraph 30 (5 words) [SHORT]: "glucose fermentation 197, 201–2, 208–9n4"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Cancer Genome Atlas 193"
Paragraph 32 (3 words) [SHORT]: "cancer viruses 205"
Paragraph 33 (6 words) [SHORT]: "CARA (Council for At-Risk Academics) 31n1"
Paragraph 34 (8 words) [SHORT]: "carbon-11 ( 11 C) 80–81, 83–4, 85n4, 178"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "293"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82"
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6"
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178"
Paragraph 4 (6 words) [SHORT]: "carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177"
Paragraph 5 (12 words) [SHORT]: "carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in ancient atmospheres 119"
Paragraph 7 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "reduction on mineral surfaces 133–41"
Paragraph 9 (9 words) [SHORT]: "carbon fixation/CO 2 fixation alternative pathways 109, 122–3, 127"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "ferredoxin and 288"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "fixation in animals 217"
Paragraph 12 (9 words) [SHORT]: "fixation in bacteria 69, 100, 123, 143, 167, 283"
Paragraph 13 (5 words) [SHORT]: "fixation in plants 83–5, 103"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "fixation in protocells 148, 163"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 85–6, 98, 100, 288"
Paragraph 16 (7 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 78, 100–101, 217, 231"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "rubisco and 76–7"
Paragraph 18 (6 words) [SHORT]: "carbon monoxide 35, 135–6, 139, 216"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "carboxylation 96, 104–5"
Paragraph 20 (9 words) [SHORT]: "carboxylic acids from CO 2 and hydrogen 115, 121"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and the Krebs line 132"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "prebiotic biosynthesis 145"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 39–41, 50"
Paragraph 24 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also acetate; C4; C6; pyruvate carcinogens 195, 204–5"
Paragraph 25 (6 words) [SHORT]: "catalysts biochemical cycles as catalytic 53"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "iron-sulfide mineral surfaces 135–9"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "metal ions 131, 152"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "nucleic acids and nucleotides 129, 148"
Paragraph 29 (3 words) [SHORT]: "ornithine as 52–3"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "succinate as 46"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "thermodynamics and 22"
Paragraph 32 (13 words) [SHORT]: "catalysts, protein see enzymes cell death, programmed (apoptosis) 194, 205, 207, 213, 216"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "and mitochondria 242"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "294"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "cell-free extracts 62"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "cell nucleus, transplanting 195"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "cells as batteries 162"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "cellular level consciousness 276"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18"
Paragraph 7 (2 words) [SHORT]: "colour 35–6n3"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "emission of radiation 27–8"
Paragraph 9 (4 words) [SHORT]: "grouping stoichiometry 171, 188"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "membranes and cell walls 61–2"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "central dogma 192"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Chandel, Navdeep 217"
Paragraph 13 (4 words) [SHORT]: "chemical reactions, depiction 134"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "chemiosmotic hypothesis/coupling 68"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Cheshire Cat grin 43, 47, 56, 106, 297"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Chlorobium bacteria 100, 103–4, 166"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "chlorophyll in anoxygenic photosynthesis 166–7, 175"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "as a haem pigment 35–6"
Paragraph 19 (7 words) [SHORT]: "mechanism of photosynthesis 85, 99, 105, 174–5"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "as a transducer 174"
Paragraph 21 (10 words) [SHORT]: "see also haem; photosynthesis chloroplasts 78, 100, 167, 221n6, 228n7"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "chordates 155, 156n1"
Paragraph 23 (8 words) [SHORT]: "cities, parallels with living cells 1–2, 14, 17–18"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "citrate and cancer growth 222–3"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "exported from mitochondria 222–3, 231, 244, 259–60"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in the Krebs non-cycle 183–4"
Paragraph 27 (9 words) [SHORT]: "removal in the Krebs cycle 172–3, 220–21, 261, 286"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 51–2, 54–5"
Paragraph 29 (14 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 101, 105, 110–11, 128 , 216–19, 221, 287 , 300– 301"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "citrate synthase 110–11, 123"
Paragraph 31 (9 words) [SHORT]: "citric acid cycle see Krebs cycle cloud chambers 86–7"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "coal and oil 139, 177"
Paragraph 33 (8 words) [SHORT]: "coenzyme A (CoA) 56–7, 128 , 140, 295–6"
Paragraph 34 (4 words) [SHORT]: "CoA-S - 289–90, 292"

=== NEW SECTION: 33 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "295"
Paragraph 1 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Colnaghi, Marco 241n2"
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "evidence from anaesthetics 276–8"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and membrane potentials 278, 283"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Corliss, Jack 112–14"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "cosmological constants 131n7"
Paragraph 8 (10 words) [SHORT]: "coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 65–6, 228n7, 262n8, 278"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Crick, Francis 10–11, 59, 128–9, 165"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "CRISPR gene editing 228n7, 282"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "crop yields 76, 109"
Paragraph 12 (8 words) [SHORT]: "cyanide and the origin of life 116, 120"
Paragraph 13 (6 words) [SHORT]: "cyanobacteria death and membrane potentials 283"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as endosymbionts 221n6"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "as ‘inventors’ of photosynthesis 78, 107, 173, 175–6"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "cycles, biochemical necessarily catalytic 53"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "nutrient cycles 126"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Q cycle 68n13"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "urea cycle 52, 224–7"
Paragraph 20 (14 words) [SHORT]: "see also Calvin–Benson; Krebs; reverse Krebs cyclotrons 79, 80n2, 82, 83n3, 84, 85n4, 87–9"
Paragraph 21 (2 words) [SHORT]: "cysteine 146"
Paragraph 22 (7 words) [SHORT]: "see also NAC cytochromes 64n11, 166–7, 198–9"
Paragraph 23 (8 words) [SHORT]: "cytochrome oxidase 35–6n3, 49, 199, 214n5, 216, 278"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "‘Darwin’s dilemma’ 157"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Davies, Paul 129n6"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Dayhoff, Margaret 164–8"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "DeBerardinis, Ralph 217"
Paragraph 28 (3 words) [SHORT]: "dehydration reactions 138"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Delphi, Temple of Apollo 272–3"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "diabetes 21, 189, 243, 266, 268n10"
Paragraph 31 (5 words) [SHORT]: "diet and drug response 15"
Paragraph 32 (11 words) [SHORT]: "and the effects of ageing 25, 232, 233, 264, 268, 272"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "296"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "imposed on Calvin 94n6"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "ketogenic diets 228"
Paragraph 3 (8 words) [SHORT]: "and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wallace on 242"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg on 197"
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269"
Paragraph 7 (6 words) [SHORT]: "diseases chronic infections and cancer 195"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "genetic variation and 14, 235, 237"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondrial genome 240"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "of old age 233–5, 243, 263"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "succinate accumulation 214–15"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "disulfide bridges 252–4"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "DNA sequencing 193"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "structure elucidation 10–11"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "dogmas 28, 77, 98, 103, 192"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "drug treatments and response 15–16, 249"
Paragraph 17 (8 words) [SHORT]: "the ‘dynamic side’ 6–7, 12–13, 16, 28, 274"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Earth as a battery 162"
Paragraph 19 (7 words) [SHORT]: "geology of the early Earth 117, 119"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "global freeze 158, 176, 179"
Paragraph 21 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Ech (energy-converting hydrogenase) 143, 145–6, 147 , 163"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Eck, Richard 164"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Ediacarans 155, 157, 182–3, 189"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "EEG (electroencephalography) 278–9"
Paragraph 25 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Einstein, Albert 82–3n3, 198–200, 212"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "electron bifurcation 163n2"
Paragraph 27 (6 words) [SHORT]: "electron donors, alternative ferredoxin as 105–6"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "H 2 S as 166–7"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen from hydrothermal vents 141"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "electron spin resonance 276–7"
Paragraph 31 (6 words) [SHORT]: "electron transfers in anaesthesia 277, 279"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in carbon dioxide reduction 133–41"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "by ferredoxin 288"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "electron-transport chains 174"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "297"
Paragraph 1 (8 words) [SHORT]: "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Emerson, Robert 199–200"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Enceladus 117, 120"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "endoplasmic reticulum 266n9"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "endosymbiosis 69, 221n6"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "energetics of early life 168"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "of fixed carbon 160"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "of living cells as invisible 3"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "of respiration 32"
Paragraph 10 (9 words) [SHORT]: "energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275"
Paragraph 11 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Energy Flow in Biology , by Morowitz 125–6"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "environmental adaptation 236, 242"
Paragraph 13 (5 words) [SHORT]: "enzymes driving metabolic flux 14–15"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "iron-(nickel-)sulfur 135, 139, 143"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "mineral surfaces compared 134, 294"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle and 130"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "turnover rates 76"
Paragraph 18 (14 words) [SHORT]: "see also specific enzymes epigenetic changes in cells 215, 223, 231, 244–5, 269, 271–3"
Paragraph 19 (6 words) [SHORT]: "of tissues 190, 252, 259, 262–4"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "epilepsy 237, 240, 278"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "eukaryotes 179, 189, 269n11"
Paragraph 22 (6 words) [SHORT]: "evolution ideal of perfection and 199–200"
Paragraph 23 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle and its reverse 70–73"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "of the mitochondrial genome 240–41"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "exercise 25, 223, 232–3, 256, 264, 268"
Paragraph 26 (2 words) [SHORT]: "exoplanets 119"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "extinct species, resurrecting 238–9"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) 48"
Paragraph 29 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Fendt, Sarah-Maria 261n7"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "‘ferment’, respiratory 35–6, 64n11, 199, 216"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "fermentation alcoholic 170"
Paragraph 32 (7 words) [SHORT]: "of glucose in cancer 197, 201–2, 208–9n4"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "of glucose with ageing 230"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "298"
Paragraph 1 (12 words) [SHORT]: "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142"
Paragraph 3 (5 words) [SHORT]: "detailed mechanism of action 288–93"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "discovery and properties 105–10, 114"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Ech interaction 143–4"
Paragraph 6 (7 words) [SHORT]: "mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "reactivity with oxygen 106–8"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 128 , 163"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "FeS see iron-sulfur Fieldhouse, Margaret 49n7"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Fischer–Tropsch synthesis 139, 145, 295"
Paragraph 11 (2 words) [SHORT]: "flagella 283"
Paragraph 12 (2 words) [SHORT]: "flavins 35n3"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Fleming, Alexander 59"
Paragraph 14 (9 words) [SHORT]: "flies, Drosophila melanogaster 245–6, 248–51, 253–6, 259, 263, 276–7"
Paragraph 15 (3 words) [SHORT]: "flux, defined 7"
Paragraph 16 (15 words) [SHORT]: "see also Krebs cycle flux; metabolic flux; ROS flux flux capacitors, mitochondria as 244, 266"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "‘follow the money’ rule 196, 228"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Franklin, Rosalind 10, 13"
Paragraph 19 (5 words) [SHORT]: "free energy 4n1, 32, 65n12"
Paragraph 20 (7 words) [SHORT]: "free radicals 25, 106–7, 248, 252, 278"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen as 158–9"
Paragraph 22 (7 words) [SHORT]: "free radical theory of ageing 257–9, 262"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Frezza, Christian 210, 214n5"
Paragraph 24 (2 words) [SHORT]: "fumarate 286–7"
Paragraph 25 (6 words) [SHORT]: "fumarate hydratase 210, 215, 217, 220"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "fumarate reductase 185, 210–11, 213"
Paragraph 27 (7 words) [SHORT]: "gas pressures pressure and hydrogen availability 142"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "tissue slice experiments 33–8"
Paragraph 29 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Gell-Mann, Murray 124"
Paragraph 30 (5 words) [SHORT]: "gene editing 14, 228n7, 282"
Paragraph 31 (7 words) [SHORT]: "genes activated by HIF 1α 212, 215"
Paragraph 32 (3 words) [SHORT]: "globin genes 187"
Paragraph 33 (4 words) [SHORT]: "late-acting genes 234, 236–7"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "299"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "origins in protocells 149–50, 275"
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "(reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215"
Paragraph 3 (9 words) [SHORT]: "whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150"
Paragraph 4 (22 words) [SHORT]: "see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9, 166"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "genetic determinism and cancer 193–4, 229"
Paragraph 6 (7 words) [SHORT]: "geology of the early Earth 117, 119"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "gluconeogenesis 108, 131, 224"
Paragraph 8 (7 words) [SHORT]: "glucose in neurons and pancreas 265, 267–8"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 37, 39–40, 57"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and the textbook Krebs cycle 23–4"
Paragraph 11 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and the Warburg Effect 197, 200"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glutamine from α-ketoglutarate 184"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "in cancer 215–16, 217 , 221–2, 224, 226–7"
Paragraph 14 (6 words) [SHORT]: "in nitrogen delivery 70, 189, 215"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glutathione (GSH) 206, 251–5"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glutathione, oxidised (GSSG) 252–4"
Paragraph 17 (2 words) [SHORT]: "S-glutathionylation 254"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glycation of proteins 260"
Paragraph 19 (6 words) [SHORT]: "glyceraldehyde phosphate 95, 100, 174, 224"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glycerol phosphate 224, 225"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "glycerol phosphate shunt 262"
Paragraph 22 (9 words) [SHORT]: "glycolysis aerobic glycolysis 203, 209–10, 213, 215, 223–5, 232"
Paragraph 23 (6 words) [SHORT]: "effect of excess ATP 207–8, 213"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs’s observation 39–40"
Paragraph 25 (6 words) [SHORT]: "NAD + -to-NADH ratios 179n5, 230"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and tissue ATP demands 188, 201"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Gnaiger, Erich 171–2"
Paragraph 28 (10 words) [SHORT]: "GOE (the Great Oxidation Event) 176, 178, 181, 182n6, 186"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Gould, Stephen Jay 156n1"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "greigite 121, 133, 135"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "groups, chemical 38–9n4"
Paragraph 32 (10 words) [SHORT]: "growth metabolic shift in cancer 196, 205, 209, 213, 223–4"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic shift with age 231"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "300"
Paragraph 1 (2 words) [SHORT]: "protocells 146–7"
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244"
Paragraph 3 (7 words) [SHORT]: "2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6"
Paragraph 4 (11 words) [SHORT]: "see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Haldane, JS 30"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "half-lives, proteins 212"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Halpern, Aaron 148"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "‘handicap principle’ 261"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Harrison, Stuart 131, 148"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Hassid, Zev 84–5"
Paragraph 13 (4 words) [SHORT]: "heredity mechanism of 10"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in protocells 147–8"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "heritability missing 236–7, 263"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "and mitochondria 244"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "heterotrophy 108, 116, 168–9, 182"
Paragraph 18 (7 words) [SHORT]: "HIF 1α (hypoxia-inducible factor) 212–13, 259, 270"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "histones, acetylation 223–4, 231"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Hitler, Adolph 30, 191, 202–3"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Hochachka, Peter 257n5"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Hoffman, Sarah 113–14"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "homeostasis, metabolic 188–9, 259, 283"
Paragraph 24 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Hopkins, Frederick Gowland 6–8, 27–31, 44, 49, 58–60, 64n11"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Howard, Richard 285"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Hudson, Reuben 144"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "humans ATP synthesis in 66"
Paragraph 28 (7 words) [SHORT]: "cell numbers and reactions per second 269"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "lifespan prolongation 235–6, 258, 272"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "‘hybrid breakdown’ 247"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "hydride ions 136, 297"
Paragraph 32 (8 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen (2H) balanced in Krebs non-cycle 185, 201"
Paragraph 33 (8 words) [SHORT]: "in biosynthesis 73, 106–7, 108n11, 128 , 206"

=== NEW SECTION: 33 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "301"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261"
Paragraph 2 (6 words) [SHORT]: "2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6"
Paragraph 3 (7 words) [SHORT]: "2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 99–100, 174"
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262"
Paragraph 6 (10 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141"
Paragraph 7 (9 words) [SHORT]: "reaction with CO 2 115, 121, 133, 141–4, 152–4"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "transfer in respiration 37, 47–52"
Paragraph 9 (12 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen sulfide (H 2 S) 105, 113–14, 166–7, 182–3, 210, 213, 263"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "hydrophobicity 149n9, 278"
Paragraph 11 (8 words) [SHORT]: "hydrothermal vents alkaline environment 120, 141–4, 146, 147"
Paragraph 12 (8 words) [SHORT]: "chemical environment 113–14, 119–20, 132, 139, 141, 153–4"
Paragraph 13 (6 words) [SHORT]: "explored with a submersible 112–13, 115"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "non-photosynthetic bacteria 110, 163n2"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "origin of life and 116–17, 142–6, 150, 162"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "photosynthesis at 114, 115n2"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "pressure and hydrogen availability 142"
Paragraph 18 (2 words) [SHORT]: "hyperglycaemia 267n10"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "inflammatory response 213, 231"
Paragraph 20 (6 words) [SHORT]: "information absent from small molecules 283–4"
Paragraph 21 (10 words) [SHORT]: "as fundamental to biology 4, 12, 129, 148–51, 194, 275"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "view of cancer 192"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "insulin secretion/resistance 265–7, 268n10"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Inwongwan, Gla 252"
Paragraph 25 (8 words) [SHORT]: "iron–(nickel–)sulfur enzymes 135, 139, 143, 147 , 262"
Paragraph 26 (13 words) [SHORT]: "see also ferredoxin iron-sulfide minerals in alkaline hydrothermal vents 114–15, 121–2, 144, 147"
Paragraph 27 (6 words) [SHORT]: "surfaces as catalytic 133, 135, 139"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "iron–sulfur clusters/catalysts in ferredoxin 105"
Paragraph 29 (6 words) [SHORT]: "FeS clusters/surfaces 147, 151, 254, 255n4"
Paragraph 30 (5 words) [SHORT]: "growth of protocells with 147"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 174"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and reverse Krebs cycle 118–19"

=== NEW SECTION: 32 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "302"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146"
Paragraph 2 (11 words) [SHORT]: "isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "isotope studies 144"
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191"
Paragraph 6 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Japanese lifespans 272"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Jordan, Sean 145"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 200"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Kelley, Deborah 115"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "ketocarboxylates 41, 106, 288"
Paragraph 12 (14 words) [SHORT]: "α-ketoglutarate carboxylation to (iso)citrate 101 , 105, 128 , 217–21, 222 , 261, 287"
Paragraph 13 (5 words) [SHORT]: "conversion to glutamine 226, 227"
Paragraph 14 (13 words) [SHORT]: "derived from citrate and isocitrate 51–2, 184, 185 , 218, 220, 231, 261"
Paragraph 15 (8 words) [SHORT]: "derived from glutamine 70, 221, 222 , 261n7"
Paragraph 16 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also Krebs cycle intermediates ketones 228, 265"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Kluyver, Albert 9"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Knoll, Andy 182–3"
Paragraph 19 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs, Hans 18, 23, 28, 30, 31n1, 49–50n7, 65n12"
Paragraph 20 (7 words) [SHORT]: "work on respiration 32–3, 37–8, 43–4, 51"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs, (Lord) John 31n1, 49n7"
Paragraph 22 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle biosynthesis and ATP synthesis 260–61"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "first draft 54–5"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "fuelling the Cambrian explosion 160"
Paragraph 25 (2 words) [SHORT]: "introduced 18–19"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "origins and evolution 70–73, 118, 184"
Paragraph 27 (7 words) [SHORT]: "oxidative and reductive prongs 184–6, 210, 230"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reversal 61n7, 111, 126, 217, 230"
Paragraph 29 (12 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle, reverse see reverse Krebs Krebs cycle enzymes membrane bound 211"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mutations affecting 196, 209–10, 215, 220"
Paragraph 31 (10 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle fluxes and ageing 25, 252–3, 264–7, 272, 280–81"

=== NEW SECTION: 36 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "303"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in cancer cells 222–3, 228"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in fruit flies 255–6"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "autocatalysis and 127n5"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "conserved intermediates 123"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "diagnostic of cell health 270"
Paragraph 11 (5 words) [SHORT]: "leaking from mitochondria 259, 270"
Paragraph 12 (7 words) [SHORT]: "in prebiotic chemistry 121–3, 132, 149, 152"
Paragraph 13 (7 words) [SHORT]: "succinate as a tipping point 186, 211–12"
Paragraph 14 (6 words) [SHORT]: "whether involved in photosynthesis 93–4, 103–5"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs junctions 222, 225 , 226"
Paragraph 16 (7 words) [SHORT]: "the Krebs line 132–3, 161, 172–3, 294–301"
Paragraph 17 (8 words) [SHORT]: "lactate in cancer cells 204, 216, 224, 228"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "from pyruvate 200–201, 216, 224–5"
Paragraph 19 (9 words) [SHORT]: "as waste product 185 , 188, 200–201, 224, 228"
Paragraph 20 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Lawrence, Ernest 79–80, 82, 87n5, 88, 90"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Lehninger, Albert 53n10"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Levin, Michael 280"
Paragraph 23 (7 words) [SHORT]: "life characterised by energy flows 4–5, 18"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "characterised by metabolism 8"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘elementary particles’ of 67"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "elsewhere in the solar system 117"
Paragraph 27 (6 words) [SHORT]: "emergence as inevitable 127, 131n7, 275"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "photosynthesis freeing life from minerals 174–5"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "as thermodynamically favoured 275"
Paragraph 30 (12 words) [SHORT]: "life, origin see origin of life Life Itself , by Crick 129"
Paragraph 31 (6 words) [SHORT]: "lifespan of bats and birds 271"
Paragraph 32 (4 words) [SHORT]: "biological time and 235–6"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "differences, men and women 247"
Paragraph 34 (5 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic rate and 256–8, 270–71"
Paragraph 35 (4 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondrial DNA and 272"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "304"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "tissue symbiosis 190"
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3"
Paragraph 3 (6 words) [SHORT]: "light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "powering ATP synthesis 105"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "synthesis of organics in plants 107"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "limestone 119, 178"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151"
Paragraph 9 (9 words) [SHORT]: "Lost in the Twentieth Century , by Szent-Györgyi 44"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "LUCA (last universal common ancestor) 122"
Paragraph 11 (7 words) [SHORT]: "machines, molecular ATP synthase 67, 69, 150"
Paragraph 12 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle as 19, 53"
Paragraph 13 (9 words) [SHORT]: "of respiration 99, 174, 196, 202, 214n5, 266, 270"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "the ribosome 13–14"
Paragraph 15 (14 words) [SHORT]: "malate as Krebs cycle C4 acid 47, 70–71, 93, 184, 185 , 283, 286"
Paragraph 16 (9 words) [SHORT]: "in the Krebs line 128, 230, 287 , 299–300"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle 128, 230, 287"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "malate–aspartate shuttle 179n5"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "male fertility 248–9"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "malic enzyme 224, 253"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "MAMs (mitochondria-associated membranes) 266–8, 280"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "manganese fields 176, 178"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "manometers 31, 34–5, 37, 39"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Margulis, Lynn 68–9, 165, 167"
Paragraph 25 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Martin, Bill 117, 119–21, 168"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "mass extinctions, end-Permian 158, 182–3"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "McGlynn, Shawn 170"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Medawar, Peter 234, 236"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "membranes anaesthetic effects and 277"
Paragraph 30 (7 words) [SHORT]: "electrical charge on 68, 244, 275, 282–3"
Paragraph 31 (7 words) [SHORT]: "formation of, and primitive life 117, 145"
Paragraph 32 (13 words) [SHORT]: "see also mitochondrial membranes membrane bound enzymes 211, 219–20, 222 , 226, 253"
Paragraph 33 (6 words) [SHORT]: "see also Ech Mendel, Gregor 243–4"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "305"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "numeric interpretation 8, 269–70"
Paragraph 3 (7 words) [SHORT]: "redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "as reversible 153, 168–9"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "signalling function 20–21, 244"
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5"
Paragraph 7 (4 words) [SHORT]: "traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic rate and lifespan 256–8, 270–71"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "metabolic reprogramming 205–6"
Paragraph 11 (6 words) [SHORT]: "metabolism conservation of core process 18"
Paragraph 12 (8 words) [SHORT]: "as having preceded genes 5–6, 17, 118, 150"
Paragraph 13 (7 words) [SHORT]: "overemphasis on sugars 23–4, 77, 81–3, 90"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "metabolomics 16, 17n3, 189"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "metals, worldwide oxidation 176"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "methane 113–14, 116, 176–7"
Paragraph 17 (7 words) [SHORT]: "methanogens and methanotrophs 143, 164, 166, 170"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "methyl group transfer 138–9"
Paragraph 19 (11 words) [SHORT]: "microbes see bacteria and archaea; protists Millay, Edna St Vincent 17"
Paragraph 20 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Miller, Stanley 114, 116"
Paragraph 21 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mineral surfaces carbon dioxide reduction 133–41"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "compared to enzymes 134, 294"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "iron-sulfide as catalysts 135–9"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "origin of life and 133, 144"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Mitchell, Peter 58–69, 99"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Mitchell, Sir Godfrey 60–61n9"
Paragraph 27 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondria bacterial origins 68–9, 167, 281"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "as flux capacitors 244, 266"
Paragraph 29 (7 words) [SHORT]: "as location of respiration 32, 67–8n13, 70–71"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "response to damage 217"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘mitochondrial Eve’ 241–2, 246"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondrial genome diseases 240, 247–8, 263–4"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "drug response 249"
Paragraph 34 (4 words) [SHORT]: "interactions with nuclear 238–41"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "306"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "offering improved lifespan 272"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8"
Paragraph 6 (8 words) [SHORT]: "charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9"
Paragraph 7 (2 words) [SHORT]: "cristae 279"
Paragraph 8 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 263–4"
Paragraph 9 (4 words) [SHORT]: "molecules organic, defined 119"
Paragraph 10 (4 words) [SHORT]: "simple, in biochemistry 6–8"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Moncada, Salvador 216–17"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Moran, Joseph 121"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Moreira, Paula 268n10"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Morowitz, Harold 125n4, 140"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Morowitz’s cycling law 124–8"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "‘mother’s curse’ 246–8"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "movie-making analogy 97–8n6"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Moyle, Jennifer 59–60, 65–7"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Muller, Hermann 245"
Paragraph 20 (6 words) [SHORT]: "multicellular organisms parallel processing 161, 188"
Paragraph 21 (6 words) [SHORT]: "mutations accumulation with ageing 257, 269"
Paragraph 22 (6 words) [SHORT]: "affecting Krebs cycle enzymes 196, 209–10"
Paragraph 23 (8 words) [SHORT]: "in the mitochondrial genome 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "occurring outside tumours 194"
Paragraph 25 (5 words) [SHORT]: "rates in different species 195–6"
Paragraph 26 (6 words) [SHORT]: "whether underlying cancer 192–4, 196, 204"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "from X-irradiation 245"
Paragraph 28 (8 words) [SHORT]: "NAC ( N -acetyl cysteine) 249–52, 255, 263"
Paragraph 29 (12 words) [SHORT]: "NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) 63, 108n11, 179n5, 201, 206n3, 220, 261"
Paragraph 30 (7 words) [SHORT]: "NAD + to NADH ratio 179n5, 270"
Paragraph 31 (6 words) [SHORT]: "NADH 63–4, 108n11, 196, 206n3, 223"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "oxidation and age 230, 261, 270–71"
Paragraph 33 (11 words) [SHORT]: "NADP + (phosphorylated NAD + ) 107, 108n11, 109, 206n3, 218–19"
Paragraph 34 (1 words) [SHORT]: "NADPH"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "307"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "programmed cell death and 207"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and transhydrogenase 222 , 226"
Paragraph 8 (7 words) [SHORT]: "nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "nanoSIMS (secondary ion mass spectrometry) 170"
Paragraph 10 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Nature (periodical) 55, 65, 171, 193, 217"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Needham, Dorothy 29, 45"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "neurons 265–8, 274"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "electrical fields 279–80"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "neutrons 27, 80–81, 87–8, 178"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "nitric oxide (NO) 36n3, 159, 216"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "nitrogen delivered as aspartate 224, 225"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "delivered as glutamine 215, 224"
Paragraph 18 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Nobel Prizes awarded to Warburg 35, 196–7, 199"
Paragraph 19 (9 words) [SHORT]: "not awarded to Kamen, Ruben or Moyle 65, 90"
Paragraph 20 (11 words) [SHORT]: "other individual laureates 27–8, 44, 57, 59, 65, 67–8n13, 82, 97"
Paragraph 21 (16 words) [SHORT]: "nuclear genome, effects on males 247 see also mitonuclear mismatches nuclear physics, in 1932 27, 87n5"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "nucleotides as catalysts 129, 148"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "energetics of synthesis 208"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "laboratory synthesis 116n3"
Paragraph 25 (5 words) [SHORT]: "possible origin in protocells 148"
Paragraph 26 (5 words) [SHORT]: "role of glutamine 215, 222"
Paragraph 27 (11 words) [SHORT]: "from sugars and amino acids 20, 104, 122, 131, 205, 224"
Paragraph 28 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also FAD; NAD + Nunes Palmeira, Raquel 148"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Ochoa, Severo 105, 217"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "oncogenes 192–4, 205"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "oocytes and mitochondria 240–42"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Oppenheimer, Robert 82, 88, 90"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "organ transplantation 214"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Orgel, Leslie 128–31"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "308"
Paragraph 1 (10 words) [SHORT]: "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "inevitability 127, 131n7, 275"
Paragraph 3 (6 words) [SHORT]: "metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen as inimical 157"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "processes summarised 275"
Paragraph 6 (2 words) [SHORT]: "ornithine 52–3"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248"
Paragraph 9 (2 words) [SHORT]: "overeating 264"
Paragraph 10 (4 words) [SHORT]: "overheating in animals 262n8"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Overton, Judge William 125"
Paragraph 12 (10 words) [SHORT]: "oxaloacetate in cancer biochemistry 216, 220, 223–6, 228, 230–31, 260"
Paragraph 13 (9 words) [SHORT]: "as Krebs cycle intermediate 47–8, 54–7, 70, 100–101, 286"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in the Krebs non-cycle 184–5"
Paragraph 15 (14 words) [SHORT]: "in the reverse Krebs cycle 100–101, 104, 110, 123, 127–8, 173n4, 287 , 298"
Paragraph 16 (6 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen atmospheric, as in balance 177"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and the Cambrian explosion 156–8"
Paragraph 18 (8 words) [SHORT]: "cellular response to a deficit 201, 210, 213–14"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "free radical character 158"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Krebs cycle reversal and 154"
Paragraph 21 (5 words) [SHORT]: "reaction with hydrogen sulfide 114"
Paragraph 22 (5 words) [SHORT]: "from water via photosynthesis 173–4"
Paragraph 23 (2 words) [SHORT]: "palmitate 206–8"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "pancreas 265, 268"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Paramecium 276, 281"
Paragraph 26 (10 words) [SHORT]: "particle accelerators 79, 80, 81n2, 82, 83n3, 84, 85n4, 87–9"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Pauling, Linus 98, 165"
Paragraph 28 (8 words) [SHORT]: "pentose phosphate pathway/shunt 108, 131, 207, 224, 253"
Paragraph 29 (6 words) [SHORT]: "PET (positron emission tomography) scans 265"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "pH and ATP formation 64, 152"
Paragraph 31 (5 words) [SHORT]: "and CO 2 reduction 142–3"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "pH gradient, hydrothermal vents 144, 146"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "phages (bacteriophages) 282"
Paragraph 34 (7 words) [SHORT]: "philosophical approaches 58–9, 69, 99, 124, 203"

=== NEW SECTION: 36 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "309"
Paragraph 1 (9 words) [SHORT]: "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7"
Paragraph 2 (5 words) [SHORT]: "phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "photophosphorylation 99, 105"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "photorespiration 76, 109"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "mechanism 82–6, 103, 199"
Paragraph 9 (3 words) [SHORT]: "phosphoglycerate in 92"
Paragraph 10 (5 words) [SHORT]: "preceded by respiration 36, 167"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "range of locations 74–5"
Paragraph 12 (7 words) [SHORT]: "water as the source of oxygen 173–4"
Paragraph 13 (6 words) [SHORT]: "photosystems in oxygenic photosynthesis 167, 175"
Paragraph 14 (6 words) [SHORT]: "phylogenetic evidence 110, 122, 165, 168"
Paragraph 15 (6 words) [SHORT]: "pigeon-breast muscle 45, 52, 71, 189"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Pikaia 156, 183–4"
Paragraph 17 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Pinna, Silvana 152"
Paragraph 18 (5 words) [SHORT]: "plants as autotrophs 77, 103"
Paragraph 19 (5 words) [SHORT]: "carbon fixation in 83–5, 103"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "evidence relevant to cancer 228n7"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "synthesis of organics 107"
Paragraph 22 (12 words) [SHORT]: "porphyrins see haem prebiotic chemistry 116, 120–21, 129–32, 145, 148, 151, 300–301"
Paragraph 23 (9 words) [SHORT]: "predators and prey 156, 160, 180, 183, 235–6, 281"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "pressure and CO 2 reduction 142"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘primordial soup’ idea 169"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "prolyl hydroxylases 212"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "proteins breakdown in cancer 226"
Paragraph 28 (5 words) [SHORT]: "chirality of amino acids 277"
Paragraph 29 (3 words) [SHORT]: "disulfide bridges 253–4"
Paragraph 30 (4 words) [SHORT]: "folding mechanisms 13, 258"
Paragraph 31 (3 words) [SHORT]: "peptide templating 149n9"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "rubisco as the most abundant 75"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "synthesis and ATP demand 208"
Paragraph 34 (9 words) [SHORT]: "see also enzymes protists 3–4, 161, 186, 276, 281"
Paragraph 35 (6 words) [SHORT]: "‘protocells’ 24, 117, 145–50, 152–3, 275"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "310"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164"
Paragraph 2 (9 words) [SHORT]: "proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220"
Paragraph 3 (8 words) [SHORT]: "powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163"
Paragraph 4 (5 words) [SHORT]: "protons in acidic environments 137–8"
Paragraph 5 (8 words) [SHORT]: "pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262"
Paragraph 6 (2 words) [SHORT]: "representation 41"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "pyrites, iron 115, 182"
Paragraph 9 (9 words) [SHORT]: "pyruvate/pyruvic acid from CO 2 and H 2 121"
Paragraph 10 (4 words) [SHORT]: "derived from acetate 289–93"
Paragraph 11 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in glycolysis 40–41"
Paragraph 12 (5 words) [SHORT]: "in respiration 43–7, 51, 54–5"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "in reverse Krebs cycle 101–2, 105, 169, 287"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "structure and representation 42–3, 296–8"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "pyruvate dehydrogenase 209n4, 267–8, 280"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Q cycle (quinones) 68n13"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "quantum effects 64, 135, 276"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘race’ as unimportant 250"
Paragraph 19 (8 words) [SHORT]: "the Rad Lab, Berkeley 79, 82, 84, 89–90"
Paragraph 20 (6 words) [SHORT]: "radio emission from the brain 277–8"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "radioisotopes applications 16, 80"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "half-lives 81, 83. 86"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "and photosynthesis 79–82"
Paragraph 24 (6 words) [SHORT]: "radioisotopes of carbon see carbon-11; carbon-14"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Ralser, Markus 131"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Ramakrishnan, Venki 13"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Rammu, Hanadi 145"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "red beds 176, 178"
Paragraph 29 (8 words) [SHORT]: "red protein see ferredoxin redox tone 259, 271"
Paragraph 30 (6 words) [SHORT]: "respiration blocking with carbon monoxide 35"
Paragraph 31 (4 words) [SHORT]: "efficiency of aerobic 159"
Paragraph 32 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Hans Krebs on 19, 32–3, 37–8"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "hydrogen transfer in 37, 47–52"

=== NEW SECTION: 37 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "311"
Paragraph 1 (6 words) [SHORT]: "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "photophosphorylation and 99"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "as preceding photosynthesis 36"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "role of NADH 108n11"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "role of succinate 211–14"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254"
Paragraph 7 (7 words) [SHORT]: "suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264"
Paragraph 8 (12 words) [SHORT]: "respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "complex II 66 , 211, 214n5"
Paragraph 10 (6 words) [SHORT]: "complex III 66 , 225, 262"
Paragraph 11 (7 words) [SHORT]: "electron escape to form ROS 219–20, 255n4"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "fumarate reductase and 185–6"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "NADH and NADPH in 64, 108n11, 179n5, 219–20"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "succinate accumulation and 214n5"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "uncoupling in plants 228n7"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘respiratory ferment’ 199, 216"
Paragraph 17 (9 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Krebs cycle in ancient bacteria 78, 100, 101"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "distribution among species 110–11"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "driving ATP synthesis 98–104"
Paragraph 20 (2 words) [SHORT]: "energetics 104–11"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "eventual acceptance 103, 114"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "evolution and 73, 109–10"
Paragraph 23 (8 words) [SHORT]: "origins of life and 116, 118–23, 130, 152"
Paragraph 24 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Oroboros metaphor 172–3"
Paragraph 25 (6 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen levels and 106–7, 109, 157–8"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "parallels with photosynthesis 83–4"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "side products 130–31"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Warburg effect 204"
Paragraph 29 (2 words) [SHORT]: "ribosomes 13"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "ribulose bisphosphate 94–6"
Paragraph 31 (8 words) [SHORT]: "RNA (ribonucleic acid) and amino acid hydrophobicity 149n9"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "origins in protocells 148–51, 275"
Paragraph 33 (3 words) [SHORT]: "regulatory RNAs 12n2"
Paragraph 34 (4 words) [SHORT]: "RNA World hypothesis 129"
Paragraph 35 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Rodriguez, Enrique 252"
Paragraph 36 (9 words) [SHORT]: "ROS (reactive oxygen species) from mitochondrial complex I 230"

=== NEW SECTION: 36 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "312"
Paragraph 1 (4 words) [SHORT]: "supercharged membrane potentials 219"
Paragraph 2 (4 words) [SHORT]: "in transplant organs 214n5"
Paragraph 3 (13 words) [SHORT]: "see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72"
Paragraph 4 (8 words) [SHORT]: "roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270"
Paragraph 5 (6 words) [SHORT]: "the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53"
Paragraph 6 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102"
Paragraph 7 (7 words) [SHORT]: "rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase) Calvin–Benson cycle 96"
Paragraph 8 (4 words) [SHORT]: "carbon isotope ratios 178"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "crop yields and 76, 109"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as repurposed 108"
Paragraph 11 (5 words) [SHORT]: "shortcomings as an enzyme 75–6"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Russell, Mike 115–16, 119"
Paragraph 13 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Rutherford, Ernest 30, 81"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sagan, Carl 165"
Paragraph 15 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sanger, Fred 59"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Schon, Eric 266"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "science cancer research spending 192"
Paragraph 18 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘creation science’ and 125"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as creative 36"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "culture and risk taking 198"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "disagreements in 116"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "major unsolved problems 276–7"
Paragraph 23 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as self-correcting 94n6"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "serendipitous discoveries 228n7, 248"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as teamwork 97–8n9"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "testable predictions 50, 68n13"
Paragraph 27 (3 words) [SHORT]: "as uncertain 273"
Paragraph 28 (4 words) [SHORT]: "‘Scopes II’ trial 124"
Paragraph 29 (5 words) [SHORT]: "selection and cancer 191, 217"
Paragraph 30 (5 words) [SHORT]: "favouring biochemical efficiency 116n3, 118"
Paragraph 31 (5 words) [SHORT]: "favouring reproductive fitness 4, 234"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "flight and ROS flux 271–2"
Paragraph 33 (6 words) [SHORT]: "operating on random RNA sequences 149–51"
Paragraph 34 (4 words) [SHORT]: "self, sensation of 280"
Paragraph 35 (6 words) [SHORT]: "senescent (epigenetic) states 259, 262, 269–72"

=== NEW SECTION: 35 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "313"
Paragraph 1 (3 words) [SHORT]: "serpentinisation 120, 174"
Paragraph 2 (6 words) [SHORT]: "sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "sexual ornamentation 261"
Paragraph 4 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6"
Paragraph 5 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183"
Paragraph 6 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sirevag, Reidun 102"
Paragraph 8 (2 words) [SHORT]: "sirtuins 223"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "small organic molecules on Enceladus 117"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "protein binding 85"
Paragraph 11 (11 words) [SHORT]: "see also Krebs cycle intermediates Snowball Earth episodes 158, 176, 179"
Paragraph 12 (6 words) [SHORT]: "SNPs (single-nucleotide polymorphisms) 235, 249–50, 264"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Soddy, Frederick 81"
Paragraph 14 (3 words) [SHORT]: "sodium gradients 163n2"
Paragraph 15 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sojo, Victor 144"
Paragraph 16 (3 words) [SHORT]: "space missions 117"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "speciation, and the mitochondrial genome 238–9"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "starvation 70, 236"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "stem cells 203, 208n4"
Paragraph 20 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Stephenson, Marjory 29, 31, 59–60"
Paragraph 21 (9 words) [SHORT]: "submarine vents see hydrothermal succinate accumulation in disease 214–15"
Paragraph 22 (4 words) [SHORT]: "catalytic role 46–7, 286–7"
Paragraph 23 (4 words) [SHORT]: "citrate conversion to 51–2"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "and hypoxia 185, 211–12"
Paragraph 25 (7 words) [SHORT]: "at Krebs non-cycle meeting point 185, 210"
Paragraph 26 (3 words) [SHORT]: "in photosynthesis 105–6"
Paragraph 27 (5 words) [SHORT]: "succinate dehydrogenase 185, 210–11, 214–15"
Paragraph 28 (12 words) [SHORT]: "succinyl CoA 128 , 184, 215 , 222 , 231, 260–61n7, 286–7"
Paragraph 29 (7 words) [SHORT]: "sugars in the Calvin-Benson cycle 95–6n8, 98"
Paragraph 30 (9 words) [SHORT]: "overemphasis on, in metabolism 77, 81–3, 90, 95, 103"
Paragraph 31 (8 words) [SHORT]: "see also glucose sulfate as an oxidant 181"
Paragraph 32 (5 words) [SHORT]: "sulfur, in CoA 57, 289–90"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "sulfur bacteria 100, 104–5, 114"
Paragraph 34 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Sweetlove, Lee 228n7"

=== NEW SECTION: 34 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "314"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "endosymbiosis 69, 221n6"
Paragraph 3 (4 words) [SHORT]: "between tissues 189–90, 265"
Paragraph 4 (8 words) [SHORT]: "Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299"
Paragraph 5 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Thauer, Rolf 163n2"
Paragraph 6 (8 words) [SHORT]: "thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275"
Paragraph 7 (6 words) [SHORT]: "and the Krebs cycle 22, 126"
Paragraph 8 (5 words) [SHORT]: "laws recast as information 4"
Paragraph 9 (4 words) [SHORT]: "and metabolic rate 258–9"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Second law 124"
Paragraph 11 (2 words) [SHORT]: "thioacetate 151–2"
Paragraph 12 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Thompson, Craig 206–7"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "tissue slice experiments 28, 33–9, 51–2, 71, 189"
Paragraph 14 (6 words) [SHORT]: "tissues differentiation 189, 202, 208–9, 269"
Paragraph 15 (4 words) [SHORT]: "flux complementarity 25, 189–90"
Paragraph 16 (4 words) [SHORT]: "symbiosis between 189–90, 265"
Paragraph 17 (5 words) [SHORT]: "traffic analogy 7–8, 14–16, 53–4"
Paragraph 18 (7 words) [SHORT]: "transhydrogenases, membrane 219–20, 222 , 226, 253"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "transmutation 27, 81, 88"
Paragraph 20 (9 words) [SHORT]: "tricarboxylic acid cycle see Krebs cycle trophic levels 159–60"
Paragraph 21 (4 words) [SHORT]: "tumour-suppressor genes 192–3, 205"
Paragraph 22 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Turin, Luca 276–9"
Paragraph 23 (6 words) [SHORT]: "twin studies 236–8, 245, 248, 263"
Paragraph 24 (4 words) [SHORT]: "uncoupling proteins 228n7, 262n8"
Paragraph 25 (4 words) [SHORT]: "urea 8, 28, 38–9"
Paragraph 26 (4 words) [SHORT]: "urea cycle 52, 224–7"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Van Leeuwenhoek, Antonie 3"
Paragraph 28 (6 words) [SHORT]: "ventilation in an anaerobic world 183"
Paragraph 29 (4 words) [SHORT]: "vertebrates, ancestors of 155–6"
Paragraph 30 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Vesalius, Andreas 243"
Paragraph 31 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Viagra 216"
Paragraph 32 (3 words) [SHORT]: "viruses 205, 282"
Paragraph 33 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The Vital Question (book) 281"

=== NEW SECTION: 29 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "315"
Paragraph 1 (5 words) [SHORT]: "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62"
Paragraph 2 (7 words) [SHORT]: "vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252"
Paragraph 3 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16"
Paragraph 4 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Walker, Sara 130n6"
Paragraph 5 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Walker, Sir John 67–8n13"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279"
Paragraph 7 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg, Emil 197"
Paragraph 8 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203"
Paragraph 9 (5 words) [SHORT]: "cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49"
Paragraph 10 (7 words) [SHORT]: "disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200"
Paragraph 11 (4 words) [SHORT]: "experimental approach 33, 35–8"
Paragraph 12 (4 words) [SHORT]: "respiration before photosynthesis 167"
Paragraph 13 (8 words) [SHORT]: "the Warburg effect 196–7, 203–6, 209, 215, 222"
Paragraph 14 (4 words) [SHORT]: "reverse Warburg effect 204"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "water dehydration reactions in 138"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "oxygen from, in photosynthesis 173–4"
Paragraph 17 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Watson, James 10, 128"
Paragraph 18 (3 words) [SHORT]: "West, Geoffrey 257n5"
Paragraph 19 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wildman, Sam 75"
Paragraph 20 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wilkins, Maurice 10"
Paragraph 21 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Wimpey Construction 60–61n9"
Paragraph 22 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Wonderful Life , by Gould 156n1"
Paragraph 23 (5 words) [SHORT]: "X-rays, biological effects 87n5, 245"
Paragraph 24 (5 words) [SHORT]: "X-ray crystallography 10, 13, 59"
Paragraph 25 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Xavier, Joana 269n11"
Paragraph 26 (2 words) [SHORT]: "xenon 277–8"
Paragraph 27 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Z scheme 175, 199"
Paragraph 28 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Zuckerkandl, Emil 165"

=== NEW SECTION: 23 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (1 words) [SHORT]: "316"
Paragraph 1 (7 words) [SHORT]: "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1"
Paragraph 2 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Title Page 3"
Paragraph 3 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Copyright 4"
Paragraph 4 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Dedication 5"
Paragraph 5 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Contents 6"
Paragraph 6 (4 words) [SHORT]: "Introduction: Life itself 8"
Paragraph 7 (5 words) [SHORT]: "1. Discovering the nanocosm 27"
Paragraph 8 (6 words) [SHORT]: "2. The path of carbon 62"
Paragraph 9 (6 words) [SHORT]: "3. From gases to life 91"
Paragraph 10 (3 words) [SHORT]: "4. Revolutions 124"
Paragraph 11 (6 words) [SHORT]: "5. To the dark side 150"
Paragraph 12 (5 words) [SHORT]: "6. The flux capacitor 181"
Paragraph 13 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Epilogue: Self 211"
Paragraph 14 (5 words) [SHORT]: "Envoi: ‘Like Most Revelations’ 219"
Paragraph 15 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"
Paragraph 16 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"
Paragraph 17 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Appendix 1: Red protein mechanics 222"
Paragraph 18 (6 words) [SHORT]: "Appendix 2: The Krebs line 227"
Paragraph 19 (4 words) [SHORT]: "List of abbreviations 233"
Paragraph 20 (3 words) [SHORT]: "Further reading 236"
Paragraph 21 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Acknowledgements 282"
Paragraph 22 (2 words) [SHORT]: "Index 288"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "9 tweezers, read out the code that specifies their structures, deciphered the they function. We have taken them apart, in centrifuges or with optical know what most of these whirring parts do, what they’re made of, how gyrating predator. Some 350 years after van Leeuwenhoek, we now themselves free f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "10 matter? The idea that there is a vital force, that life is fundamentally biology: what processes animate cells and set them apart from inanimate meaningful. A far better question goes back to the formative years of wrong question, which can’t be answered precisely because it is not new laws of ph..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "11 that cells are not made of an amorphous protoplasm composed of information. The golden age of biochemistry began with a realisation first look to where biology has turned a blind eye since the ascent of To understand this flow of energy and matter and all it portends, we must The dynamic side and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "12 reliably going through exactly the same succession. This is the flux that may be several hundred vehicles entering a street every second , each one streets in a cell (with the same thing happening in each of them) but there incomprehensible number. You might say that there’s a lot of repeat cell ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "13 evidence for the unity of biochemistry. His slightly maniacal phrase Dutch pioneer of microbiology, Albert Kluyver, marshalled new heart cells behave in similar circumstances. In the 1920s, another great oxygen or grow in its absence is remarkably similar to how our own life. Painstaking experime..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "14 but technically there is no loss of meaning, and the canon can be might not enjoy listening to the works of Shakespeare in blips and bleeps Morse code only has two letters and can convey the same meaning. We compared with, say, the twenty-six letters of the English alphabet, but the sequence down..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "15 think about everything, it has also helped us forget some lessons from exhaustive exploration of the digital jungle has changed the way we cheats. Nothing in biology has escaped digital scrutiny. But while our bearing suggests; nearly a third of offspring are fathered by philandering example, tur..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "16 the atomic structure of the latest machines. In comparison, even the admiration, for every issue seems to contain at least two papers detailing pages of journals such as Nature with a mixture of jealousy and of us who don’t solve the structure of proteins for a living look at the preoccupied some..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "17 harassed local authorities may procrastinate for months, the genes extra traffic flow? No problem: widen the road. Unlike a city, where immediately implemented. Alternative route too narrow to accommodate frustration travels straight to the genes, where contingency plans are horns. Something simi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "18 take a sample of cells and look at the distribution of flux at one moment, map, showing live congestion, but it’s still a snapshot in time. We can differ from that in one of yours? It is closer to a satnav-enabled road how does the flux of materials and energy through one of my heart cells pathwa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "19 metabolism has changed little in part because it was never powered to generation, without pause, right back to the emergence of life. Core living metabolic network in the egg cell, a flame passed from generation inert information in the form of genes – our inheritance includes this minute by minu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "20 burning very small carbon skeletons is not an efficient process, he just a few simple steps? Krebs himself suggested one plausible answer: discharged into the outside world. But why is it a cycle at all? Why not the cell, while the inert carcasses of water and carbon dioxide are The energy releas..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "21 yin and yang at all. cycle into sharp modern focus but does not explain why the cycle has a the synthesis of new organic molecules. This question brings the Krebs the Krebs cycle – how to offset the needs of energy generation against problem in all these disparate cases is how to balance the yin ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "22 many people an obscure subject, full of runic symbols that suggest a own tantalisingly different ways. I appreciate that biochemistry is for the way we are, and ultimately why we age and die, each of us in our This is the story of our planet from within our cells – what makes us high-octane world..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "23 the universal precursors of life. view) reacting the simple gases hydrogen and carbon dioxide to generate bacteria that run the cycle backwards (or forwards, from their point of the core of metabolism lies in the Krebs cycle – as practised by ancient the sugary chemistry of photosynthesis and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "24 ancestral pathways for dealing with low oxygen levels, driving with age, intermediates such as succinate accumulate and trigger the generation. As the flux through our Krebs cycle becomes more sluggish need to use the same pathway for biosynthesis as well as energy emerges from the yin and yang o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "25 builds up; in effect, a car park. To understand which one requires a lot of context reflect the opposite – almost no downstream flux, so the intermediate gradually flux, with the intermediate being constantly replenished at high levels, or it could in the cell does not necessarily imply high flux..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "26 just be called gnomics. and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "28 bacteria living in stagnant river waters, causing more anguish at the on bacterial metabolism. Her pioneering studies (most famously on research, for example convincing the young Marjory Stephenson to work MRC either), Hopkins did occasionally influence their direction of affectionately as Hoppy ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "29 laboratory included people of many dispositions, convictions and he called ‘the British way of life’, writing that ‘The Cambridge that Krebs had known in Germany. Years later, Krebs reflected on what You can imagine that Hopkins’s lab was very different to anything changes in gas pressure. a carg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "30 stories – but also the more scope they have to colour our thinking. Krebs it was won. That’s only human. The harder the discoveries, the better the way was hard won. And knowledge comes tinged with the stories of how called ‘powerhouses’ of the cell; but every scrap of knowledge along the We now ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "31 reaction step. It took unimaginable patience and skill to figure out gave an indirect view of what was actually happening, for just a single needed to measure one biochemical reaction filled half a room, and still submerged in a water-bath controlled by a thermostat. The apparatus pressure measur..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "32 4. and chlorophyll.’ He wasn’t so far from the truth, as we’ll see in Chapter oxidation. For evidently, the ferment existed earlier than haemoglobin arisen from the ferment – blood pigments by reduction, leaf pigment by before photosynthesis: ‘blood pigment and leaf pigments have both ferment. Fr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "33 rate of respiration in the presence or absence of respiratory inhibitors. amounts of various substances that could be respired, and measure the manometers simultaneously in a single study. He would add known folk sag at the prospect. Krebs sometimes ran as many as ten single method, coupled to a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "34 in his tissue slices, as did adding carboxylic acids. But adding both of Krebs found that adding amino acids increased the rate of respiration matters became interesting. which as we’ve seen consumes and releases gases too. And that’s where measurements, he needed to take into account the rate of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "35 is the three-carbon pyruvic acid: book. What exactly is a carboxylic acid? Let me draw one for you. This It is time to get acquainted with the molecular protagonists of this released captured and put to use? were burned in oxygen. What were the steps? How was the energy ever. Surely, the secret o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "36 touch unstable and reactive. Now the middle oxygen in my picture is bond tends to throw its weight about. That’s what makes pyruvic acid a to oxygen, which likes nothing better than getting into a fight; the extra That’s because the middle carbon atom in pyruvic acid has a double bond suit, or a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "37 something of a Cheshire Cat grin: symmetry and stability. It can be drawn like this, giving pyruvate oxygen atoms, giving a ‘delocalised cloud’ of electrons that confers clarity. But in reality this charge is smeared in space between the two left with a negative charge (–) which I’ve shown on the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "38 one carbon. In other words, the C3 pyruvate should be broken down into that the intermediates should be stripped down to two carbons and then carbon molecules of pyruvate, so a reasonable working assumption was Krebs knew that the six-carbon glucose is initially split into two three- individually..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "39 exactly how much of the carboxylic acid remained in the muscle after the (by up to 600 per cent!!) over prolonged periods. Yet when he analysed acids, notably succinate, dramatically increased the rate of respiration to. Szent-Györgyi found that adding small amounts of C4 carboxylic changes; in r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "40 Pulling hydrogen biology at the time. Almost ... yet had a general catalytic activity, unlike almost anything else known in more perplexing. The bottom line is that succinate was fairly unreactive overall speed of respiration. That only made the individual steps even succinate doesn’t increase th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "41 or more specifically 2H. The product is water, or H 2 O. Warburg had Recall that respiration consumes oxygen by reacting it with hydrogen, respiration. even more intriguing examples of hydrogen transfer, somehow linked to hydrogen was transferred had entranced Szent-Györgyi. Now here were would r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "42 Remember that the formula for glucose is C 6 H 12 O 6 . Szent-Györgyi then CO 2 should be released from the skeletal remains of the sugar. 2H was stripped out from the sugar and passed onto a carboxylic acid, If C4 carboxylic acids were merely hydrogen carriers, then as each point do we just ‘loo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "43 length. Presumably, these steps, in which CO 2 was pulled out, needed the carboxylic acids were clipped down from six to four carbon atoms in escaped Krebs’s notice that these steps released two CO 2 molecules, as (called α-ketoglutarate) to the four C4 carboxylic acids. It had not interconnected..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "44 essence, adding more of any constituent gives rise to more of the next, Krebs realised that biochemical cycles are necessarily catalytic. In systems, that Hopkins had celebrated at the Royal Society in 1932. insight, with just the degree of unexpectedness to be expected of living the addition of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "45 reaction did operate under normal metabolic conditions, catalysed by an quite harsh chemical conditions, and without an enzyme. If a similar from oxaloacetate and pyruvate, in effect welding them together under mattered to Krebs. It had recently been shown that citrate could be made come back to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "46 and we will encounter it repeatedly. Once formed, acetyl CoA reacted metabolism across the whole of life, from ancient bacteria to ourselves, short. This turned out to be perhaps the single most central molecule in named the overall assemblage acetyl coenzyme A or acetyl CoA for attached to a lar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "47 properly. The process by which glucose is oxidised goes like this. First, oxaloacetate, to give the C6 citrate. At last, everything added up Once activated in this way, the C2 acetate can be attached onto the C4 (and that remaining oxygen is beginning to stare a bit): what makes the composite mol..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "48 commented that ‘Peter is too original for his examiners.’ He finally all’. Mitchell’s mentor, the distinguished Polish biochemist David Keilin, and ‘statids’. The examiners dismissed his work as ‘not really a thesis at grounded in his own development of ancient Greek theory on ‘fluctids’ thesis o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "49 ‘Beethovenian’ appearance, with a flowing mane of hair (he too later keen intellect and wide-ranging interests, as well as his cultivated first meeting Mitchell at departmental tea in 1947. She was struck by his joined Marjory Stephenson in Cambridge as a research assistant in 1946, year helping ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "50 frankly, this view is still prevalent today. The goal of biochemistry was about living matter that could not be reduced to mere chemistry; and discredited idea of vitalism, implying that there was something special Many biochemists were uncomfortable with this view, as it recalled the cells’, arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "51 term NADH, just focus on the ‘H’. I hope you will develop a Pavlovian NADH will figure large later in this book, but for now, when you see the leaving another proton nearby, bound onto water) is called NADH. 10 components of hydrogen (or more exactly, two electrons and one proton, dinucleotide’, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "52 in the mid-1960s, laying out the basic experimental approaches still used Moyle together published a series of ground-breaking papers in Nature contribution would surely not have been overlooked today. Mitchell and which he alone was awarded the Nobel prize in 1978. Her essential contributed larg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "53 decades, right up to today. depending on factors that have kept bioenergeticists busy for whole number but a fraction (3.3 in humans) and can vary that the number of ATPs formed from a single NADH is not a ‘wasted’ but are saved up towards the next ATP. Note this means motor, which generates thre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "54 chemiosmotic hypothesis, in the mid-1960s, Lynn Margulis was ‘powerhouses’ of complex cells. When Mitchell was developing his This is how respiration works in our own mitochondria, the pitches – all charged with the power of a bolt of lightning. were flat, they would cover an area equivalent to a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "55 ketoglutarate. The α-ketoglutarate spins round the Krebs cycle to form wasting is glutamine. This is converted into the C5 carboxylic acid α- most common amino acid that is shipped around the body from muscle ammonia plus the carboxylic acids that enter the Krebs cycle. By far the Krebs back in t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "56 with plenty of glucose needed to form acetyl CoA). But had they possible, to provide energy for flying (and the tissue slices were supplied by 600% because that tissue is poised to oxidise glucose as quickly as Adding succinate to pigeon-breast muscle raised the respiratory rate Szent-Györgyi and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "57 synthesis is secondary. That impression is strengthened by the fact that presented it in this chapter: breakdown is its primary purpose, and that’s still how it is presented in most textbooks, and how I have cycle in animals as largely dedicated to the breakdown of organics; and perfectly aware o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "58 protein that Warburg discovered is now called cytochrome oxidase, ‘cytochrome’ that, CO would stifle respiration in your cells for the same reasons. The haem haemoglobin of your red blood cells and displacing oxygen, but if you survived 3 Carbon monoxide poisoning can kill you by binding to the i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "59 refers to two hydrogen atoms, which are typically attached to other molecules, difference but might leave you feeling exasperated with pedantic scientists. 2H 6 Let me just clarify the distinction between 2H and H 2 . It’s an important medical problem, cancer, which took away most of what was dea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "60 work on bioenergetics included demonstrating that respiration takes place in ATP synthesis, in two classic papers in the late 1940s. Lehninger’s pioneering famous textbook) to show that the oxidation of NADH by oxygen was linked to significance. It fell to the great US biochemist Albert Lehninger..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "61 Mitchell. the membrane through precisely the type of spatial coupling proposed by mechanisms, known as the Q cycle, in which quinones transfer protons across errors, Mitchell was in fact correct about one of the most baffling pumping disprove a hypothesis, regardless of whether it was true or not..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "63 unity of biochemistry. In the Introduction, we touched on the value of emblematic of a more interesting and deeper problem: the dogma of the which swiftly came to be seen as the enzyme for carbon fixation – is carrot of improved yields dangling distractingly overhead. Yet rubisco – rubisco with a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "64 of creation. gaze from the lofty pinnacles of evolution down to the obscure canyons understand the deep chemistry of life (and death ...) we must shift our bowels of the Earth. Many had no need for the sun. If we want to already ancient, living from gases and rocks, sometimes deep in the party to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "65 course into a circular path. With each acceleration the circle widens, so every second) while applying an external magnetic field that bends their rapidly reversing an electric voltage (thousands or millions of times centre of a circular vacuum chamber, and their flight is accelerated by targeted..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "66 experimentation was necessary. The results were often unpredictable, experimentation. Indeed, the theory was so unreliable that this commonplace that it had become a matter for respectable head off as alchemists!’ By the 1930s, though, transmutation was so responded ‘For Christ’s sake don’t call ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "67 Kamen and Ruben, but also made clear the importance of proper This bonding experience cemented a strong friendship between the Nobel prize for his pioneering work on cyclotrons in 1939. 3 Luckily, this embarrassing mishap doesn’t stop Lawrence from receiving contamination from laboratory dust bak..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "68 the whole pathway. then track the path of carbon in photosynthesis, giving a route map for to identify them. By building up a time-course, Kamen and Ruben could radioactive molecules and use the standard methods of organic chemistry periods would give later products. All they had to do was isolat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "69 metabolism, but the path was twisted. I mentioned in Chapter 1 that the carboxylic acids and the Krebs cycle for CO 2 fixation and so all of core as Krebs-cycle intermediates. This could have signalled the centrality of the first product was a carboxylic acid, with the same kind of chemistry towa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "70 vanishes in an instant, a ghostly apparition. Larger particles such as through the cloud chamber, leaving a long, spindly vapour trail that through the chamber. A proton is tiny and fast moving. It whizzes part. The vapour trail formed depends on what kind of particle is passing vapour trail simi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "71 developing the new protocols. Ruben was set to work in defending the isotopes, notably uranium and plutonium. Kamen was put in charge of the cyclotrons at the Rad Lab to focus on the production of radioactive Francisco seemed only too real a target. The US government took over 1941 was greeted wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "72 power of 14 C could mark out the path by which carbon was fixed in notion that sugars are the backbone of biochemistry. Only the discerning photosynthesis today, and especially central carbon metabolism – the train a peculiar history that still influences how we understand discovery, coupled with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "73 radioactivity emanating from the 14 C would then betray its presence as a precise place on the paper, depending on its chemical properties. The incorporated into a specific type of molecule, this would migrate to a paper, which darkened in the presence of radioactivity. If the 14 C was first). Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "74 smudge, it is a whole world! why scientists get so excited about the seemingly abstruse. That is no simple molecule that made sense. All that in one dark smudge. This is language of science, of human comprehension, of the rational mind – a tangible clue, which transformed nature’s deepest magic i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "75 through a rejigging process to regenerate three C5 molecules – all the be used anywhere in metabolism, while the other five C3 molecules went cycle produce six C3 molecules. One of these could be siphoned off to arithmetic, albeit a strange numbers game. Three complete turns of the on, giving two..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "76 imploded, so his greatest achievements in the field were more wrong? Calvin’s own cherished ideas on photochemistry had recently to go, and Calvin made no obvious effort on his behalf. What went dismissed Benson with the words ‘It is time to go.’ Benson had no place cycle. For reasons that were n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "77 against the king. That’s exactly what happened next – and why it took so amounted an insurrection against the unity of biochemistry, a rebellion anyone had the temerity to claim another way of fixing CO 2 , that assimilation of CO 2 via the Calvin cycle.’ You can imagine that if ‘One important pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "78 motive force’ from Chapter 1. In the case of photosynthesis, a current of paths, just as they do in respiration. Remember Peter Mitchell’s ‘proton- in turn splits into electrons and protons, which then follow different stripping the 2H from H 2 O through the auspices of chlorophyll. The 2H the sa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "79 highlight the key points): had in mind (I’m just slightly simplifying their original diagram to It could drive growth like a ... well, like a bacterium. Here’s what they would make four, three turns make eight, four turns sixteen, and so on ... complete turn of the cycle generates two molecules, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "80 pyruvate (plus that metabolic link between carboxylic acids and sugars, thought of as Krebs-cycle intermediates, notably acetyl CoA and backwards: it includes several extra carboxylic acids that are not usually reverse cycle is slightly longer than the standard cycle running cycle here – that’s s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "81 saw Krebs-cycle intermediates everywhere – the same carboxylic acids autoradiographs: I had expected to see sugar phosphates but instead I elsewhere. I was astonished when I first looked at Benson’s in autotrophic metabolism became obscured, as the focus shifted don’t contribute to carbon fixatio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "82 whole was deemed to be irreversible. dismissed as energetically too unfavourable. That meant the cycle as a (C2 to C3 and C4 to C5) were taken to be biochemically impossible, as if they were plants. Even so, the remaining two carboxylation steps not animals, yet here were animal tissues – our own..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "83 steps; see Appendix 1 if you want to know – the process is rather Let’s not worry about exactly how that works here (it requires several to form a carbon-to-carbon bond: takes the electrons from the 2H and transfers them onto CO 2 , enabling it CO 2 has to be bound onto something very like itself..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "84 (Fd) to form Fd 2– . In the presence of oxygen, Fd 2– is dangerous as need sunlight to transfer the electrons from 2H onto ferredoxin H 2 S, H 2 or H 2 O depending on the type of photosynthesis – but all photosynthesis, powered by sunlight. The 2H could come from Transfer of electrons from 2H to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "85 sizeable yield, but at least they survive to die another day. The penalty staving off an impending catastrophe. Certainly, this can cost plants a lowering the levels of reactive ferredoxin and oxygen simultaneously, again. So it could be that photorespiration acts as a safety valve, NADPH back to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "86 citrate into acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate. The gene encoding ATP citrate ATP citrate lyase. As it says on the tin, this enzyme uses ATP to split own Krebs cycle running backwards, but by a distinct enzyme called CoA is not catalysed by the familiar ‘citrate synthase’ enzyme from our page 101. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "87 Large Hadron Collider at CERN, in Geneva, with a diameter of 27 km. of cyclotrons are called synchrotrons. The largest cyclic particle accelerator is the with the flight of charged particles. As a result, the higher-powered descendants has to be taken into consideration in synchronising the rever..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "88 budget meeting for anything but the timing of his heart attack. Calvin lost 30 kg in weight and quit smoking. It would be unfair to blame the 7 Calvin’s wife Genevieve took matters in hand: under her strict dietary regime, wonders. detrimental mutations are part of natural selection, driving the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "89 twentieth century. revolutionise our understanding of life, the universe and everything in the lead to fundamentally new ways of seeing the world, and which did so much to to develop better ways of assessing radically new ideas in science – the kind that rise above our own baser instincts. For th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "90 NAD + form. We’ll come back to the significance of NADPH in Chapter 5. electrons, whereas NADH tends to offload its electrons, leaving it mostly in the reaction. NADP + is normally present as NADPH, the form that is replete with maintained at very different ratios, enabling them to promote distin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "92 reverse Krebs cycle uses iron–sulfur proteins, notably ferredoxin, to ripe for a new conception of the origin of life. In broad brushstroke, the autotrophic bacteria depend on the Calvin–Benson cycle. The time was was finally gaining credence, as gene sequences made it clear that not all fixation..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "93 these terms for now. Suffice to say that science is often furiously ultimate guide to life’s origin. Don’t worry about the meaning of all accumulation, local or planetary scales, and biology or chemistry as the genes first, autotrophy or heterotrophy, fast chemistry or slow warm ponds, light ener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "94 origin of life, or a question for gene editing and synthetic biology to intractable outcome of metabolism, written into cells from the very are smart enough? Is the difference between ageing and disease an just a trivial outcome of information systems that could be rewired, if we thermodynamics –..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "95 of the early Earth. Now, if all the carbon in organic matter plus limestone record that barely any limestone was laid down beneath the acidic oceans to form in relatively alkaline oceans. We know from the geological There was also much less limestone on the early Earth, for this tends space. made..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "96 have accumulated in warm ponds on land, there is little evidence for that such as cyanide. While relatively stable forms such as ferricyanide might That certainly can’t be said for the alternative theories based on gases CO 2 , were present at the origin of life in nearly unlimited quantities. th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "97 common ancestor, the last universal common ancestor of all life domains of life, implying that this was the only pathway present in their pathway, is found in both bacteria and archaea, the two great prokaryotic fixation across the living world. Just one of these, the acetyl CoA chapter, we now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "98 pathways form overlapping groups of Krebs-cycle intermediates. topologies that operate optimally under diverse conditions. These ‘crystallised’ into five different pathways, with distinct network multiple ways of making Krebs-cycle intermediates, which eventually bacteria and archaea, but it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "99 evolutionary biology or ‘creation science’ in schools. Being a pioneer of Scopes ‘monkey trial’ in the 1920s. Both trials concerned the teaching of McLean versus Arkansas trial, sometimes known as Scopes II, after the public in the early 1980s when called up as an expert witness at the rigour wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "100 Morowitz could not help but see the Krebs cycle as the perfect cyclone Always an admirer of the iconic metabolic charts of biochemistry, hence energy flow powers the cycling of matter. the dissipation of heat means that no pathway is perfectly reversible, energy balance – another great steady-st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "101 Leslie Orgel. serious was pointed out by another pioneering origin-of-life researcher, some grave problems with Morowitz’s view too. Perhaps the most treacherous guide in science, as in life. Life is rarely simple and there are of chemistry give way to the wiles of biology? But beauty can be a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "102 accident’, meaning that the code was essentially random, and became problem of the genetic code, which Crick had pronounced a ‘frozen seeded on Earth by an alien civilisation. That conception grew from the possibility of directed panspermia – the idea that life was deliberately 1970s, which ende..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "103 precisely nothing to amplify. of the final step. Fat chance of autocatalysis. Each cycle would have came the sucker punch. The first step of any cycle depends on the yield without enzymes increasing the selectivity and yield of each step. Then successive steps to regenerate its starting point, c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "104 geological environment – alkaline hydrothermal vents – to the heart of that already has unique explanatory power in connecting an omnipresent from CO 2 and H 2 . That’s a big deal, because it substantiates a hypothesis years, that these Krebs line intermediates do indeed form spontaneously We’ve..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "105 between the oxygen atoms and the mineral surface, depicted here with apposition with the surface and is held in place by electrical attractions to keep things simple. Imagine that a CO 2 molecule comes into close containing iron and sulfur (such as greigite), shown below as a wavy line Consider ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "106 greigite is nearly identical to the tiny clusters of iron and sulfur that remarkable: the lattice structure of iron and sulfur in minerals such as parallel between mineral surfaces and enzymes such as ferredoxin is transfer of electrons onto CO 2 in cells today (see Appendix 1). The mineral surf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "107 sequence showing roughly what happens: transfer of hydrogen, even in the absence of hydrogen itself. Here’s a Overall, the transfer of electrons and protons onto CO 2 equates to the They can then follow the electrons onto CO 2 attached to the surface. onto the surface of the mineral, positioning..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "108 with a nearby proton, in this case forming an OH (an ‘alcohol’ group): in the middle panel that the electron pair on the oxygen is quickly shared same thing can happen repeatedly. So here’s what happens next. Notice to add a hydrogen atom onto the carbon, giving an organic molecule. The proton p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "109 sometimes said that this kind of dehydration is impossible at the origin of reaction: water is being removed in a watery environment. It’s what’s formed overall – water! This is what’s called a dehydration already an excess of OH – ions in the surroundings. And second, look in acidic environment..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "110 and one of the most important molecules in all metabolism. We have just equivalent to acetyl CoA – discovered, if you recall, by Fritz Lipmann, But now look at the product. This bound molecule is a prebiotic enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase catalyses exactly this reaction. process as well as..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "111 concentration of hydrogen in hydrothermal fluids is high, that tends to gas, bubbling straight out of alkaline hydrothermal vents. If the these electrons being replenished from? The answer is simple: hydrogen experiments that start with CO 2 and minerals. But where exactly are all first half. No..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "112 prebiotic chemistry. The most intriguing possibility, which connects cells complex, and involve multiple enzymes, so don’t seem relevant to CO 2 ? There are several ways of doing that, but most of them are to transfer their electrons onto ferredoxin, which then passes them onto The explicit prob..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "113 electrons from H 2 (in the jargon, it is more easily reduced). And when which is to say, the local pH. So, when Ech binds protons, it can accept channel in the membrane, and their properties depend on proton binding, from H 2 to ferredoxin. Two of the clusters sit right next to a proton protein ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "114 Small steps, giant leaps them. verification – for once, not slain by an ugly fact. I take my hat off to absence of a steep pH gradient. This is beautiful experimental organics were formed at normal air pressure, or without H 2 gas, or in the molecules (mainly formate) really did derive from the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "115 (where I talked about protons crossing cell membranes). The electrons crossing inorganic barriers) and organic synthesis in protocells between organic synthesis in inorganic pores (where I talked about If you are unusually alert, you may have noticed a discrepancy inside the protocells – which i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "116 the membrane, whereas a proportion of amino acids should interact with For reasons of physical chemistry, new fatty acids will go straight into principle make copies of itself, and over time can become more complex. Perhaps the most important property of this system is that it can in barriers mu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "117 against. 9 Meaning emerges with function. In other words, the genetic protocell growth (through ‘selfish’ behaviour) would be selected enhance protocell growth would be favoured, while RNA that impedes genetic sequences in terms of protocell growth. Only strings of RNA that think that means zero..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "118 unquestionably a product of genetic information and natural selection; it ATP synthase motor, as noted in Chapter 1. This awesome nanomotor is 22 here. ATP synthesis is powered by proton gradients, which rotate the enables these difficult steps to happen is ATP. There’s an apparent catch- RNA sy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "119 roughly like this: ADP (adenosine diphosphate) to form ATP at modest (20 per cent) yield, thioacetate. Once formed, acetyl phosphate will pass its phosphate onto really does – acetyl phosphate is formed from a two-carbon precursor should occur under prebiotic conditions too, and we have shown th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "120 within vents are the perfect homes for protocells that nestle in the flow and reaction of gases in the environment. The inorganic pores Growth is the non-stop formation of new organics from the continuous H 2 is replenished, and the same reaction can happen all over again. tiny proportion of H 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "121 Synthetic chemists tend to have little interest in the pathways that biochemistry as nucleotides, at high yield, ideally uncontaminated by unwanted products. 3 The tradition of synthetic chemistry aims to make the products of interest, such have been the primordial energy source. relatively comp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "122 giving rise to us; or perhaps there is some deeper reason, buried in the laws of different cosmological constants, and we have to live in one that was capable of ‘finely tuned’. Perhaps there is a multiverse in which different universes have stars, planets, organic chemistry and life as we know ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "123 through selection on protocell growth. RNA, giving a genetic code linked directly with function, that can evolve amino-acid sequence in short peptides depends on the sequence of letters in RNA polymerisation, would then depend on that location. This templating of and potentially interact with me..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "125 cycle, burning them, the revolution that powered the revolution. from the reverse Krebs cycle, making organics, to our own oxidative explosion more than three billion years later. It turned, quite literally, years ago, to the chemistry of 2H and O 2 , powering the Cambrian from the chemistry of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "126 behaviour of oxygen, the world that we know and love could not exist. predominantly two-electron chemistry of carbon, versus the one-electron It’s sobering to realise that without the quantum rules that govern the energy-history of the Earth is the story of oxygen in the air and oceans. other th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "127 about the Krebs line : a linear pathway that arguably preceded the cycle origin of life, where we left off in the previous chapter. There we talked ageing) we need to take the long view, a view that goes right back to the involved (and later in the book, to understand what goes wrong in composed..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "128 (technically, reduced) metals such as iron and nickel. In contrast, the sources, ultimately the Earth’s mantle, which is rich in electron-dense of the electrons that cells need to grow still derive from geological with less H 2 , or extract it from other sources such as H 2 S. Either way, all fr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "129 methane (CH 4 ) and water (H 2 O) as waste products. In this case, each 2H likely CO 2 itself. Transferring 2H onto CO 2 – repeatedly – generates Earth, the most common electron acceptor was not oxygen, but most released is used to pump protons, just as in respiration. On the early electrons fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "130 her classic paper on ferredoxin in 1966. the history of life on Earth like never before. The beginning of it all was protein sequences – the basis of modern phylogenetics – to reconstruct bond energies) with her pioneering computational work on comparing underpinning planetary processes such as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "131 serious disadvantage compared with the more familiar oxygenic for methanogens. The sun provides this power instead. But there is still a without the need for burning fuel to power pumping – the 40-fold cost from a donor (H 2 S) to an acceptor (ferredoxin) and then onto CO 2 , huge advantage here..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "132 horizons, let’s first see how these limits are built into the universal core explore how the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis opened up new synthesis of ATP. This world left its imprint on biochemistry. Before we systems, which were needed to drive the reduction of ferredoxin and the gases s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "133 the same energy constraints). But this efficiency only works under Calvin–Benson cycle (which with oxygenic photosynthesis doesn’t face pyruvate via the reverse Krebs cycle are less than half those of the respect, it’s striking that the ATP costs to make a single molecule of fixing CO 2 . Make t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "134 reflecting an intimate metabolic relationship between the cells: how stoichiometry. This stoichiometry varied with the cells’ colours, comparable distribution of cells, even consistent numbers – a precise bacteria or archaea. The clumps were usually similar in size, with a displaying two differe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "135 decreased, by removing it to form C: increased, by living next to a good source of it (a vent will do), and B is can be pushed in the forward direction if the concentration of A is the direction of a reaction that is close to equilibrium substrates that enter the pathway while removing the end p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "136 not some virgin to placate a medieval dragon, but water. Zap. Repeat. sacrificial gift offered by the trembling priestly protein. This sacrifice is Transiently angry, chlorophyll snatches a replacement from the off down an electron-transport chain embedded in the membrane. excited electron, zapp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "137 flowing from water – water everywhere! – to synthesise ATP in the first ferredoxin simultaneously. Now, the power of the sun sets electrons scheme, oxygenic photosynthesis could now generate ATP and reduce distinct photosystems used in earlier forms of photosynthesis into the Z ATP, the cramped ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "138 common sense is the worst guide to the history of life. In fact, the levels oxygen in ancient rocks. I admit that doesn’t sound plausible, but being formed reacted swiftly with methane, there would be no trace of evidence against an early evolution of photosynthesis. If all the oxygen may reflec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "139 12 C over 13 C (compared with a standard ratio) by around 30 per mille rubisco, the outcome is that organic carbon becomes slightly enriched in a touch faster, so encounter enzymes more frequently. In the case of bumping into enzymes such as rubisco. Lighter molecules bounce around molecules as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "140 it means. A fall in 13 C relative to 12 C implies that far more carbon was uninterestingly dry and technical? It’s actually shocking! Just think what content), recovering slowly over ten million years. Does that sound standard, to a record 12 per mille below (much lower than the mantle 13 C 13 C..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "141 accumulations of sulfate were raised up high as continents collided and Gondwana together, around 560 million years ago, these great minerals such as gypsum. When the drifting continents brought partially evaporated to form massive deposits of evaporitic sulfate apart, large land masses became s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "142 burrowing through the stagnant muds, remaining active in even the most excess CO 2 or sulfide. Those tough survivors had already adapted to managed to deliver scraps of oxygen to their muscles and clear out circulatory systems that could be actively ventilated, animals that from random, but prim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "143 fumarate and succinate. This is the reverse pathway used in biosynthesis runs through the C3 pyruvate to the C4 oxaloacetate, then onto malate, other oxidative. The reductive prong begins with the C2 acetyl CoA and cycle (see the scheme below). One prong of this fork is reductive, the time they ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "144 switched off, and an alternative enzyme is expressed instead – succinate on and off. Conversely, when oxygen is available fumarate reductase is adaptation to low-oxygen (hypoxic) conditions, switching many genes Accumulation of succinate is a powerful signal for physiological proton pumping and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "145 sulfide, growing and reproducing in this stench, puts a premium on Cambrian explosion? Crawling around in the mud, snuffling through the organisms? And what happened in that traumatic age before the synthesis? What is the difference between microbes and multicellular So why do textbooks still cl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "146 consumes the waste products of another. That helps them to stabilise living symbiotically, with a precise stoichiometry in which one cell type We’ve seen that bacteria and archaea often benefit from company, could underpin the evolution of complex multicellularity in animals. balancing that in a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "147 web of symbiosis between tissues begins to fray. And so we age. biosynthetic pathways falter, ATP synthesis declines and the delicate cells and tissues. Tissue function eventually becomes strained, hundreds or thousands of genes, changing the stable (epigenetic) state of through the Krebs cycle,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "148 citrate. The trouble here is that high levels of oxaloacetate could interfere with broken down into acetyl CoA plus oxaloacetate, both of which can regenerate 4 The eagle-eyed will notice that statement is slightly ambiguous. Citrate is Innsbruck. philosophy), Gnaiger has a wonderful collection ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "149 burial and oxygenation is clearly misguided. levels plummeted to nearly zero. The idea that 13 C variations only reflect carbon That could explain why the 13 C signal is so large, yet soon afterwards oxygen the GOE might have been caused partly by the sequestration of sulfate on land. sulfate fl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "151 cause cancer are not set in stone, but take their meaning from the reflects the society in which we live, so the effects of oncogenes said to human delinquency cannot be blamed on individuals only, but partly is too close to dogma. Biology is not only about information. Just as to dogmas even to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "152 for cancer is older age: cancer incidence increases exponentially with of these actually causes cancer is unclear. Perhaps the greatest risk factor proliferate through pulling on the normal levers of cell division. Which can mutate genes (as they insert into DNA) but also induce cells to chronic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "153 The Warburg effect to explain the root cause of cancer. between energy and growth, the yin and yang of the Krebs cycle, begins those that suppress growth)? In this chapter, we’ll see how the tension growth (whether it be to press down the levers that drive growth, or lift words: how does any met..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "154 quartets: ‘You know Albert, your trouble is that you can’t count!’ Fritz Kreisler to his friend Einstein – the two played together in string people, though I can’t help calling to mind a quip from the great violinist It’s striking how many great scientists are also culturally rounded interest in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "155 Einstein’s reaction to the quirkiness of quantum mechanics: ‘God does itself, nearly perfect.’ To my mind, this remark is in the same vein as applied light energy is lost; on the contrary, the reaction is like the world organic world is based, is not so imperfect that the greater part of the sun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "156 produces ATP, albeit barely a tenth as much. The breakdown of glucose the Krebs cycle and respiration. Like respiration, fermentation also betrays a shortage of oxygen: an inability to make enough ATP through but still somewhat intoxicating. The accumulation of lactate normally has been replaced..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "157 had a deep-seated fear of cancer. His mother, said to be the only person who is a Jew.’ The reasons are shrouded in mystery, but Hitler apparently But he was swiftly reinstated, under Göring’s declaration ‘I will decide 50 per cent Jewish, and he was for a brief period relieved of his position. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "158 cancer. In which case, why has the number of papers citing it risen so Warburg effect. So, the Warburg effect is certainly not a universal key to outside and burn it in their mitochondria, in what’s called the reverse for their energy needs. Some cancer cells even take up lactate from to new cel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "159 rather than a genetic disease, but his focus on cell respiration missed the Warburg was arguably right that cancer is fundamentally a metabolic do indeed all induce some form of metabolic rewiring. know that many oncogenes, tumour suppressor genes and cancer viruses Warburg dismissed as obscurin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "160 get the balance between ATP, NADPH and carbon skeletons right. ATP for growth (and so cancer), and cells must wire their metabolism to NADPH. All in all, making NADPH is at least as important as making programmed cell death. Cancer cells escape this fate by making more vulnerable to oxidative st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "161 on how many proteins are actually made. The workhorses of tissues are carbon or NADPH), although in this case the demand depends primarily ATP demands (joining monomers together in chains costs ATP but not ATP. The synthesis of RNA, DNA and especially proteins has higher nucleotides also consume..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "162 excitement of his perspective on the Krebs cycle in cancer has never left his department. I have no idea what I talked about that day – but the the first time from Christian Frezza in Cambridge, before I gave a talk in the C4 intermediate succinate. I’ve never forgotten hearing about this for hy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "163 complex II and the right-hand complex is the nanomotor ATP synthase): enzyme. Overall, it works like this (where CI depicts complex I, CII is little ATP synthesis in animals that possess the fumarate reductase electron flow allows the pumping of four protons at complex I, driving a to fumarate i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "164 certain death? Look at the genes that it targets. They include genes for So how does HIF 1α making it to the nucleus in time save the cell from oxygen emergency. the protein can make it to the nucleus in time, in the rare event of an continuously just to ensure that fully functional (spanking ne..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "165 sobering. I’ll come back to a couple of these in the next chapter but just of medical conditions where this mechanism turns out to be relevant is levels, which are counteracted through changes in gene activity. The list slight impairments in Krebs-cycle flux give a read-out of succinate time fee..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "166 cancers glutamine. I have a vivid memory of discussing glutamine and substrates serve all of their needs. And of the two of them ... give the Most cancers need no more than glucose and glutamine to grow. These Another reversal Krebs cycle. in the form of the amino acid glutamine. And that, too, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "167 DeBerardinis and colleagues in 2012. They reported in Nature that cells The first wave of the storm came from Navdeep Chandel, Ralph urgently before his blackboard. Molecules acquire personality this way. whenever I think of glutamine, I can’t help but see Moncada pacing Institute for Cancer Sci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "168 means that the ATP synthase stops spinning. So protons no longer flow series. If demand for ATP is low, then ATP is not being consumed, which inside your cells right now? Everything in your mitochondria is linked in around reading this book), so demand for ATP is low. What’s going on into explos..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "169 NADH flips the direction of transhydrogenase enzyme. This now so NADH levels fall. The shift in the balance between NADPH and falls. Now NADH can transfer electrons into the respiratory chain again, though its rotary motor. As protons flow back inside, membrane potential spent, the ATP synthase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "170 glutamine looks something like the diagram on the next page: making citrate, supporting cancer cell growth. Overall, the flux from Mutations keep the enzyme jammed in reverse mode, so it keeps on because they lock in a flux that is already beneficial for cancer cells. reinforce this shift in can..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "171 strip out the acetyl group, switching off the growth signal. But their is reinforced by the context. The sirtuins are a group of enzymes that and proliferation – another signal that says grow! This epigenetic switch switch’ known as acetylation. The genes switched on drive cell growth histones. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "172 broken down to acetyl CoA. And we’ve seen the havoc that can cause. from glutamine in this way. Alternatively, from pyruvate, you can be washed out as waste. Much of the lactate excreted by cancer cells comes needed for biosynthesis. From pyruvate, you can form lactate and be C3 pyruvate, plus (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "173 oxygen in the normal way. Glycerol phosphate can be recycled by from outside the mitochondria. These electrons are transferred onto stripped of 2H, which is fed into complex III of the respiratory chain involving the Krebs cycle. It works like this. Glycerol phosphate is to generate electrical m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "174 splurged as ammonia rather than urea, promoting this vicious cycle while mutations in genes for the urea cycle. That way, excess nitrogen is free fossil fuels for the filthiest polluters. Cancer cells often acquire maintains a copious supply of free glutamine. It’s as if a state provides From th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "175 cancer cells. acetone). Yet even these metabolic hurdles are not insurmountable for make sugars from fats (although it can be done via the C3 intermediary presence tends to switch off growth signals. It’s also notoriously tricky to Because our physiology links ketone bodies with starvation, thei..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "176 deriving from the Krebs cycle. Electrons enter from NADH and pass on through the respiratory chain, and the only entry point for NADH us to the second problem. Complex I is the beginning of the longest route compensated somewhat through suppression of complex I. That brings We’ll see in the next..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "177 or don’t know about the treatments he was receiving; but also, how many for fun. He was acutely aware of his chances, and exactly what we know think. Full of zest. Always active. A man who would run up mountains and a smile to light a room, who taught me much about how to write and education, a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "178 structure, which is functionally identical, but relates to how far each one has been 3 The reason NAD P H has more power than NADH has nothing to do with the physical danger. unquestionably applied to both Warburg and Haldane – and a tendency to enjoy there is any correlation between those given..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "179 former chloroplasts. This has retained some genes that derive from the original malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum , which has a plastid derived from its called a plastid) which they use for other purposes. A famous example is the ability to photosynthesise altogether, but retained their ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "180 immunity to viral infections. Who knew they had an immune system? editing technology of CRISPR was discovered by scientists studying bacterial insights deriving from plant scientists. In a similar way, remember that the gene quarters. Focusing funding on research into human cancer would miss pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "182 to counter the effects of hundreds, nay thousands or millions of SNPs, a consume us from within. To reverse the afflictions of older age would be then we will be afflicted by a maelstrom of implacable spectres that our expected chronological time (protected by the wonders of society), and so on...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "183 genomics. Genome-wide association studies assign additive risk to The problem of missing heritability is more startling in this age of heritability of height is about 0.8. too, regardless of their upbringing. For comparison’s sake, the condition, then the other twin has about a 50 per cent chanc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "184 Wallace made ‘cybrids’, in which the genes in the nucleus came from between the mitochondria and nuclear genes. To study these interactions, nucleus too. That cooperation can be undermined by incompatibilities on the mitochondrial gene; it needs to cooperate with the genes in the cell to grow no..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "185 mitochondrial DNA into diagnostic chunks using ‘restriction enzymes’, passed on) but Wallace used a spanking new method (cutting up mitochondrial genes (the father’s mitochondrial genes are usually not Others had already established the idea of ‘uniparental inheritance’ of humans, mitochondrial ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "186 groups can be used to track the migrations of humans out of Africa into accumulation of differences in mitochondrial DNA between diverging human mitochondrial DNA, around 160,000 years ago. The gradual female, now known as ‘mitochondrial Eve’, the ancestor of all modern mitochondrial variations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "187 only dared to disagree; he was usually right. His legacy can be seen in anatomy. Galen had been undisputed for 1,400 years, but Vesalius not Vesalius did not fear to pick a fight with the ancients on points of landscapes. These plates pack a punch that has echoed down centuries. in various state..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "188 That signals directly to the nucleus, through succinate and citrate, is not being consumed) then Krebs-cycle flux must slow or even reverse. we saw in Chapter 5, if the electrical potential is too high (because ATP feeds back, shaping forward or reverse flux through the Krebs cycle. As strengthe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "189 genetics and mitochondrial function in Melbourne and was now full of mine at University College London. She had done her PhD in fly I knew little of this until Flo Camus arrived in the lab next door to confess to quite a strong fellow feeling. gaining their proteins from the yeast that ferments ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "190 people from other cultures is as human as we can get, and I will always divergent populations within the same species? Falling in love with mitochondrial and nuclear genes. So what about crosses between cause ‘hybrid breakdown’, attributed to incompatibilities between But where should we draw th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "191 Just one line. The other lines looked a bit ropey but seemed OK. We affect the males much. Yet it killed most of the females in one fly line! antioxidant. We tried one called NAC (for N -acetylcysteine), but it didn’t The cure seemed obvious: lower the stress. Give the flies an stressing the tes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "192 the suppression of respiration by NAC. That’s surprising, because ROS flight muscles of the thorax – it remained more or less constant, despite finding was that ROS flux hardly changed, least of all in the powerful The answer seems to be linked to the flux of ROS. A really striking the antioxida..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "193 Gla Inwongwan in my lab are looking into that right now, so I can’t tell of tissues: which genes are switched on or off. Enrique Rodriguez and respiration, NAC has to be having serious effects on the epigenetic state downstream effects on the activity of thousands of genes. By suppressing lower ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "194 linking together different bits of a protein, disulfide bridges change the with GSSG, oxidised thiols in proteins tend to form disulfide bridges. By There are more layers. GSH can also regenerate thiols in proteins. As the form GSSG in the flies that died. glutathione pool was more oxidised – a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "195 within a normal range. We know that the only difference between our fly suppression of complex I did indeed bring elevated ROS flux back flux was in fact unchanged in muscle tissue, so presumably the complex I, which in principle decreases ROS flux. We know that ROS that oxidation of glutathione..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "196 correlation between metabolic rate (the rate of living) and lifespan. The rate would have slowed down too). My point is that there is a broad done so, they would likely have lived a little longer (albeit their heart intend to use up any of mine running around doing exercises.’ If they had the wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "197 why lifespan only correlates loosely with metabolic rate – but to ignore in the first place? The contrasting answers to these questions explain spend on cleaning up the mess or preventing the mess from building up in reproduction or competing for a mate? How much do you want to to live anyway? W..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "198 or Krebs-cycle flux much when we’re strutting our stuff in our tails). Presumably, any incremental damage does not impede respiration glucose to react with proteins and lipids, decorating them with ‘sticky’ linking, oxidation by ROS or glycation (the tendency of sugars such as damage, whether th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "199 whereas less fit individuals can’t sustain both biosynthesis and energy once, with the Krebs cycle in full forwards mode much of the time, individuals have a respiratory system that is capable of doing both at on the relative allocation of resources to growth or energy: the fittest the amazing e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "200 linked with ageing? variations in nuclear genes. So how exactly are age-related diseases established genetic risk for these conditions is explained by known spectre of missing heritability means that only a small proportion of the or some heart condition. Take your pick. We’re all individuals. B..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "201 on which genes are active, overlaid on the energetic and biosynthetic tissues express different genes, with the effects of each SNP depending activation in the nucleus, tissue by tissue. By their very nature, different to the dwindling availability of ATP and the shifting pattern of gene rather ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "202 easily by the brain, despite high levels in the bloodstream. Perpetually insulin secretion. As secreted insulin levels fall, glucose is taken up less glucose itself – lowers the membrane potentials achievable, which saps islet mitochondria – damage that’s typically caused by the reactivity of pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "203 the mitochondria, activating pyruvate dehydrogenase further and MAMs attempt to compensate for this deficit by pumping more Ca 2+ into glucose, but insulin resistance means that they struggle to do so. 10 The Think about the problem here. To fire normally, neurons must take up now let’s just see..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "204 (10 23 , or 100,000,000,000, 000,000,000,000). I’m now in my mid-fifties, sustained by an incomprehensible one hundred billion trillion reactions thirty trillion cells, so in the last second your tranquil demeanour was billion metabolic reactions every second. 11 You are composed of at least loo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "205 longer-lived animals restrict ROS flux from complex I, simply by down- rate. Recent work from Gustavo Barja in Madrid suggests that these their land-lubber cousins with a similar body size or resting metabolic Animals with the power of flight live as much as ten times longer than repairing damag..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "206 maxim was ‘Nothing to excess’. Think about how hard it is to change and die. We each need to learn that lesson for ourselves. The second defines us as individuals and humans, but they knew well how to live have imagined the invisible metabolic flux dancing through genes that inscribed three maxi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "207 immature oocytes, why most of those die before birth, why oocytes are then female germline – why germ cells proliferate to form up to eight million quality operates gives striking insights into the developmental architecture of the found in human populations. Thinking about how selection for mit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "208 that are not still not fully explained. the demands on visceral organs such as the liver fall with body size, for reasons size. The great Canadian comparative biochemist Peter Hochachka showed that Sex, Suicide for a critique of this idea). And it partly relates to the economies of networks, as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "209 resistant, to the point that Alzheimer’s disease has been termed ‘type 3 diabetes’. resistant’, but more recent work indicates that neurons do indeed become insulin affect the uptake of glucose by the brain, hence the brain could not be ‘insulin directly toxic to proteins). For a long time, it w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "210 environments or response to infections, but that’s another story. responsiveness to rapid change, perhaps in terms of adaptability to variable respiration. That would predict there are evolutionary costs in limiting the why mitochondria retain genes at all; he argues they are needed to control a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "212 such as fruit flies. As Turin puts it, ‘While it is not known to what extent means we can study consciousness in some simple experimental models but is something more fundamental that works at the level of cells. This emergent property of the complex nervous systems of higher animals, paramecium..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "213 the hydrophobic pockets of proteins sitting within the mitochondrial Let’s get back to xenon. All this suggests that xenon concentrates in stuff of science fiction. But it seems they do. known. Even he admits that brains emitting radio waves sounds like the reputation for being difficult. His sc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "214 interfere with each other (cancelling out) or can link in phase to generate that electromagnetic fields interact with each other – separate fields can mitochondria. But there are some broader principles too about the way attempting to measure the strength of electromagnetic fields in individual ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "215 behaviour under the microscope, the way they move around, explore, fields on their mitochondrial membranes. Just watch their amazing think about protists such as paramecium, which also generate electrical Let’s put aside multicellular organisms with their nervous systems and music as the fields ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "216 counterattack, chopping up the DNA into bits before the virus can copy exposure to the virus, it can recognise the viral DNA and marshal a editing. If the bacterium (or indeed its ancestors) has had an earlier learnt to exploit, called CRISPR, which allow for sophisticated gene much chance, but ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "217 malate, then oxaloacetate, or perhaps an amino acid or sugar. You are a succinate for long. In a tiny fraction of a second, you will transform into are you part of the same entity, the same self? You won’t even be molecule of succinate across the city, twenty miles away? In what sense scale of L..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "218 that forges the oneness of self. You are a moment in a life. through a living cell on this restless planet of ours, the rush of change bacterium. You have just been part of something magic, the flow of life dancing electromagnetic fields, shifting the mood, the living states of a oxygen, heat or..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "219 it is the movement that creates the form. to this mortal process of continuing, Even though we give (give up) ourselves it is the movement that negates the form? Were we mistaken? What does it matter if it is the movement that achieves the form. beguiling our attention – we supposed it is the mo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "220 The forward Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "221 The reverse Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "222 CH 3 ). The first step goes like this: ‘R’ depicted in the example above corresponds to a methyl group (- activated to react with CO 2 , to form the C3 pyruvate. In other words, the Let’s think about a specific example – how acetate (a C2 molecule) is works. central to modern metabolism that it’..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "223 molecule of CO 2 , giving the C3 pyruvate: willing to react. In the final step, the CoA-S – can now be substituted for a way (as there is in acetyl phosphate). And that makes the carbon more joined directly to a sulfur atom, without there being an oxygen in the The important thing to notice here..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "224 electrical charge), which is symbolised by the Greek symbol delta (δ). towards themselves, giving them a slightly negative charge (not a full-on because the oxygen atoms have a strong tendency to pull electrons bond structure. But this structure is under some electrical strain. That’s that faces..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "225 water is shown as a product. Yet that seems to have gone missing in There’s only one other thing to notice here. In the first scheme above, exits the stage. instant that the CoA-S – grabs the electrons in its bond with acetate and from ferredoxin are transferred onto the two carbon atoms in the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "226 Biology magics water away. on the phosphate), but it’s nowhere to be seen as an independent entity. marked by the dashed lines (one of the oxygens plus two of the protons As happens so often in the chemistry of life, the water is there alright, newly released phosphate ion. So the overall reacti..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "227 bound onto the surface of the mineral: this time giving pyruvate (or more technically, a pyruvyl group), again hops across to join the CO (the same Fischer–Tropsch-type chemistry), can’t recall where the CO comes from). Once again, the acetyl group group is bound on near to another CO (check bac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "228 called ‘alpha carbon’. This arrangement is unusually reactive. Here’s oxygen on the first carbon atom next to the carboxylate group, a so- pattern slightly, because pyruvate possesses an extra double-bonded The next few steps build on what we’ve already seen, but alter the beautifully simple. pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "229 you can see it interacting with the surface better: the charge on one of the two oxygens of the carboxylate group. That way Cheshire Cat smile, but in the more conventional way that emphasises here. In this case, I’m not going to draw the pyruvate with its normal mineral surface) can abstract a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "230 reacting with CO to form the C4 oxaloacetate: before. Here’s the enol form of pyruvate binding to a surface and then to react with other bound molecules such as CO, exactly as we’ve seen means an enol can bind to a mineral surface, and once bound will be able easily if the oxygen picks up a prot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "231 plentiful. I’m not showing their movements any more, but recall that two Remember that we’re in a mildly acidic environment, where protons are oxaloacetate, allowing the oxygen to wrest its electrons from the carbon: of electrons transfers from the surface onto the alpha carbon of continue to re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "232 experiments. mineral surfaces, and at last, the results of some revolutionary on the known reactivity of carboxylic acids, the known behaviour of but the first few steps are exactly as predicted from first principles, based prebiotic chemistry will form citrate or the complete reverse Krebs cycl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "233 molecules). An important cellular antioxidant. oxidised form (where an H has been extracted from each of two GSH GSH Glutathione. GSH is the reduced form (containing H) and GSSG is the classic is the 4Fe4S cluster. sulfur, containing just a few atoms, with structures similar to minerals. The FeS..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "234 antioxidant glutathione. Found in coenzyme A, the amino acid cysteine (and so many proteins) and the -SH A thiol, containing a sulfur joined to a hydrogen, which is quite reactive. ‘free radicals’ and related molecules. oxygen grabs single electrons from FeS clusters in the respiratory chain to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "235 SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "236 Finally Solving the Mystery of Life (London, Penguin, 2019). An eloquent Paul Davies, The Demon in the Machine: How Hidden Webs of Information are The paradox of information in biology published scientific journal. Includes a light-touch historical overview. Philosophical Transactions of the Roy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "237 bacterial evolution. transfer has refocused attention on physiology as an organising principle in power of genetic information. Ironically, the scrambling power of lateral gene brought to an end the classical era of microbiology, ceding precedence to the Mikrobiologie 42 (1962) 17–35. A paper of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "238 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101 (2004) 13168–13173. E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, ‘Universality in intermediary metabolism’, Deep unity of biochemistry – the conserved city-centre plan (and justly famous). larger group; as close to the paradigm of molecular medicine as it ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "239 869–871. The text of Gowland Hopkins’s anniversary address to the Royal F. Gowland Hopkins, ‘Atomic physics and vital activities’, Nature 130 (1932) Hopkins’s biochemistry lab Chapter 1: Discovering the nanocosm which, in the way of science, has since been proved at least partly wrong. appeal to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "240 instrument invented by T. G. Brodie and others. short history that explains how Warburg’s name came to be associated with an use’, Journal of Chemical Education 41 (1964) 294–296. An enjoyably breezy P. Oesper, ‘The history of the Warburg apparatus. Some reminiscences on its inspiring piece, whi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "241 Volume 1 (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991). A monumental tome of Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: The Formation of a Scientific Life 1900–1933 . aimed at medics. 736–738. An immediate perspective on the cycle, written by Krebs alone and H. A. Krebs, ‘The intermediate metabolism of carbohydr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "242 Royal Society Memoirs . Features the memorable closing line that Lipmann died 88 (2006) 246–266. The US National Academy of Sciences equivalent to the W. P. Jenks and R. V. Wolfenden, ‘Fritz Albert Lipmann’, Biographical Memoirs system is essential at the very start of life.’ Plus ça change. an ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "243 recognised. to my mind Moyle’s vital experimental contribution has not been sufficiently Mitchell’s original paper on chemiosmotic coupling or his ‘little grey books’, but by Mitchell and Moyle in Nature in the mid-1960s, less heavily cited than mitochondria’, Nature 208 (1965) 147–151. One of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "244 (1981) 381–382. An influential paper that stands out in my mind for not even J. E. Baldwin and H. A. Krebs, ‘The evolution of metabolic cycles’, Nature 291 Evolution of the Krebs cycle University Press, 2021), a unique distillation from a remarkable nonagenarian. latest is On Life: Cells, Genes ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "245 scientific biography, with many memorable character portraits of the leading (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). A remarkable and absorbing Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age Lawrence and the Rad Lab discovered by Ellis himself. Rubisco by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "246 trying hard not to be bitter. Calvin until decades later, when he finally broke his silence. One senses he was Photosynthesis Research 73 (2002) 29–49. Benson said little about his time with A. A. Benson, ‘Following the path of carbon in photosynthesis: a personal story’, that those who fund res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "247 of recollections from the main protagonists of the reverse Krebs cycle, fifty years 2016’, Photosynthesis Research 134 (2017) 117–131. A fascinating compendium R. Tabita and I. A. Berg, ‘The Arnon–Buchanan cycle: a retrospective, 1966– B. B. Buchanan, R. Sirevåg, G. Fuchs, R. N. Ivanovsky, Y. Ig..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "248 autotrophic growth of a thermophilic bacterium’, Science 359 (2018) 563–567. A A. Mall, J. Sobotta, C. Huber et al ., ‘Reversibility of citrate synthase allows Widespread reverse Krebs cycle when oxygen is present. this paper just highlights how difficult it is to operate the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "249 from two distinguished marine biologists, John Baross and Deb Kelley, who had overview of the different types of vent system and their roles at the origin of life, origin of life’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 805–814. A good W. Martin, J. Baross, D. Kelley and M. J. Russell, ‘Hydrotherm..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "250 prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells’, Philosophical evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the Krebs cycle. their detailed thinking on Peter Mitchell’s protonmotive force and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "251 would have had to take place in high-pressure atmospheres. Here he teams up the origin of life involving an unusual form of ‘zinc sulfide photosynthesis’ that is a distinguished bioenergeticist who has had some strikingly original ideas on National Academy of Sciences USA 109 (2012) E821–830. Ar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "252 that they trained as synthetic chemists, yet are thinking from a biochemical point Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018) 1019–1024. Joseph Moran’s group is unusual in CO 2 to intermediates and end-products of the acetyl-CoA pathway’, Nature S. J. Varma, K. B. Muchowska, P. Chatelain and J. Moran, ‘Nati..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "253 lived from H 2 and CO 2 using proton gradients and iron–sulfur proteins. While some details have been decried, the paper reinforces the idea that LUCA simple cells subsisting in vents in the neverland between the abiotic and biotic. advance a striking portrait of the physiology of LUCA – as a po..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "254 with his long-term collaborator, the equally brilliant Eric Smith. Deserves a place 2016). A magisterial volume, and fitting final testament of Morowitz, written Emergence of the Fourth Geosphere (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, Eric Smith and Harold J. Morowitz, The Origin and Nature of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "255 the thermodynamically permissible. of data and mechanisms on the energetics of making a living at the margins of conservation’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 579–591. A treasure-trove ‘Methanogenic archaea: ecologically relevant differences in energy R. K. Thauer, A.-K. Kaster, H. Seedorf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "256 steep pH gradients (as much as 3 or 4 pH units across single nanocrystals). million times faster than hydroxide ions going the other way, giving rise to very experimental results, showing that protons can cross iron–sulfur barriers two Interface Focus 9 (2019) 20190073. A detailed theoretical pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "257 our own current thinking on the origins of the genetic code. possible for protocells to get better at copying themselves. The basis for much of acids) and iron–sulfur clusters drive a form of membrane heredity that makes it show that positive feedbacks between organic molecules (fatty acids and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "258 and pushes its central thesis a little too far. generation of young minds into palaeontology. But it has not weathered so well, (New York, W. W. Norton, 1989). A heady book that must have drawn a Stephen Jay Gould, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the History of Nature Cambrian explosion Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "259 1 (2017) 0138. A sweeping take from Olivia Judson on how a succession of O. Judson, ‘The energy expansions of evolution’, Nature Ecology and Evolution environmental change to the simple gas oxygen. A valuable corrective. Geobiology 7 (2009) 1–7. Quite a diatribe against the lazy ascription of dr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "260 of eukaryotes. An honour to contribute. issue of the journal in which she published her classic 1967 paper on the origin Margulis’s contribution to cell evolution, written for a special fiftieth anniversary Journal of Theoretical Biology 434 (2017) 58–67. My own appraisal of Lynn N. Lane, ‘Seria..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "261 abruptly. The intellectual son and grandson of James Lovelock (using PhD Gaia) can flip from one stable state to another as conditions change, sometimes Oxford University Press, 2013). A detailed overview of how the Earth system (or Tim Lenton and Andrew Watson, Revolutions that Made the Earth (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "262 was linked to the Cambrian explosion. Not a straightforward case! A marshalling of the evidence that the rise in oxygen in the late Neoproterozoic geochemical evidence and biological consequences’, GSA Today 21 (2011) 4–11. G. Shields-Zhou and L. Och, ‘The case for a Neoproterozoic oxygenation e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "263 gave rise to eukaryotic cells with large, complex genomes. They have to be right. cross-talk between the host cells and endosymbionts (proto-mitochondria) that I spotted it earlier. Argues that Krebs-cycle intermediates were critical to the read this paper after finishing the book and would have..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "264 Warburg’s papers. Much has changed since then, of course, but his closing line cause of cancer, and with a similar anger (but a completely different view) to the same year that Rous received the Nobel prize for his work on viruses as a 1361. Quite a diatribe against the somatic mutation theory o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "265 impacts on tumor metabolism’, Cancer & Metabolism 4 (2016) 5. A lively and A. M. Otto, ‘Warburg effect(s)—a biographical sketch of Otto Warburg and his side. accomplishments, while finding kind words to allay Warburg’s less appealing Krebs at his most gentlemanly in highlighting his mentor’s gre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "266 searing piece that I quote from in some detail in my chapter. Worth taking a look O. Warburg, ‘On the origin of cancer cells’, Science 123 (1956) 309–314. A decades. in cancer cells, which became the basis for his work on cancer over the following Warburg’s first publication on cancer, showing e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "267 An ancient switch critical role of mitochondria in cancer. hardly need to say that he was one of the strongest voices calling attention to the chapter, in part because I discussed his ideas at some length in Chapter 6. I 685–698. I neglected to say much about Doug Wallace’s work on cancer in thi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "268 to glutamine, in this case in HeLa cells. On that count, I feel obliged to point you (1955) 501–514. One of the first papers to point to the addiction of cancer cells H. Eagle, ‘Nutrition needs of mammalian cells in tissue culture’, Science 122 Glutamine in cancer easily achieved in humans. oxyg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "269 the Krebs cycle can be turbocharged. mitochondria’, FEBS Letters 344 (1994) 109–116. A lovely paper showing how which contributes to fine regulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle activity in NAD- and NADP-linked isocitrate dehydrogenases operate in a substrate cycle L. A. Sazanov and J. B. Jac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "270 Introduction to OXPHOS Analysis (Innsbruck, Bioenergetics Communications, Erich Gnaiger, Mitochondrial Pathways and Respiratory Control. An paper. inputs to the respiratory chain in this book. If you want diagrams, check out this and fed into the Krebs cycle. I’ve talked about a few of these alt..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "271 this book does not focus on ageing it is one of the finest and most influential positive benefits in youth that outweigh disadvantages with older age). While known forbiddingly as antagonistic pleiotropy (meaning that genes can have Williams independently put forward a similar view of ageing to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "272 paper from Doug Wallace’s PhD thesis on cybrids treated with antibiotics. inheritance in mammalian tissue culture cells’, In Vitro 12 (1976) 758–776. The D. C. Wallace, Y. Pollack, C. L. Bunn and J. M. Eisenstadt, ‘Cytoplasmic Doug Wallace and advances in mitochondrial research DNA. and heartfel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "273 boundaries of Western medicine, with its twin pillars grounded in the work of D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondria as chi’, Genetics 179 (2008) 727–735. Pushing the mutations in mitochondrial DNA. the female germline can be understood in terms of selection against detrimental eLife 10 (2021) e69344. A m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "274 mitochondria under different stress compared with adult flies. Giving them the Frontiers in Genetics 12 (2021) 734255. Larvae just eat and grow, placing the interactions produce diverging responses to mild stress in Drosophila larvae’, E. Rodríguez, F. Grover Thomas, M. F. Camus and N. Lane, ‘Mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "275 plenty of objections, but the ideas are stimulating. Here, West develops them at Enquist and James Brown, which I’m not citing individually here. There are physicist who has published revolutionary papers on fractal scaling, with Brian Cities and Companies (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "276 respiratory suppression producing a shift in metabolic flux and epigenetic state. weak, at older age, to shut down. I explain the same observations in terms of results from the overrun of other developmental programs that selection is too theory’. According to this theory there is no program ‘fo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "277 of the term ‘sweet mitochondria’ (the term ‘diabetes mellitus’ means sweet Alzheimer’s Disease 62 (2018) 1391–1401. Never was there a more sinister use P. I. Moreira, ‘Sweet mitochondria: a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’, Journal of need to mind my diet. 1113. The evidence is mounting that Alz..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "278 Epilogue: Self that you really should know about. calculate this particular parameter, but they calculate many other amazing things calculations on the number of metabolic reactions per second in cells. They don’t knew you had about cells. I’m citing this book in relation to Joana Xavier’s Scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "279 medium for dynamic control of growth and form’, Biosystems 164 (2018) 76–93. M. Levin and C. J. Martyniuk, ‘The bioelectric code: an ancient computational Electrical fields in development mitochondrial membranes generate the EEG. with autism in humans. At least consistent with the much bolder hy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "280 summarises their ideas. free energy’ to distinguish it from more conventional usage. This formal paper Friston, whose concept of free energy in this context is sometimes called ‘Friston 25 (2018) 202–238. Solms’s ideas on consciousness were developed with Karl considerations from physics and phy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "281 fields give cells their unity. suspect that this loss of orientation is just one manifestation of how electrical – collapse the potential and bacteria can’t figure out how to divide in two. I is that they can only achieve this when there is an electrical membrane potential the constricting appar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "282 intermediates, either as a product of CO 2 fixation at the origin of life, or both groups, in their different ways, have been working on Krebs-cycle subjects had little in common beyond the centrality of energy flow. Yet in fruit flies. Before reading this book, you might have thought those one ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "283 read the whole book, pointing out more stylistic faux pas than I would used to climb together, but now we reminisce. Allyson Jones has also to say nothing of the music, conversation, sea walks and good cheer. We me going through darker days with unreasonably enthusiastic comments, Carter has rea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "284 intermediary metabolism. I’ll never forget our lunch together, where we cycle than Lee, yet he can still barely trammel his excitement about bigger picture. No one in the world today knows more about the Krebs whole book and made many penetrating comments, while celebrating the friendship. I am ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "285 on salt balance and thirst in animals. I confess that I had put the question energy and plans. He had been drawn into the subject through his work with Prof. Derek Denton, now in his nineties, yet still overflowing with alone in that). That led me into a long and enjoyable correspondence Life As..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "286 touched strive to be the best we can be. I hadn’t appreciated how many a zestful sense that anything is possible, which would make those he immense impact on my life. He had buoyant energy, warmth of spirit and legacy is to influence the lives of others for the better. Ian had an dedicate this b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "287 dimension. I have tried to say in this book, yet in a few lines from another permission to reprint the poem. It somehow captures the essence of what Revelations’ to my attention, and Richard Howard for his gracious Finally, I thank Cliff Hanks for bringing the poem ‘Like Most (and for responding..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "288 and individuality 234–6, 238, 243 compensatory 247 alleles suppression of respiration 230, 259–60, 262, 264 predisposing to cancer 25, 195, 229–32 mechanism of 260–67 Krebs cycle reversal and 111, 259 glycolysis and carbon fixation 230–31 free radical theory 257–9, 262 and flux capacitance 245 d..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "289 see also GOE atmospheric oxygen balance 177 of other planets 165 early/primordial 76, 109–10, 114, 119, 165 atmospheres assembly line analogy 170, 208 aspartate 179n5, 224–7 Asimov, Isaac 248 ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 44–5, 48, 252 artificial intelligence (AI) 13, 274 Arnon, Daniel 98–100, 102, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "290 acetyl CoA pathway in 122–3, 151 bacteria and archaea bacteria, autotrophic 85n4, 102, 114 rubisco in 108 reverse Krebs cycle 73, 78, 100, 101 origins of mitochondria 68–9, 167, 281 non-photosynthetic 110 molecular phylogenetics 166 bacteria, ancient vent bacteria 110, 163n2 sulfur bacteria 100,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "291 prebiotic 24, 275 Krebs cycle as source 20, 33, 115, 161 as fundamental 4, 6, 9–10, 131 building blocks of life, molecular Buckel, Wolfgang 163n2 Buchanan, Bob 100, 104 radio emissions and EEG signals 277–9 oxidative Krebs cycle in 187 glucose preference 265–8, 280 electrical fields in 280 brain..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "292 carbon-11 ( 11 C) 80–81, 83–4, 85n4, 178 CARA (Council for At-Risk Academics) 31n1 cancer viruses 205 Cancer Genome Atlas 193 glucose fermentation 197, 201–2, 208–9n4 effect of transplanting 25, 194 effect of glutamine deprivation 216 cancer cells use of radioisotopes 80 as metabolic, rather tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "293 and mitochondria 242 cell death, programmed (apoptosis) 194, 205, 207, 213, 216 catalysts, protein see enzymes thermodynamics and 22 succinate as 46 ornithine as 52–3 nucleic acids and nucleotides 129, 148 metal ions 131, 152 iron-sulfide mineral surfaces 135–9 biochemical cycles as catalytic 53..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "294 CoA-S - 289–90, 292 coenzyme A (CoA) 56–7, 128 , 140, 295–6 coal and oil 139, 177 cloud chambers 86–7 citric acid cycle see Krebs cycle citrate synthase 110–11, 123 301 reverse Krebs cycle 101, 105, 110–11, 128 , 216–19, 221, 287 , 300– in respiration 51–2, 54–5 removal in the Krebs cycle 172–3,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "295 and the effects of ageing 25, 232, 233, 264, 268, 272 and drug response 15 diet diabetes 21, 189, 243, 266, 268n10 Delphi, Temple of Apollo 272–3 dehydration reactions 138 DeBerardinis, Ralph 217 Dayhoff, Margaret 164–8 Davies, Paul 129n6 ‘Darwin’s dilemma’ 157 cytochrome oxidase 35–6n3, 49, 199..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "296 electron-transport chains 174 by ferredoxin 288 in carbon dioxide reduction 133–41 in anaesthesia 277, 279 electron transfers electron spin resonance 276–7 hydrogen from hydrothermal vents 141 H 2 S as 166–7 ferredoxin as 105–6 electron donors, alternative electron bifurcation 163n2 Einstein, Al..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "297 of glucose with ageing 230 of glucose in cancer 197, 201–2, 208–9n4 alcoholic 170 fermentation ‘ferment’, respiratory 35–6, 64n11, 199, 216 Fendt, Sarah-Maria 261n7 FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) 48 extinct species, resurrecting 238–9 exoplanets 119 exercise 25, 223, 232–3, 256, 264, 268 of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "298 late-acting genes 234, 236–7 globin genes 187 activated by HIF 1α 212, 215 genes gene editing 14, 228n7, 282 Gell-Mann, Murray 124 tissue slice experiments 33–8 pressure and hydrogen availability 142 gas pressures fumarate reductase 185, 210–11, 213 fumarate hydratase 210, 215, 217, 220 fumarate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "299 metabolic shift with age 231 metabolic shift in cancer 196, 205, 209, 213, 223–4 growth groups, chemical 38–9n4 greigite 121, 133, 135 Gould, Stephen Jay 156n1 GOE (the Great Oxidation Event) 176, 178, 181, 182n6, 186 Gnaiger, Erich 171–2 and tissue ATP demands 188, 201 NAD + -to-NADH ratios 179..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "300 in biosynthesis 73, 106–7, 108n11, 128 , 206 balanced in Krebs non-cycle 185, 201 hydrogen (2H) hydride ions 136, 297 ‘hybrid breakdown’ 247 lifespan prolongation 235–6, 258, 272 cell numbers and reactions per second 269 ATP synthesis in 66 humans Hudson, Reuben 144 Howard, Richard 285 Hopkins, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "301 and reverse Krebs cycle 118–19 in photosynthesis 174 growth of protocells with 147 FeS clusters/surfaces 147, 151, 254, 255n4 in ferredoxin 105 iron–sulfur clusters/catalysts surfaces as catalytic 133, 135, 139 in alkaline hydrothermal vents 114–15, 121–2, 144, 147 iron-sulfide minerals see also..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "302 and ageing 25, 252–3, 264–7, 272, 280–81 Krebs cycle fluxes mutations affecting 196, 209–10, 215, 220 membrane bound 211 Krebs cycle enzymes Krebs cycle, reverse see reverse Krebs reversal 61n7, 111, 126, 217, 230 oxidative and reductive prongs 184–6, 210, 230 origins and evolution 70–73, 118, 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "303 mitochondrial DNA and 272 metabolic rate and 256–8, 270–71 differences, men and women 247 biological time and 235–6 of bats and birds 271 lifespan Life Itself , by Crick 129 life, origin see origin of life as thermodynamically favoured 275 photosynthesis freeing life from minerals 174–5 emergenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "304 Mendel, Gregor 243–4 see also Ech membrane bound enzymes 211, 219–20, 222 , 226, 253 see also mitochondrial membranes formation of, and primitive life 117, 145 electrical charge on 68, 244, 275, 282–3 anaesthetic effects and 277 membranes Medawar, Peter 234, 236 McGlynn, Shawn 170 mass extinctio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "305 interactions with nuclear 238–41 drug response 249 diseases 240, 247–8, 263–4 mitochondrial genome ‘mitochondrial Eve’ 241–2, 246 response to damage 217 as location of respiration 32, 67–8n13, 70–71 as flux capacitors 244, 266 bacterial origins 68–9, 167, 281 mitochondria Mitchell, Sir Godfrey 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "306 NADPH NADP + (phosphorylated NAD + ) 107, 108n11, 109, 206n3, 218–19 oxidation and age 230, 261, 270–71 NADH 63–4, 108n11, 196, 206n3, 223 NAD + to NADH ratio 179n5, 270 206n3, 220, 261 NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) 63, 108n11, 179n5, 201, NAC ( N -acetyl cysteine) 249–52, 255, 263 f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "307 Orgel, Leslie 128–31 organ transplantation 214 Oppenheimer, Robert 82, 88, 90 oocytes and mitochondria 240–42 oncogenes 192–4, 205 Ochoa, Severo 105, 217 Nunes Palmeira, Raquel 148 see also FAD; NAD + from sugars and amino acids 20, 104, 122, 131, 205, 224 role of glutamine 215, 222 possible ori..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "308 philosophical approaches 58–9, 69, 99, 124, 203 phages (bacteriophages) 282 pH gradient, hydrothermal vents 144, 146 and CO 2 reduction 142–3 and ATP formation 64, 152 pH PET (positron emission tomography) scans 265 pentose phosphate pathway/shunt 108, 131, 207, 224, 253 Pauling, Linus 98, 165 p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "309 ‘protocells’ 24, 117, 145–50, 152–3, 275 protists 3–4, 161, 186, 276, 281 see also enzymes synthesis and ATP demand 208 rubisco as the most abundant 75 peptide templating 149n9 folding mechanisms 13, 258 disulfide bridges 253–4 chirality of amino acids 277 breakdown in cancer 226 proteins prolyl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "310 hydrogen transfer in 37, 47–52 Hans Krebs on 19, 32–3, 37–8 efficiency of aerobic 159 blocking with carbon monoxide 35 respiration redox tone 259, 271 red protein see ferredoxin red beds 176, 178 Rammu, Hanadi 145 Ramakrishnan, Venki 13 Ralser, Markus 131 radioisotopes of carbon see carbon-11; c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "311 from mitochondrial complex I 230 ROS (reactive oxygen species) Rodriguez, Enrique 252 RNA World hypothesis 129 regulatory RNAs 12n2 origins in protocells 148–51, 275 and amino acid hydrophobicity 149n9 RNA (ribonucleic acid) ribulose bisphosphate 94–6 ribosomes 13 reverse Warburg effect 204 side..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "312 senescent (epigenetic) states 259, 262, 269–72 self, sensation of 280 operating on random RNA sequences 149–51 flight and ROS flux 271–2 favouring reproductive fitness 4, 234 favouring biochemical efficiency 116n3, 118 and cancer 191, 217 selection ‘Scopes II’ trial 124 as uncertain 273 testable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "313 Sweetlove, Lee 228n7 sulfur bacteria 100, 104–5, 114 sulfur, in CoA 57, 289–90 sulfate as an oxidant 181 see also glucose overemphasis on, in metabolism 77, 81–3, 90, 95, 103 in the Calvin-Benson cycle 95–6n8, 98 sugars succinyl CoA 128 , 184, 215 , 222 , 231, 260–61n7, 286–7 succinate dehydroge..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "314 The Vital Question (book) 281 viruses 205, 282 Viagra 216 Vesalius, Andreas 243 vertebrates, ancestors of 155–6 ventilation in an anaerobic world 183 Van Leeuwenhoek, Antonie 3 urea cycle 52, 224–7 urea 8, 28, 38–9 uncoupling proteins 228n7, 262n8 twin studies 236–8, 245, 248, 263 Turin, Luca 27..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "315 Zuckerkandl, Emil 165 Z scheme 175, 199 xenon 277–8 Xavier, Joana 269n11 X-ray crystallography 10, 13, 59 X-rays, biological effects 87n5, 245 Wonderful Life , by Gould 156n1 Wimpey Construction 60–61n9 Wilkins, Maurice 10 Wildman, Sam 75 West, Geoffrey 257n5 Watson, James 10, 128 oxygen from, i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "316 Index 288 Acknowledgements 282 Further reading 236 List of abbreviations 233 Appendix 2: The Krebs line 227 Appendix 1: Red protein mechanics 222 The reverse Krebs cycle 221 The forward Krebs cycle 220 Envoi: ‘Like Most Revelations’ 219 Epilogue: Self 211 6. The flux capacitor 181 5. To the dark..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "9 tweezers, read out the code that specifies their structures, deciphered the they function. We have taken them apart, in centrifuges or with optical know what most of these whirring parts do, what they’re made of, how gyrating predator. Some 350 years after van Leeuwenhoek, we now themselves free f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "10 matter? The idea that there is a vital force, that life is fundamentally biology: what processes animate cells and set them apart from inanimate meaningful. A far better question goes back to the formative years of wrong question, which can’t be answered precisely because it is not new laws of ph..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "11 that cells are not made of an amorphous protoplasm composed of information. The golden age of biochemistry began with a realisation first look to where biology has turned a blind eye since the ascent of To understand this flow of energy and matter and all it portends, we must The dynamic side and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "12 reliably going through exactly the same succession. This is the flux that may be several hundred vehicles entering a street every second , each one streets in a cell (with the same thing happening in each of them) but there incomprehensible number. You might say that there’s a lot of repeat cell ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "13 evidence for the unity of biochemistry. His slightly maniacal phrase Dutch pioneer of microbiology, Albert Kluyver, marshalled new heart cells behave in similar circumstances. In the 1920s, another great oxygen or grow in its absence is remarkably similar to how our own life. Painstaking experime..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "14 but technically there is no loss of meaning, and the canon can be might not enjoy listening to the works of Shakespeare in blips and bleeps Morse code only has two letters and can convey the same meaning. We compared with, say, the twenty-six letters of the English alphabet, but the sequence down..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "15 think about everything, it has also helped us forget some lessons from exhaustive exploration of the digital jungle has changed the way we cheats. Nothing in biology has escaped digital scrutiny. But while our bearing suggests; nearly a third of offspring are fathered by philandering example, tur..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "16 the atomic structure of the latest machines. In comparison, even the admiration, for every issue seems to contain at least two papers detailing pages of journals such as Nature with a mixture of jealousy and of us who don’t solve the structure of proteins for a living look at the preoccupied some..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "17 harassed local authorities may procrastinate for months, the genes extra traffic flow? No problem: widen the road. Unlike a city, where immediately implemented. Alternative route too narrow to accommodate frustration travels straight to the genes, where contingency plans are horns. Something simi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "18 take a sample of cells and look at the distribution of flux at one moment, map, showing live congestion, but it’s still a snapshot in time. We can differ from that in one of yours? It is closer to a satnav-enabled road how does the flux of materials and energy through one of my heart cells pathwa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "19 metabolism has changed little in part because it was never powered to generation, without pause, right back to the emergence of life. Core living metabolic network in the egg cell, a flame passed from generation inert information in the form of genes – our inheritance includes this minute by minu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "20 burning very small carbon skeletons is not an efficient process, he just a few simple steps? Krebs himself suggested one plausible answer: discharged into the outside world. But why is it a cycle at all? Why not the cell, while the inert carcasses of water and carbon dioxide are The energy releas..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "21 yin and yang at all. cycle into sharp modern focus but does not explain why the cycle has a the synthesis of new organic molecules. This question brings the Krebs the Krebs cycle – how to offset the needs of energy generation against problem in all these disparate cases is how to balance the yin ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "22 many people an obscure subject, full of runic symbols that suggest a own tantalisingly different ways. I appreciate that biochemistry is for the way we are, and ultimately why we age and die, each of us in our This is the story of our planet from within our cells – what makes us high-octane world..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "23 the universal precursors of life. view) reacting the simple gases hydrogen and carbon dioxide to generate bacteria that run the cycle backwards (or forwards, from their point of the core of metabolism lies in the Krebs cycle – as practised by ancient the sugary chemistry of photosynthesis and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "24 ancestral pathways for dealing with low oxygen levels, driving with age, intermediates such as succinate accumulate and trigger the generation. As the flux through our Krebs cycle becomes more sluggish need to use the same pathway for biosynthesis as well as energy emerges from the yin and yang o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "25 builds up; in effect, a car park. To understand which one requires a lot of context reflect the opposite – almost no downstream flux, so the intermediate gradually flux, with the intermediate being constantly replenished at high levels, or it could in the cell does not necessarily imply high flux..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "26 just be called gnomics. and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "28 bacteria living in stagnant river waters, causing more anguish at the on bacterial metabolism. Her pioneering studies (most famously on research, for example convincing the young Marjory Stephenson to work MRC either), Hopkins did occasionally influence their direction of affectionately as Hoppy ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "29 laboratory included people of many dispositions, convictions and he called ‘the British way of life’, writing that ‘The Cambridge that Krebs had known in Germany. Years later, Krebs reflected on what You can imagine that Hopkins’s lab was very different to anything changes in gas pressure. a carg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "30 stories – but also the more scope they have to colour our thinking. Krebs it was won. That’s only human. The harder the discoveries, the better the way was hard won. And knowledge comes tinged with the stories of how called ‘powerhouses’ of the cell; but every scrap of knowledge along the We now ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "31 reaction step. It took unimaginable patience and skill to figure out gave an indirect view of what was actually happening, for just a single needed to measure one biochemical reaction filled half a room, and still submerged in a water-bath controlled by a thermostat. The apparatus pressure measur..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "32 4. and chlorophyll.’ He wasn’t so far from the truth, as we’ll see in Chapter oxidation. For evidently, the ferment existed earlier than haemoglobin arisen from the ferment – blood pigments by reduction, leaf pigment by before photosynthesis: ‘blood pigment and leaf pigments have both ferment. Fr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "33 rate of respiration in the presence or absence of respiratory inhibitors. amounts of various substances that could be respired, and measure the manometers simultaneously in a single study. He would add known folk sag at the prospect. Krebs sometimes ran as many as ten single method, coupled to a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "34 in his tissue slices, as did adding carboxylic acids. But adding both of Krebs found that adding amino acids increased the rate of respiration matters became interesting. which as we’ve seen consumes and releases gases too. And that’s where measurements, he needed to take into account the rate of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "35 is the three-carbon pyruvic acid: book. What exactly is a carboxylic acid? Let me draw one for you. This It is time to get acquainted with the molecular protagonists of this released captured and put to use? were burned in oxygen. What were the steps? How was the energy ever. Surely, the secret o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "36 touch unstable and reactive. Now the middle oxygen in my picture is bond tends to throw its weight about. That’s what makes pyruvic acid a to oxygen, which likes nothing better than getting into a fight; the extra That’s because the middle carbon atom in pyruvic acid has a double bond suit, or a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "37 something of a Cheshire Cat grin: symmetry and stability. It can be drawn like this, giving pyruvate oxygen atoms, giving a ‘delocalised cloud’ of electrons that confers clarity. But in reality this charge is smeared in space between the two left with a negative charge (–) which I’ve shown on the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "38 one carbon. In other words, the C3 pyruvate should be broken down into that the intermediates should be stripped down to two carbons and then carbon molecules of pyruvate, so a reasonable working assumption was Krebs knew that the six-carbon glucose is initially split into two three- individually..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "39 exactly how much of the carboxylic acid remained in the muscle after the (by up to 600 per cent!!) over prolonged periods. Yet when he analysed acids, notably succinate, dramatically increased the rate of respiration to. Szent-Györgyi found that adding small amounts of C4 carboxylic changes; in r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "40 Pulling hydrogen biology at the time. Almost ... yet had a general catalytic activity, unlike almost anything else known in more perplexing. The bottom line is that succinate was fairly unreactive overall speed of respiration. That only made the individual steps even succinate doesn’t increase th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "41 or more specifically 2H. The product is water, or H 2 O. Warburg had Recall that respiration consumes oxygen by reacting it with hydrogen, respiration. even more intriguing examples of hydrogen transfer, somehow linked to hydrogen was transferred had entranced Szent-Györgyi. Now here were would r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "42 Remember that the formula for glucose is C 6 H 12 O 6 . Szent-Györgyi then CO 2 should be released from the skeletal remains of the sugar. 2H was stripped out from the sugar and passed onto a carboxylic acid, If C4 carboxylic acids were merely hydrogen carriers, then as each point do we just ‘loo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "43 length. Presumably, these steps, in which CO 2 was pulled out, needed the carboxylic acids were clipped down from six to four carbon atoms in escaped Krebs’s notice that these steps released two CO 2 molecules, as (called α-ketoglutarate) to the four C4 carboxylic acids. It had not interconnected..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "44 essence, adding more of any constituent gives rise to more of the next, Krebs realised that biochemical cycles are necessarily catalytic. In systems, that Hopkins had celebrated at the Royal Society in 1932. insight, with just the degree of unexpectedness to be expected of living the addition of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "45 reaction did operate under normal metabolic conditions, catalysed by an quite harsh chemical conditions, and without an enzyme. If a similar from oxaloacetate and pyruvate, in effect welding them together under mattered to Krebs. It had recently been shown that citrate could be made come back to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "46 and we will encounter it repeatedly. Once formed, acetyl CoA reacted metabolism across the whole of life, from ancient bacteria to ourselves, short. This turned out to be perhaps the single most central molecule in named the overall assemblage acetyl coenzyme A or acetyl CoA for attached to a lar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "47 properly. The process by which glucose is oxidised goes like this. First, oxaloacetate, to give the C6 citrate. At last, everything added up Once activated in this way, the C2 acetate can be attached onto the C4 (and that remaining oxygen is beginning to stare a bit): what makes the composite mol..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "48 commented that ‘Peter is too original for his examiners.’ He finally all’. Mitchell’s mentor, the distinguished Polish biochemist David Keilin, and ‘statids’. The examiners dismissed his work as ‘not really a thesis at grounded in his own development of ancient Greek theory on ‘fluctids’ thesis o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "49 ‘Beethovenian’ appearance, with a flowing mane of hair (he too later keen intellect and wide-ranging interests, as well as his cultivated first meeting Mitchell at departmental tea in 1947. She was struck by his joined Marjory Stephenson in Cambridge as a research assistant in 1946, year helping ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "50 frankly, this view is still prevalent today. The goal of biochemistry was about living matter that could not be reduced to mere chemistry; and discredited idea of vitalism, implying that there was something special Many biochemists were uncomfortable with this view, as it recalled the cells’, arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "51 term NADH, just focus on the ‘H’. I hope you will develop a Pavlovian NADH will figure large later in this book, but for now, when you see the leaving another proton nearby, bound onto water) is called NADH. 10 components of hydrogen (or more exactly, two electrons and one proton, dinucleotide’, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "52 in the mid-1960s, laying out the basic experimental approaches still used Moyle together published a series of ground-breaking papers in Nature contribution would surely not have been overlooked today. Mitchell and which he alone was awarded the Nobel prize in 1978. Her essential contributed larg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "53 decades, right up to today. depending on factors that have kept bioenergeticists busy for whole number but a fraction (3.3 in humans) and can vary that the number of ATPs formed from a single NADH is not a ‘wasted’ but are saved up towards the next ATP. Note this means motor, which generates thre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "54 chemiosmotic hypothesis, in the mid-1960s, Lynn Margulis was ‘powerhouses’ of complex cells. When Mitchell was developing his This is how respiration works in our own mitochondria, the pitches – all charged with the power of a bolt of lightning. were flat, they would cover an area equivalent to a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "55 ketoglutarate. The α-ketoglutarate spins round the Krebs cycle to form wasting is glutamine. This is converted into the C5 carboxylic acid α- most common amino acid that is shipped around the body from muscle ammonia plus the carboxylic acids that enter the Krebs cycle. By far the Krebs back in t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "56 with plenty of glucose needed to form acetyl CoA). But had they possible, to provide energy for flying (and the tissue slices were supplied by 600% because that tissue is poised to oxidise glucose as quickly as Adding succinate to pigeon-breast muscle raised the respiratory rate Szent-Györgyi and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "57 synthesis is secondary. That impression is strengthened by the fact that presented it in this chapter: breakdown is its primary purpose, and that’s still how it is presented in most textbooks, and how I have cycle in animals as largely dedicated to the breakdown of organics; and perfectly aware o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "58 protein that Warburg discovered is now called cytochrome oxidase, ‘cytochrome’ that, CO would stifle respiration in your cells for the same reasons. The haem haemoglobin of your red blood cells and displacing oxygen, but if you survived 3 Carbon monoxide poisoning can kill you by binding to the i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "59 refers to two hydrogen atoms, which are typically attached to other molecules, difference but might leave you feeling exasperated with pedantic scientists. 2H 6 Let me just clarify the distinction between 2H and H 2 . It’s an important medical problem, cancer, which took away most of what was dea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "60 work on bioenergetics included demonstrating that respiration takes place in ATP synthesis, in two classic papers in the late 1940s. Lehninger’s pioneering famous textbook) to show that the oxidation of NADH by oxygen was linked to significance. It fell to the great US biochemist Albert Lehninger..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "61 Mitchell. the membrane through precisely the type of spatial coupling proposed by mechanisms, known as the Q cycle, in which quinones transfer protons across errors, Mitchell was in fact correct about one of the most baffling pumping disprove a hypothesis, regardless of whether it was true or not..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "63 unity of biochemistry. In the Introduction, we touched on the value of emblematic of a more interesting and deeper problem: the dogma of the which swiftly came to be seen as the enzyme for carbon fixation – is carrot of improved yields dangling distractingly overhead. Yet rubisco – rubisco with a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "64 of creation. gaze from the lofty pinnacles of evolution down to the obscure canyons understand the deep chemistry of life (and death ...) we must shift our bowels of the Earth. Many had no need for the sun. If we want to already ancient, living from gases and rocks, sometimes deep in the party to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "65 course into a circular path. With each acceleration the circle widens, so every second) while applying an external magnetic field that bends their rapidly reversing an electric voltage (thousands or millions of times centre of a circular vacuum chamber, and their flight is accelerated by targeted..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "66 experimentation was necessary. The results were often unpredictable, experimentation. Indeed, the theory was so unreliable that this commonplace that it had become a matter for respectable head off as alchemists!’ By the 1930s, though, transmutation was so responded ‘For Christ’s sake don’t call ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "67 Kamen and Ruben, but also made clear the importance of proper This bonding experience cemented a strong friendship between the Nobel prize for his pioneering work on cyclotrons in 1939. 3 Luckily, this embarrassing mishap doesn’t stop Lawrence from receiving contamination from laboratory dust bak..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "68 the whole pathway. then track the path of carbon in photosynthesis, giving a route map for to identify them. By building up a time-course, Kamen and Ruben could radioactive molecules and use the standard methods of organic chemistry periods would give later products. All they had to do was isolat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "69 metabolism, but the path was twisted. I mentioned in Chapter 1 that the carboxylic acids and the Krebs cycle for CO 2 fixation and so all of core as Krebs-cycle intermediates. This could have signalled the centrality of the first product was a carboxylic acid, with the same kind of chemistry towa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "70 vanishes in an instant, a ghostly apparition. Larger particles such as through the cloud chamber, leaving a long, spindly vapour trail that through the chamber. A proton is tiny and fast moving. It whizzes part. The vapour trail formed depends on what kind of particle is passing vapour trail simi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "71 developing the new protocols. Ruben was set to work in defending the isotopes, notably uranium and plutonium. Kamen was put in charge of the cyclotrons at the Rad Lab to focus on the production of radioactive Francisco seemed only too real a target. The US government took over 1941 was greeted wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "72 power of 14 C could mark out the path by which carbon was fixed in notion that sugars are the backbone of biochemistry. Only the discerning photosynthesis today, and especially central carbon metabolism – the train a peculiar history that still influences how we understand discovery, coupled with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "73 radioactivity emanating from the 14 C would then betray its presence as a precise place on the paper, depending on its chemical properties. The incorporated into a specific type of molecule, this would migrate to a paper, which darkened in the presence of radioactivity. If the 14 C was first). Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "74 smudge, it is a whole world! why scientists get so excited about the seemingly abstruse. That is no simple molecule that made sense. All that in one dark smudge. This is language of science, of human comprehension, of the rational mind – a tangible clue, which transformed nature’s deepest magic i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "75 through a rejigging process to regenerate three C5 molecules – all the be used anywhere in metabolism, while the other five C3 molecules went cycle produce six C3 molecules. One of these could be siphoned off to arithmetic, albeit a strange numbers game. Three complete turns of the on, giving two..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "76 imploded, so his greatest achievements in the field were more wrong? Calvin’s own cherished ideas on photochemistry had recently to go, and Calvin made no obvious effort on his behalf. What went dismissed Benson with the words ‘It is time to go.’ Benson had no place cycle. For reasons that were n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "77 against the king. That’s exactly what happened next – and why it took so amounted an insurrection against the unity of biochemistry, a rebellion anyone had the temerity to claim another way of fixing CO 2 , that assimilation of CO 2 via the Calvin cycle.’ You can imagine that if ‘One important pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "78 motive force’ from Chapter 1. In the case of photosynthesis, a current of paths, just as they do in respiration. Remember Peter Mitchell’s ‘proton- in turn splits into electrons and protons, which then follow different stripping the 2H from H 2 O through the auspices of chlorophyll. The 2H the sa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "79 highlight the key points): had in mind (I’m just slightly simplifying their original diagram to It could drive growth like a ... well, like a bacterium. Here’s what they would make four, three turns make eight, four turns sixteen, and so on ... complete turn of the cycle generates two molecules, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "80 pyruvate (plus that metabolic link between carboxylic acids and sugars, thought of as Krebs-cycle intermediates, notably acetyl CoA and backwards: it includes several extra carboxylic acids that are not usually reverse cycle is slightly longer than the standard cycle running cycle here – that’s s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "81 saw Krebs-cycle intermediates everywhere – the same carboxylic acids autoradiographs: I had expected to see sugar phosphates but instead I elsewhere. I was astonished when I first looked at Benson’s in autotrophic metabolism became obscured, as the focus shifted don’t contribute to carbon fixatio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "82 whole was deemed to be irreversible. dismissed as energetically too unfavourable. That meant the cycle as a (C2 to C3 and C4 to C5) were taken to be biochemically impossible, as if they were plants. Even so, the remaining two carboxylation steps not animals, yet here were animal tissues – our own..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "83 steps; see Appendix 1 if you want to know – the process is rather Let’s not worry about exactly how that works here (it requires several to form a carbon-to-carbon bond: takes the electrons from the 2H and transfers them onto CO 2 , enabling it CO 2 has to be bound onto something very like itself..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "84 (Fd) to form Fd 2– . In the presence of oxygen, Fd 2– is dangerous as need sunlight to transfer the electrons from 2H onto ferredoxin H 2 S, H 2 or H 2 O depending on the type of photosynthesis – but all photosynthesis, powered by sunlight. The 2H could come from Transfer of electrons from 2H to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "85 sizeable yield, but at least they survive to die another day. The penalty staving off an impending catastrophe. Certainly, this can cost plants a lowering the levels of reactive ferredoxin and oxygen simultaneously, again. So it could be that photorespiration acts as a safety valve, NADPH back to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "86 citrate into acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate. The gene encoding ATP citrate ATP citrate lyase. As it says on the tin, this enzyme uses ATP to split own Krebs cycle running backwards, but by a distinct enzyme called CoA is not catalysed by the familiar ‘citrate synthase’ enzyme from our page 101. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "87 Large Hadron Collider at CERN, in Geneva, with a diameter of 27 km. of cyclotrons are called synchrotrons. The largest cyclic particle accelerator is the with the flight of charged particles. As a result, the higher-powered descendants has to be taken into consideration in synchronising the rever..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "88 budget meeting for anything but the timing of his heart attack. Calvin lost 30 kg in weight and quit smoking. It would be unfair to blame the 7 Calvin’s wife Genevieve took matters in hand: under her strict dietary regime, wonders. detrimental mutations are part of natural selection, driving the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "89 twentieth century. revolutionise our understanding of life, the universe and everything in the lead to fundamentally new ways of seeing the world, and which did so much to to develop better ways of assessing radically new ideas in science – the kind that rise above our own baser instincts. For th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "90 NAD + form. We’ll come back to the significance of NADPH in Chapter 5. electrons, whereas NADH tends to offload its electrons, leaving it mostly in the reaction. NADP + is normally present as NADPH, the form that is replete with maintained at very different ratios, enabling them to promote distin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "92 reverse Krebs cycle uses iron–sulfur proteins, notably ferredoxin, to ripe for a new conception of the origin of life. In broad brushstroke, the autotrophic bacteria depend on the Calvin–Benson cycle. The time was was finally gaining credence, as gene sequences made it clear that not all fixation..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "93 these terms for now. Suffice to say that science is often furiously ultimate guide to life’s origin. Don’t worry about the meaning of all accumulation, local or planetary scales, and biology or chemistry as the genes first, autotrophy or heterotrophy, fast chemistry or slow warm ponds, light ener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "94 origin of life, or a question for gene editing and synthetic biology to intractable outcome of metabolism, written into cells from the very are smart enough? Is the difference between ageing and disease an just a trivial outcome of information systems that could be rewired, if we thermodynamics –..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "95 of the early Earth. Now, if all the carbon in organic matter plus limestone record that barely any limestone was laid down beneath the acidic oceans to form in relatively alkaline oceans. We know from the geological There was also much less limestone on the early Earth, for this tends space. made..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "96 have accumulated in warm ponds on land, there is little evidence for that such as cyanide. While relatively stable forms such as ferricyanide might That certainly can’t be said for the alternative theories based on gases CO 2 , were present at the origin of life in nearly unlimited quantities. th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "97 common ancestor, the last universal common ancestor of all life domains of life, implying that this was the only pathway present in their pathway, is found in both bacteria and archaea, the two great prokaryotic fixation across the living world. Just one of these, the acetyl CoA chapter, we now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "98 pathways form overlapping groups of Krebs-cycle intermediates. topologies that operate optimally under diverse conditions. These ‘crystallised’ into five different pathways, with distinct network multiple ways of making Krebs-cycle intermediates, which eventually bacteria and archaea, but it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "99 evolutionary biology or ‘creation science’ in schools. Being a pioneer of Scopes ‘monkey trial’ in the 1920s. Both trials concerned the teaching of McLean versus Arkansas trial, sometimes known as Scopes II, after the public in the early 1980s when called up as an expert witness at the rigour wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "100 Morowitz could not help but see the Krebs cycle as the perfect cyclone Always an admirer of the iconic metabolic charts of biochemistry, hence energy flow powers the cycling of matter. the dissipation of heat means that no pathway is perfectly reversible, energy balance – another great steady-st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "101 Leslie Orgel. serious was pointed out by another pioneering origin-of-life researcher, some grave problems with Morowitz’s view too. Perhaps the most treacherous guide in science, as in life. Life is rarely simple and there are of chemistry give way to the wiles of biology? But beauty can be a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "102 accident’, meaning that the code was essentially random, and became problem of the genetic code, which Crick had pronounced a ‘frozen seeded on Earth by an alien civilisation. That conception grew from the possibility of directed panspermia – the idea that life was deliberately 1970s, which ende..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "103 precisely nothing to amplify. of the final step. Fat chance of autocatalysis. Each cycle would have came the sucker punch. The first step of any cycle depends on the yield without enzymes increasing the selectivity and yield of each step. Then successive steps to regenerate its starting point, c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "104 geological environment – alkaline hydrothermal vents – to the heart of that already has unique explanatory power in connecting an omnipresent from CO 2 and H 2 . That’s a big deal, because it substantiates a hypothesis years, that these Krebs line intermediates do indeed form spontaneously We’ve..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "105 between the oxygen atoms and the mineral surface, depicted here with apposition with the surface and is held in place by electrical attractions to keep things simple. Imagine that a CO 2 molecule comes into close containing iron and sulfur (such as greigite), shown below as a wavy line Consider ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "106 greigite is nearly identical to the tiny clusters of iron and sulfur that remarkable: the lattice structure of iron and sulfur in minerals such as parallel between mineral surfaces and enzymes such as ferredoxin is transfer of electrons onto CO 2 in cells today (see Appendix 1). The mineral surf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "107 sequence showing roughly what happens: transfer of hydrogen, even in the absence of hydrogen itself. Here’s a Overall, the transfer of electrons and protons onto CO 2 equates to the They can then follow the electrons onto CO 2 attached to the surface. onto the surface of the mineral, positioning..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "108 with a nearby proton, in this case forming an OH (an ‘alcohol’ group): in the middle panel that the electron pair on the oxygen is quickly shared same thing can happen repeatedly. So here’s what happens next. Notice to add a hydrogen atom onto the carbon, giving an organic molecule. The proton p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "109 sometimes said that this kind of dehydration is impossible at the origin of reaction: water is being removed in a watery environment. It’s what’s formed overall – water! This is what’s called a dehydration already an excess of OH – ions in the surroundings. And second, look in acidic environment..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "110 and one of the most important molecules in all metabolism. We have just equivalent to acetyl CoA – discovered, if you recall, by Fritz Lipmann, But now look at the product. This bound molecule is a prebiotic enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase catalyses exactly this reaction. process as well as..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "111 concentration of hydrogen in hydrothermal fluids is high, that tends to gas, bubbling straight out of alkaline hydrothermal vents. If the these electrons being replenished from? The answer is simple: hydrogen experiments that start with CO 2 and minerals. But where exactly are all first half. No..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "112 prebiotic chemistry. The most intriguing possibility, which connects cells complex, and involve multiple enzymes, so don’t seem relevant to CO 2 ? There are several ways of doing that, but most of them are to transfer their electrons onto ferredoxin, which then passes them onto The explicit prob..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "113 electrons from H 2 (in the jargon, it is more easily reduced). And when which is to say, the local pH. So, when Ech binds protons, it can accept channel in the membrane, and their properties depend on proton binding, from H 2 to ferredoxin. Two of the clusters sit right next to a proton protein ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "114 Small steps, giant leaps them. verification – for once, not slain by an ugly fact. I take my hat off to absence of a steep pH gradient. This is beautiful experimental organics were formed at normal air pressure, or without H 2 gas, or in the molecules (mainly formate) really did derive from the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "115 (where I talked about protons crossing cell membranes). The electrons crossing inorganic barriers) and organic synthesis in protocells between organic synthesis in inorganic pores (where I talked about If you are unusually alert, you may have noticed a discrepancy inside the protocells – which i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "116 the membrane, whereas a proportion of amino acids should interact with For reasons of physical chemistry, new fatty acids will go straight into principle make copies of itself, and over time can become more complex. Perhaps the most important property of this system is that it can in barriers mu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "117 against. 9 Meaning emerges with function. In other words, the genetic protocell growth (through ‘selfish’ behaviour) would be selected enhance protocell growth would be favoured, while RNA that impedes genetic sequences in terms of protocell growth. Only strings of RNA that think that means zero..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "118 unquestionably a product of genetic information and natural selection; it ATP synthase motor, as noted in Chapter 1. This awesome nanomotor is 22 here. ATP synthesis is powered by proton gradients, which rotate the enables these difficult steps to happen is ATP. There’s an apparent catch- RNA sy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "119 roughly like this: ADP (adenosine diphosphate) to form ATP at modest (20 per cent) yield, thioacetate. Once formed, acetyl phosphate will pass its phosphate onto really does – acetyl phosphate is formed from a two-carbon precursor should occur under prebiotic conditions too, and we have shown th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "120 within vents are the perfect homes for protocells that nestle in the flow and reaction of gases in the environment. The inorganic pores Growth is the non-stop formation of new organics from the continuous H 2 is replenished, and the same reaction can happen all over again. tiny proportion of H 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "121 Synthetic chemists tend to have little interest in the pathways that biochemistry as nucleotides, at high yield, ideally uncontaminated by unwanted products. 3 The tradition of synthetic chemistry aims to make the products of interest, such have been the primordial energy source. relatively comp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "122 giving rise to us; or perhaps there is some deeper reason, buried in the laws of different cosmological constants, and we have to live in one that was capable of ‘finely tuned’. Perhaps there is a multiverse in which different universes have stars, planets, organic chemistry and life as we know ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "123 through selection on protocell growth. RNA, giving a genetic code linked directly with function, that can evolve amino-acid sequence in short peptides depends on the sequence of letters in RNA polymerisation, would then depend on that location. This templating of and potentially interact with me..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "125 cycle, burning them, the revolution that powered the revolution. from the reverse Krebs cycle, making organics, to our own oxidative explosion more than three billion years later. It turned, quite literally, years ago, to the chemistry of 2H and O 2 , powering the Cambrian from the chemistry of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "126 behaviour of oxygen, the world that we know and love could not exist. predominantly two-electron chemistry of carbon, versus the one-electron It’s sobering to realise that without the quantum rules that govern the energy-history of the Earth is the story of oxygen in the air and oceans. other th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "127 about the Krebs line : a linear pathway that arguably preceded the cycle origin of life, where we left off in the previous chapter. There we talked ageing) we need to take the long view, a view that goes right back to the involved (and later in the book, to understand what goes wrong in composed..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "128 (technically, reduced) metals such as iron and nickel. In contrast, the sources, ultimately the Earth’s mantle, which is rich in electron-dense of the electrons that cells need to grow still derive from geological with less H 2 , or extract it from other sources such as H 2 S. Either way, all fr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "129 methane (CH 4 ) and water (H 2 O) as waste products. In this case, each 2H likely CO 2 itself. Transferring 2H onto CO 2 – repeatedly – generates Earth, the most common electron acceptor was not oxygen, but most released is used to pump protons, just as in respiration. On the early electrons fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "130 her classic paper on ferredoxin in 1966. the history of life on Earth like never before. The beginning of it all was protein sequences – the basis of modern phylogenetics – to reconstruct bond energies) with her pioneering computational work on comparing underpinning planetary processes such as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "131 serious disadvantage compared with the more familiar oxygenic for methanogens. The sun provides this power instead. But there is still a without the need for burning fuel to power pumping – the 40-fold cost from a donor (H 2 S) to an acceptor (ferredoxin) and then onto CO 2 , huge advantage here..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "132 horizons, let’s first see how these limits are built into the universal core explore how the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis opened up new synthesis of ATP. This world left its imprint on biochemistry. Before we systems, which were needed to drive the reduction of ferredoxin and the gases s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "133 the same energy constraints). But this efficiency only works under Calvin–Benson cycle (which with oxygenic photosynthesis doesn’t face pyruvate via the reverse Krebs cycle are less than half those of the respect, it’s striking that the ATP costs to make a single molecule of fixing CO 2 . Make t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "134 reflecting an intimate metabolic relationship between the cells: how stoichiometry. This stoichiometry varied with the cells’ colours, comparable distribution of cells, even consistent numbers – a precise bacteria or archaea. The clumps were usually similar in size, with a displaying two differe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "135 decreased, by removing it to form C: increased, by living next to a good source of it (a vent will do), and B is can be pushed in the forward direction if the concentration of A is the direction of a reaction that is close to equilibrium substrates that enter the pathway while removing the end p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "136 not some virgin to placate a medieval dragon, but water. Zap. Repeat. sacrificial gift offered by the trembling priestly protein. This sacrifice is Transiently angry, chlorophyll snatches a replacement from the off down an electron-transport chain embedded in the membrane. excited electron, zapp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "137 flowing from water – water everywhere! – to synthesise ATP in the first ferredoxin simultaneously. Now, the power of the sun sets electrons scheme, oxygenic photosynthesis could now generate ATP and reduce distinct photosystems used in earlier forms of photosynthesis into the Z ATP, the cramped ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "138 common sense is the worst guide to the history of life. In fact, the levels oxygen in ancient rocks. I admit that doesn’t sound plausible, but being formed reacted swiftly with methane, there would be no trace of evidence against an early evolution of photosynthesis. If all the oxygen may reflec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "139 12 C over 13 C (compared with a standard ratio) by around 30 per mille rubisco, the outcome is that organic carbon becomes slightly enriched in a touch faster, so encounter enzymes more frequently. In the case of bumping into enzymes such as rubisco. Lighter molecules bounce around molecules as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "140 it means. A fall in 13 C relative to 12 C implies that far more carbon was uninterestingly dry and technical? It’s actually shocking! Just think what content), recovering slowly over ten million years. Does that sound standard, to a record 12 per mille below (much lower than the mantle 13 C 13 C..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "141 accumulations of sulfate were raised up high as continents collided and Gondwana together, around 560 million years ago, these great minerals such as gypsum. When the drifting continents brought partially evaporated to form massive deposits of evaporitic sulfate apart, large land masses became s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "142 burrowing through the stagnant muds, remaining active in even the most excess CO 2 or sulfide. Those tough survivors had already adapted to managed to deliver scraps of oxygen to their muscles and clear out circulatory systems that could be actively ventilated, animals that from random, but prim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "143 fumarate and succinate. This is the reverse pathway used in biosynthesis runs through the C3 pyruvate to the C4 oxaloacetate, then onto malate, other oxidative. The reductive prong begins with the C2 acetyl CoA and cycle (see the scheme below). One prong of this fork is reductive, the time they ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "144 switched off, and an alternative enzyme is expressed instead – succinate on and off. Conversely, when oxygen is available fumarate reductase is adaptation to low-oxygen (hypoxic) conditions, switching many genes Accumulation of succinate is a powerful signal for physiological proton pumping and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "145 sulfide, growing and reproducing in this stench, puts a premium on Cambrian explosion? Crawling around in the mud, snuffling through the organisms? And what happened in that traumatic age before the synthesis? What is the difference between microbes and multicellular So why do textbooks still cl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "146 consumes the waste products of another. That helps them to stabilise living symbiotically, with a precise stoichiometry in which one cell type We’ve seen that bacteria and archaea often benefit from company, could underpin the evolution of complex multicellularity in animals. balancing that in a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "147 web of symbiosis between tissues begins to fray. And so we age. biosynthetic pathways falter, ATP synthesis declines and the delicate cells and tissues. Tissue function eventually becomes strained, hundreds or thousands of genes, changing the stable (epigenetic) state of through the Krebs cycle,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "148 citrate. The trouble here is that high levels of oxaloacetate could interfere with broken down into acetyl CoA plus oxaloacetate, both of which can regenerate 4 The eagle-eyed will notice that statement is slightly ambiguous. Citrate is Innsbruck. philosophy), Gnaiger has a wonderful collection ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "149 burial and oxygenation is clearly misguided. levels plummeted to nearly zero. The idea that 13 C variations only reflect carbon That could explain why the 13 C signal is so large, yet soon afterwards oxygen the GOE might have been caused partly by the sequestration of sulfate on land. sulfate fl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "151 cause cancer are not set in stone, but take their meaning from the reflects the society in which we live, so the effects of oncogenes said to human delinquency cannot be blamed on individuals only, but partly is too close to dogma. Biology is not only about information. Just as to dogmas even to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "152 for cancer is older age: cancer incidence increases exponentially with of these actually causes cancer is unclear. Perhaps the greatest risk factor proliferate through pulling on the normal levers of cell division. Which can mutate genes (as they insert into DNA) but also induce cells to chronic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "153 The Warburg effect to explain the root cause of cancer. between energy and growth, the yin and yang of the Krebs cycle, begins those that suppress growth)? In this chapter, we’ll see how the tension growth (whether it be to press down the levers that drive growth, or lift words: how does any met..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "154 quartets: ‘You know Albert, your trouble is that you can’t count!’ Fritz Kreisler to his friend Einstein – the two played together in string people, though I can’t help calling to mind a quip from the great violinist It’s striking how many great scientists are also culturally rounded interest in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "155 Einstein’s reaction to the quirkiness of quantum mechanics: ‘God does itself, nearly perfect.’ To my mind, this remark is in the same vein as applied light energy is lost; on the contrary, the reaction is like the world organic world is based, is not so imperfect that the greater part of the sun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "156 produces ATP, albeit barely a tenth as much. The breakdown of glucose the Krebs cycle and respiration. Like respiration, fermentation also betrays a shortage of oxygen: an inability to make enough ATP through but still somewhat intoxicating. The accumulation of lactate normally has been replaced..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "157 had a deep-seated fear of cancer. His mother, said to be the only person who is a Jew.’ The reasons are shrouded in mystery, but Hitler apparently But he was swiftly reinstated, under Göring’s declaration ‘I will decide 50 per cent Jewish, and he was for a brief period relieved of his position. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "158 cancer. In which case, why has the number of papers citing it risen so Warburg effect. So, the Warburg effect is certainly not a universal key to outside and burn it in their mitochondria, in what’s called the reverse for their energy needs. Some cancer cells even take up lactate from to new cel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "159 rather than a genetic disease, but his focus on cell respiration missed the Warburg was arguably right that cancer is fundamentally a metabolic do indeed all induce some form of metabolic rewiring. know that many oncogenes, tumour suppressor genes and cancer viruses Warburg dismissed as obscurin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "160 get the balance between ATP, NADPH and carbon skeletons right. ATP for growth (and so cancer), and cells must wire their metabolism to NADPH. All in all, making NADPH is at least as important as making programmed cell death. Cancer cells escape this fate by making more vulnerable to oxidative st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "161 on how many proteins are actually made. The workhorses of tissues are carbon or NADPH), although in this case the demand depends primarily ATP demands (joining monomers together in chains costs ATP but not ATP. The synthesis of RNA, DNA and especially proteins has higher nucleotides also consume..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "162 excitement of his perspective on the Krebs cycle in cancer has never left his department. I have no idea what I talked about that day – but the the first time from Christian Frezza in Cambridge, before I gave a talk in the C4 intermediate succinate. I’ve never forgotten hearing about this for hy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "163 complex II and the right-hand complex is the nanomotor ATP synthase): enzyme. Overall, it works like this (where CI depicts complex I, CII is little ATP synthesis in animals that possess the fumarate reductase electron flow allows the pumping of four protons at complex I, driving a to fumarate i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "164 certain death? Look at the genes that it targets. They include genes for So how does HIF 1α making it to the nucleus in time save the cell from oxygen emergency. the protein can make it to the nucleus in time, in the rare event of an continuously just to ensure that fully functional (spanking ne..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "165 sobering. I’ll come back to a couple of these in the next chapter but just of medical conditions where this mechanism turns out to be relevant is levels, which are counteracted through changes in gene activity. The list slight impairments in Krebs-cycle flux give a read-out of succinate time fee..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "166 cancers glutamine. I have a vivid memory of discussing glutamine and substrates serve all of their needs. And of the two of them ... give the Most cancers need no more than glucose and glutamine to grow. These Another reversal Krebs cycle. in the form of the amino acid glutamine. And that, too, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "167 DeBerardinis and colleagues in 2012. They reported in Nature that cells The first wave of the storm came from Navdeep Chandel, Ralph urgently before his blackboard. Molecules acquire personality this way. whenever I think of glutamine, I can’t help but see Moncada pacing Institute for Cancer Sci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "168 means that the ATP synthase stops spinning. So protons no longer flow series. If demand for ATP is low, then ATP is not being consumed, which inside your cells right now? Everything in your mitochondria is linked in around reading this book), so demand for ATP is low. What’s going on into explos..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "169 NADH flips the direction of transhydrogenase enzyme. This now so NADH levels fall. The shift in the balance between NADPH and falls. Now NADH can transfer electrons into the respiratory chain again, though its rotary motor. As protons flow back inside, membrane potential spent, the ATP synthase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "170 glutamine looks something like the diagram on the next page: making citrate, supporting cancer cell growth. Overall, the flux from Mutations keep the enzyme jammed in reverse mode, so it keeps on because they lock in a flux that is already beneficial for cancer cells. reinforce this shift in can..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "171 strip out the acetyl group, switching off the growth signal. But their is reinforced by the context. The sirtuins are a group of enzymes that and proliferation – another signal that says grow! This epigenetic switch switch’ known as acetylation. The genes switched on drive cell growth histones. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "172 broken down to acetyl CoA. And we’ve seen the havoc that can cause. from glutamine in this way. Alternatively, from pyruvate, you can be washed out as waste. Much of the lactate excreted by cancer cells comes needed for biosynthesis. From pyruvate, you can form lactate and be C3 pyruvate, plus (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "173 oxygen in the normal way. Glycerol phosphate can be recycled by from outside the mitochondria. These electrons are transferred onto stripped of 2H, which is fed into complex III of the respiratory chain involving the Krebs cycle. It works like this. Glycerol phosphate is to generate electrical m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "174 splurged as ammonia rather than urea, promoting this vicious cycle while mutations in genes for the urea cycle. That way, excess nitrogen is free fossil fuels for the filthiest polluters. Cancer cells often acquire maintains a copious supply of free glutamine. It’s as if a state provides From th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "175 cancer cells. acetone). Yet even these metabolic hurdles are not insurmountable for make sugars from fats (although it can be done via the C3 intermediary presence tends to switch off growth signals. It’s also notoriously tricky to Because our physiology links ketone bodies with starvation, thei..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "176 deriving from the Krebs cycle. Electrons enter from NADH and pass on through the respiratory chain, and the only entry point for NADH us to the second problem. Complex I is the beginning of the longest route compensated somewhat through suppression of complex I. That brings We’ll see in the next..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "177 or don’t know about the treatments he was receiving; but also, how many for fun. He was acutely aware of his chances, and exactly what we know think. Full of zest. Always active. A man who would run up mountains and a smile to light a room, who taught me much about how to write and education, a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "178 structure, which is functionally identical, but relates to how far each one has been 3 The reason NAD P H has more power than NADH has nothing to do with the physical danger. unquestionably applied to both Warburg and Haldane – and a tendency to enjoy there is any correlation between those given..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "179 former chloroplasts. This has retained some genes that derive from the original malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum , which has a plastid derived from its called a plastid) which they use for other purposes. A famous example is the ability to photosynthesise altogether, but retained their ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "180 immunity to viral infections. Who knew they had an immune system? editing technology of CRISPR was discovered by scientists studying bacterial insights deriving from plant scientists. In a similar way, remember that the gene quarters. Focusing funding on research into human cancer would miss pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "182 to counter the effects of hundreds, nay thousands or millions of SNPs, a consume us from within. To reverse the afflictions of older age would be then we will be afflicted by a maelstrom of implacable spectres that our expected chronological time (protected by the wonders of society), and so on...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "183 genomics. Genome-wide association studies assign additive risk to The problem of missing heritability is more startling in this age of heritability of height is about 0.8. too, regardless of their upbringing. For comparison’s sake, the condition, then the other twin has about a 50 per cent chanc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "184 Wallace made ‘cybrids’, in which the genes in the nucleus came from between the mitochondria and nuclear genes. To study these interactions, nucleus too. That cooperation can be undermined by incompatibilities on the mitochondrial gene; it needs to cooperate with the genes in the cell to grow no..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "185 mitochondrial DNA into diagnostic chunks using ‘restriction enzymes’, passed on) but Wallace used a spanking new method (cutting up mitochondrial genes (the father’s mitochondrial genes are usually not Others had already established the idea of ‘uniparental inheritance’ of humans, mitochondrial ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "186 groups can be used to track the migrations of humans out of Africa into accumulation of differences in mitochondrial DNA between diverging human mitochondrial DNA, around 160,000 years ago. The gradual female, now known as ‘mitochondrial Eve’, the ancestor of all modern mitochondrial variations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "187 only dared to disagree; he was usually right. His legacy can be seen in anatomy. Galen had been undisputed for 1,400 years, but Vesalius not Vesalius did not fear to pick a fight with the ancients on points of landscapes. These plates pack a punch that has echoed down centuries. in various state..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "188 That signals directly to the nucleus, through succinate and citrate, is not being consumed) then Krebs-cycle flux must slow or even reverse. we saw in Chapter 5, if the electrical potential is too high (because ATP feeds back, shaping forward or reverse flux through the Krebs cycle. As strengthe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "189 genetics and mitochondrial function in Melbourne and was now full of mine at University College London. She had done her PhD in fly I knew little of this until Flo Camus arrived in the lab next door to confess to quite a strong fellow feeling. gaining their proteins from the yeast that ferments ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "190 people from other cultures is as human as we can get, and I will always divergent populations within the same species? Falling in love with mitochondrial and nuclear genes. So what about crosses between cause ‘hybrid breakdown’, attributed to incompatibilities between But where should we draw th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "191 Just one line. The other lines looked a bit ropey but seemed OK. We affect the males much. Yet it killed most of the females in one fly line! antioxidant. We tried one called NAC (for N -acetylcysteine), but it didn’t The cure seemed obvious: lower the stress. Give the flies an stressing the tes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "192 the suppression of respiration by NAC. That’s surprising, because ROS flight muscles of the thorax – it remained more or less constant, despite finding was that ROS flux hardly changed, least of all in the powerful The answer seems to be linked to the flux of ROS. A really striking the antioxida..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "193 Gla Inwongwan in my lab are looking into that right now, so I can’t tell of tissues: which genes are switched on or off. Enrique Rodriguez and respiration, NAC has to be having serious effects on the epigenetic state downstream effects on the activity of thousands of genes. By suppressing lower ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "194 linking together different bits of a protein, disulfide bridges change the with GSSG, oxidised thiols in proteins tend to form disulfide bridges. By There are more layers. GSH can also regenerate thiols in proteins. As the form GSSG in the flies that died. glutathione pool was more oxidised – a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "195 within a normal range. We know that the only difference between our fly suppression of complex I did indeed bring elevated ROS flux back flux was in fact unchanged in muscle tissue, so presumably the complex I, which in principle decreases ROS flux. We know that ROS that oxidation of glutathione..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "196 correlation between metabolic rate (the rate of living) and lifespan. The rate would have slowed down too). My point is that there is a broad done so, they would likely have lived a little longer (albeit their heart intend to use up any of mine running around doing exercises.’ If they had the wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "197 why lifespan only correlates loosely with metabolic rate – but to ignore in the first place? The contrasting answers to these questions explain spend on cleaning up the mess or preventing the mess from building up in reproduction or competing for a mate? How much do you want to to live anyway? W..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "198 or Krebs-cycle flux much when we’re strutting our stuff in our tails). Presumably, any incremental damage does not impede respiration glucose to react with proteins and lipids, decorating them with ‘sticky’ linking, oxidation by ROS or glycation (the tendency of sugars such as damage, whether th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "199 whereas less fit individuals can’t sustain both biosynthesis and energy once, with the Krebs cycle in full forwards mode much of the time, individuals have a respiratory system that is capable of doing both at on the relative allocation of resources to growth or energy: the fittest the amazing e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "200 linked with ageing? variations in nuclear genes. So how exactly are age-related diseases established genetic risk for these conditions is explained by known spectre of missing heritability means that only a small proportion of the or some heart condition. Take your pick. We’re all individuals. B..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "201 on which genes are active, overlaid on the energetic and biosynthetic tissues express different genes, with the effects of each SNP depending activation in the nucleus, tissue by tissue. By their very nature, different to the dwindling availability of ATP and the shifting pattern of gene rather ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "202 easily by the brain, despite high levels in the bloodstream. Perpetually insulin secretion. As secreted insulin levels fall, glucose is taken up less glucose itself – lowers the membrane potentials achievable, which saps islet mitochondria – damage that’s typically caused by the reactivity of pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "203 the mitochondria, activating pyruvate dehydrogenase further and MAMs attempt to compensate for this deficit by pumping more Ca 2+ into glucose, but insulin resistance means that they struggle to do so. 10 The Think about the problem here. To fire normally, neurons must take up now let’s just see..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "204 (10 23 , or 100,000,000,000, 000,000,000,000). I’m now in my mid-fifties, sustained by an incomprehensible one hundred billion trillion reactions thirty trillion cells, so in the last second your tranquil demeanour was billion metabolic reactions every second. 11 You are composed of at least loo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "205 longer-lived animals restrict ROS flux from complex I, simply by down- rate. Recent work from Gustavo Barja in Madrid suggests that these their land-lubber cousins with a similar body size or resting metabolic Animals with the power of flight live as much as ten times longer than repairing damag..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "206 maxim was ‘Nothing to excess’. Think about how hard it is to change and die. We each need to learn that lesson for ourselves. The second defines us as individuals and humans, but they knew well how to live have imagined the invisible metabolic flux dancing through genes that inscribed three maxi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "207 immature oocytes, why most of those die before birth, why oocytes are then female germline – why germ cells proliferate to form up to eight million quality operates gives striking insights into the developmental architecture of the found in human populations. Thinking about how selection for mit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "208 that are not still not fully explained. the demands on visceral organs such as the liver fall with body size, for reasons size. The great Canadian comparative biochemist Peter Hochachka showed that Sex, Suicide for a critique of this idea). And it partly relates to the economies of networks, as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "209 resistant, to the point that Alzheimer’s disease has been termed ‘type 3 diabetes’. resistant’, but more recent work indicates that neurons do indeed become insulin affect the uptake of glucose by the brain, hence the brain could not be ‘insulin directly toxic to proteins). For a long time, it w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "210 environments or response to infections, but that’s another story. responsiveness to rapid change, perhaps in terms of adaptability to variable respiration. That would predict there are evolutionary costs in limiting the why mitochondria retain genes at all; he argues they are needed to control a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "212 such as fruit flies. As Turin puts it, ‘While it is not known to what extent means we can study consciousness in some simple experimental models but is something more fundamental that works at the level of cells. This emergent property of the complex nervous systems of higher animals, paramecium..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "213 the hydrophobic pockets of proteins sitting within the mitochondrial Let’s get back to xenon. All this suggests that xenon concentrates in stuff of science fiction. But it seems they do. known. Even he admits that brains emitting radio waves sounds like the reputation for being difficult. His sc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "214 interfere with each other (cancelling out) or can link in phase to generate that electromagnetic fields interact with each other – separate fields can mitochondria. But there are some broader principles too about the way attempting to measure the strength of electromagnetic fields in individual ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "215 behaviour under the microscope, the way they move around, explore, fields on their mitochondrial membranes. Just watch their amazing think about protists such as paramecium, which also generate electrical Let’s put aside multicellular organisms with their nervous systems and music as the fields ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "216 counterattack, chopping up the DNA into bits before the virus can copy exposure to the virus, it can recognise the viral DNA and marshal a editing. If the bacterium (or indeed its ancestors) has had an earlier learnt to exploit, called CRISPR, which allow for sophisticated gene much chance, but ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "217 malate, then oxaloacetate, or perhaps an amino acid or sugar. You are a succinate for long. In a tiny fraction of a second, you will transform into are you part of the same entity, the same self? You won’t even be molecule of succinate across the city, twenty miles away? In what sense scale of L..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "218 that forges the oneness of self. You are a moment in a life. through a living cell on this restless planet of ours, the rush of change bacterium. You have just been part of something magic, the flow of life dancing electromagnetic fields, shifting the mood, the living states of a oxygen, heat or..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "219 it is the movement that creates the form. to this mortal process of continuing, Even though we give (give up) ourselves it is the movement that negates the form? Were we mistaken? What does it matter if it is the movement that achieves the form. beguiling our attention – we supposed it is the mo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "220 The forward Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "221 The reverse Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "222 CH 3 ). The first step goes like this: ‘R’ depicted in the example above corresponds to a methyl group (- activated to react with CO 2 , to form the C3 pyruvate. In other words, the Let’s think about a specific example – how acetate (a C2 molecule) is works. central to modern metabolism that it’..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "223 molecule of CO 2 , giving the C3 pyruvate: willing to react. In the final step, the CoA-S – can now be substituted for a way (as there is in acetyl phosphate). And that makes the carbon more joined directly to a sulfur atom, without there being an oxygen in the The important thing to notice here..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "224 electrical charge), which is symbolised by the Greek symbol delta (δ). towards themselves, giving them a slightly negative charge (not a full-on because the oxygen atoms have a strong tendency to pull electrons bond structure. But this structure is under some electrical strain. That’s that faces..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "225 water is shown as a product. Yet that seems to have gone missing in There’s only one other thing to notice here. In the first scheme above, exits the stage. instant that the CoA-S – grabs the electrons in its bond with acetate and from ferredoxin are transferred onto the two carbon atoms in the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "226 Biology magics water away. on the phosphate), but it’s nowhere to be seen as an independent entity. marked by the dashed lines (one of the oxygens plus two of the protons As happens so often in the chemistry of life, the water is there alright, newly released phosphate ion. So the overall reacti..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "227 bound onto the surface of the mineral: this time giving pyruvate (or more technically, a pyruvyl group), again hops across to join the CO (the same Fischer–Tropsch-type chemistry), can’t recall where the CO comes from). Once again, the acetyl group group is bound on near to another CO (check bac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "228 called ‘alpha carbon’. This arrangement is unusually reactive. Here’s oxygen on the first carbon atom next to the carboxylate group, a so- pattern slightly, because pyruvate possesses an extra double-bonded The next few steps build on what we’ve already seen, but alter the beautifully simple. pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "229 you can see it interacting with the surface better: the charge on one of the two oxygens of the carboxylate group. That way Cheshire Cat smile, but in the more conventional way that emphasises here. In this case, I’m not going to draw the pyruvate with its normal mineral surface) can abstract a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "230 reacting with CO to form the C4 oxaloacetate: before. Here’s the enol form of pyruvate binding to a surface and then to react with other bound molecules such as CO, exactly as we’ve seen means an enol can bind to a mineral surface, and once bound will be able easily if the oxygen picks up a prot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "231 plentiful. I’m not showing their movements any more, but recall that two Remember that we’re in a mildly acidic environment, where protons are oxaloacetate, allowing the oxygen to wrest its electrons from the carbon: of electrons transfers from the surface onto the alpha carbon of continue to re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "232 experiments. mineral surfaces, and at last, the results of some revolutionary on the known reactivity of carboxylic acids, the known behaviour of but the first few steps are exactly as predicted from first principles, based prebiotic chemistry will form citrate or the complete reverse Krebs cycl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "233 molecules). An important cellular antioxidant. oxidised form (where an H has been extracted from each of two GSH GSH Glutathione. GSH is the reduced form (containing H) and GSSG is the classic is the 4Fe4S cluster. sulfur, containing just a few atoms, with structures similar to minerals. The FeS..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "234 antioxidant glutathione. Found in coenzyme A, the amino acid cysteine (and so many proteins) and the -SH A thiol, containing a sulfur joined to a hydrogen, which is quite reactive. ‘free radicals’ and related molecules. oxygen grabs single electrons from FeS clusters in the respiratory chain to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "235 SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "236 Finally Solving the Mystery of Life (London, Penguin, 2019). An eloquent Paul Davies, The Demon in the Machine: How Hidden Webs of Information are The paradox of information in biology published scientific journal. Includes a light-touch historical overview. Philosophical Transactions of the Roy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "237 bacterial evolution. transfer has refocused attention on physiology as an organising principle in power of genetic information. Ironically, the scrambling power of lateral gene brought to an end the classical era of microbiology, ceding precedence to the Mikrobiologie 42 (1962) 17–35. A paper of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "238 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101 (2004) 13168–13173. E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, ‘Universality in intermediary metabolism’, Deep unity of biochemistry – the conserved city-centre plan (and justly famous). larger group; as close to the paradigm of molecular medicine as it ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "239 869–871. The text of Gowland Hopkins’s anniversary address to the Royal F. Gowland Hopkins, ‘Atomic physics and vital activities’, Nature 130 (1932) Hopkins’s biochemistry lab Chapter 1: Discovering the nanocosm which, in the way of science, has since been proved at least partly wrong. appeal to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "240 instrument invented by T. G. Brodie and others. short history that explains how Warburg’s name came to be associated with an use’, Journal of Chemical Education 41 (1964) 294–296. An enjoyably breezy P. Oesper, ‘The history of the Warburg apparatus. Some reminiscences on its inspiring piece, whi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "241 Volume 1 (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991). A monumental tome of Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: The Formation of a Scientific Life 1900–1933 . aimed at medics. 736–738. An immediate perspective on the cycle, written by Krebs alone and H. A. Krebs, ‘The intermediate metabolism of carbohydr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "242 Royal Society Memoirs . Features the memorable closing line that Lipmann died 88 (2006) 246–266. The US National Academy of Sciences equivalent to the W. P. Jenks and R. V. Wolfenden, ‘Fritz Albert Lipmann’, Biographical Memoirs system is essential at the very start of life.’ Plus ça change. an ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "243 recognised. to my mind Moyle’s vital experimental contribution has not been sufficiently Mitchell’s original paper on chemiosmotic coupling or his ‘little grey books’, but by Mitchell and Moyle in Nature in the mid-1960s, less heavily cited than mitochondria’, Nature 208 (1965) 147–151. One of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "244 (1981) 381–382. An influential paper that stands out in my mind for not even J. E. Baldwin and H. A. Krebs, ‘The evolution of metabolic cycles’, Nature 291 Evolution of the Krebs cycle University Press, 2021), a unique distillation from a remarkable nonagenarian. latest is On Life: Cells, Genes ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "245 scientific biography, with many memorable character portraits of the leading (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). A remarkable and absorbing Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age Lawrence and the Rad Lab discovered by Ellis himself. Rubisco by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "246 trying hard not to be bitter. Calvin until decades later, when he finally broke his silence. One senses he was Photosynthesis Research 73 (2002) 29–49. Benson said little about his time with A. A. Benson, ‘Following the path of carbon in photosynthesis: a personal story’, that those who fund res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "247 of recollections from the main protagonists of the reverse Krebs cycle, fifty years 2016’, Photosynthesis Research 134 (2017) 117–131. A fascinating compendium R. Tabita and I. A. Berg, ‘The Arnon–Buchanan cycle: a retrospective, 1966– B. B. Buchanan, R. Sirevåg, G. Fuchs, R. N. Ivanovsky, Y. Ig..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "248 autotrophic growth of a thermophilic bacterium’, Science 359 (2018) 563–567. A A. Mall, J. Sobotta, C. Huber et al ., ‘Reversibility of citrate synthase allows Widespread reverse Krebs cycle when oxygen is present. this paper just highlights how difficult it is to operate the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "249 from two distinguished marine biologists, John Baross and Deb Kelley, who had overview of the different types of vent system and their roles at the origin of life, origin of life’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 805–814. A good W. Martin, J. Baross, D. Kelley and M. J. Russell, ‘Hydrotherm..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "250 prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells’, Philosophical evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the Krebs cycle. their detailed thinking on Peter Mitchell’s protonmotive force and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "251 would have had to take place in high-pressure atmospheres. Here he teams up the origin of life involving an unusual form of ‘zinc sulfide photosynthesis’ that is a distinguished bioenergeticist who has had some strikingly original ideas on National Academy of Sciences USA 109 (2012) E821–830. Ar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "252 that they trained as synthetic chemists, yet are thinking from a biochemical point Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018) 1019–1024. Joseph Moran’s group is unusual in CO 2 to intermediates and end-products of the acetyl-CoA pathway’, Nature S. J. Varma, K. B. Muchowska, P. Chatelain and J. Moran, ‘Nati..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "253 lived from H 2 and CO 2 using proton gradients and iron–sulfur proteins. While some details have been decried, the paper reinforces the idea that LUCA simple cells subsisting in vents in the neverland between the abiotic and biotic. advance a striking portrait of the physiology of LUCA – as a po..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "254 with his long-term collaborator, the equally brilliant Eric Smith. Deserves a place 2016). A magisterial volume, and fitting final testament of Morowitz, written Emergence of the Fourth Geosphere (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, Eric Smith and Harold J. Morowitz, The Origin and Nature of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "255 the thermodynamically permissible. of data and mechanisms on the energetics of making a living at the margins of conservation’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 579–591. A treasure-trove ‘Methanogenic archaea: ecologically relevant differences in energy R. K. Thauer, A.-K. Kaster, H. Seedorf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "256 steep pH gradients (as much as 3 or 4 pH units across single nanocrystals). million times faster than hydroxide ions going the other way, giving rise to very experimental results, showing that protons can cross iron–sulfur barriers two Interface Focus 9 (2019) 20190073. A detailed theoretical pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "257 our own current thinking on the origins of the genetic code. possible for protocells to get better at copying themselves. The basis for much of acids) and iron–sulfur clusters drive a form of membrane heredity that makes it show that positive feedbacks between organic molecules (fatty acids and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "258 and pushes its central thesis a little too far. generation of young minds into palaeontology. But it has not weathered so well, (New York, W. W. Norton, 1989). A heady book that must have drawn a Stephen Jay Gould, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the History of Nature Cambrian explosion Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "259 1 (2017) 0138. A sweeping take from Olivia Judson on how a succession of O. Judson, ‘The energy expansions of evolution’, Nature Ecology and Evolution environmental change to the simple gas oxygen. A valuable corrective. Geobiology 7 (2009) 1–7. Quite a diatribe against the lazy ascription of dr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "260 of eukaryotes. An honour to contribute. issue of the journal in which she published her classic 1967 paper on the origin Margulis’s contribution to cell evolution, written for a special fiftieth anniversary Journal of Theoretical Biology 434 (2017) 58–67. My own appraisal of Lynn N. Lane, ‘Seria..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "261 abruptly. The intellectual son and grandson of James Lovelock (using PhD Gaia) can flip from one stable state to another as conditions change, sometimes Oxford University Press, 2013). A detailed overview of how the Earth system (or Tim Lenton and Andrew Watson, Revolutions that Made the Earth (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "262 was linked to the Cambrian explosion. Not a straightforward case! A marshalling of the evidence that the rise in oxygen in the late Neoproterozoic geochemical evidence and biological consequences’, GSA Today 21 (2011) 4–11. G. Shields-Zhou and L. Och, ‘The case for a Neoproterozoic oxygenation e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "263 gave rise to eukaryotic cells with large, complex genomes. They have to be right. cross-talk between the host cells and endosymbionts (proto-mitochondria) that I spotted it earlier. Argues that Krebs-cycle intermediates were critical to the read this paper after finishing the book and would have..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "264 Warburg’s papers. Much has changed since then, of course, but his closing line cause of cancer, and with a similar anger (but a completely different view) to the same year that Rous received the Nobel prize for his work on viruses as a 1361. Quite a diatribe against the somatic mutation theory o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "265 impacts on tumor metabolism’, Cancer & Metabolism 4 (2016) 5. A lively and A. M. Otto, ‘Warburg effect(s)—a biographical sketch of Otto Warburg and his side. accomplishments, while finding kind words to allay Warburg’s less appealing Krebs at his most gentlemanly in highlighting his mentor’s gre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "266 searing piece that I quote from in some detail in my chapter. Worth taking a look O. Warburg, ‘On the origin of cancer cells’, Science 123 (1956) 309–314. A decades. in cancer cells, which became the basis for his work on cancer over the following Warburg’s first publication on cancer, showing e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "267 An ancient switch critical role of mitochondria in cancer. hardly need to say that he was one of the strongest voices calling attention to the chapter, in part because I discussed his ideas at some length in Chapter 6. I 685–698. I neglected to say much about Doug Wallace’s work on cancer in thi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "268 to glutamine, in this case in HeLa cells. On that count, I feel obliged to point you (1955) 501–514. One of the first papers to point to the addiction of cancer cells H. Eagle, ‘Nutrition needs of mammalian cells in tissue culture’, Science 122 Glutamine in cancer easily achieved in humans. oxyg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "269 the Krebs cycle can be turbocharged. mitochondria’, FEBS Letters 344 (1994) 109–116. A lovely paper showing how which contributes to fine regulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle activity in NAD- and NADP-linked isocitrate dehydrogenases operate in a substrate cycle L. A. Sazanov and J. B. Jac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "270 Introduction to OXPHOS Analysis (Innsbruck, Bioenergetics Communications, Erich Gnaiger, Mitochondrial Pathways and Respiratory Control. An paper. inputs to the respiratory chain in this book. If you want diagrams, check out this and fed into the Krebs cycle. I’ve talked about a few of these alt..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "271 this book does not focus on ageing it is one of the finest and most influential positive benefits in youth that outweigh disadvantages with older age). While known forbiddingly as antagonistic pleiotropy (meaning that genes can have Williams independently put forward a similar view of ageing to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "272 paper from Doug Wallace’s PhD thesis on cybrids treated with antibiotics. inheritance in mammalian tissue culture cells’, In Vitro 12 (1976) 758–776. The D. C. Wallace, Y. Pollack, C. L. Bunn and J. M. Eisenstadt, ‘Cytoplasmic Doug Wallace and advances in mitochondrial research DNA. and heartfel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "273 boundaries of Western medicine, with its twin pillars grounded in the work of D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondria as chi’, Genetics 179 (2008) 727–735. Pushing the mutations in mitochondrial DNA. the female germline can be understood in terms of selection against detrimental eLife 10 (2021) e69344. A m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "274 mitochondria under different stress compared with adult flies. Giving them the Frontiers in Genetics 12 (2021) 734255. Larvae just eat and grow, placing the interactions produce diverging responses to mild stress in Drosophila larvae’, E. Rodríguez, F. Grover Thomas, M. F. Camus and N. Lane, ‘Mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "275 plenty of objections, but the ideas are stimulating. Here, West develops them at Enquist and James Brown, which I’m not citing individually here. There are physicist who has published revolutionary papers on fractal scaling, with Brian Cities and Companies (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "276 respiratory suppression producing a shift in metabolic flux and epigenetic state. weak, at older age, to shut down. I explain the same observations in terms of results from the overrun of other developmental programs that selection is too theory’. According to this theory there is no program ‘fo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "277 of the term ‘sweet mitochondria’ (the term ‘diabetes mellitus’ means sweet Alzheimer’s Disease 62 (2018) 1391–1401. Never was there a more sinister use P. I. Moreira, ‘Sweet mitochondria: a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’, Journal of need to mind my diet. 1113. The evidence is mounting that Alz..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "278 Epilogue: Self that you really should know about. calculate this particular parameter, but they calculate many other amazing things calculations on the number of metabolic reactions per second in cells. They don’t knew you had about cells. I’m citing this book in relation to Joana Xavier’s Scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "279 medium for dynamic control of growth and form’, Biosystems 164 (2018) 76–93. M. Levin and C. J. Martyniuk, ‘The bioelectric code: an ancient computational Electrical fields in development mitochondrial membranes generate the EEG. with autism in humans. At least consistent with the much bolder hy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "280 summarises their ideas. free energy’ to distinguish it from more conventional usage. This formal paper Friston, whose concept of free energy in this context is sometimes called ‘Friston 25 (2018) 202–238. Solms’s ideas on consciousness were developed with Karl considerations from physics and phy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "281 fields give cells their unity. suspect that this loss of orientation is just one manifestation of how electrical – collapse the potential and bacteria can’t figure out how to divide in two. I is that they can only achieve this when there is an electrical membrane potential the constricting appar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "282 intermediates, either as a product of CO 2 fixation at the origin of life, or both groups, in their different ways, have been working on Krebs-cycle subjects had little in common beyond the centrality of energy flow. Yet in fruit flies. Before reading this book, you might have thought those one ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "283 read the whole book, pointing out more stylistic faux pas than I would used to climb together, but now we reminisce. Allyson Jones has also to say nothing of the music, conversation, sea walks and good cheer. We me going through darker days with unreasonably enthusiastic comments, Carter has rea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "284 intermediary metabolism. I’ll never forget our lunch together, where we cycle than Lee, yet he can still barely trammel his excitement about bigger picture. No one in the world today knows more about the Krebs whole book and made many penetrating comments, while celebrating the friendship. I am ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "285 on salt balance and thirst in animals. I confess that I had put the question energy and plans. He had been drawn into the subject through his work with Prof. Derek Denton, now in his nineties, yet still overflowing with alone in that). That led me into a long and enjoyable correspondence Life As..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "286 touched strive to be the best we can be. I hadn’t appreciated how many a zestful sense that anything is possible, which would make those he immense impact on my life. He had buoyant energy, warmth of spirit and legacy is to influence the lives of others for the better. Ian had an dedicate this b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "287 dimension. I have tried to say in this book, yet in a few lines from another permission to reprint the poem. It somehow captures the essence of what Revelations’ to my attention, and Richard Howard for his gracious Finally, I thank Cliff Hanks for bringing the poem ‘Like Most (and for responding..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "288 and individuality 234–6, 238, 243 compensatory 247 alleles suppression of respiration 230, 259–60, 262, 264 predisposing to cancer 25, 195, 229–32 mechanism of 260–67 Krebs cycle reversal and 111, 259 glycolysis and carbon fixation 230–31 free radical theory 257–9, 262 and flux capacitance 245 d..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "289 see also GOE atmospheric oxygen balance 177 of other planets 165 early/primordial 76, 109–10, 114, 119, 165 atmospheres assembly line analogy 170, 208 aspartate 179n5, 224–7 Asimov, Isaac 248 ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 44–5, 48, 252 artificial intelligence (AI) 13, 274 Arnon, Daniel 98–100, 102, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "290 acetyl CoA pathway in 122–3, 151 bacteria and archaea bacteria, autotrophic 85n4, 102, 114 rubisco in 108 reverse Krebs cycle 73, 78, 100, 101 origins of mitochondria 68–9, 167, 281 non-photosynthetic 110 molecular phylogenetics 166 bacteria, ancient vent bacteria 110, 163n2 sulfur bacteria 100,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "291 prebiotic 24, 275 Krebs cycle as source 20, 33, 115, 161 as fundamental 4, 6, 9–10, 131 building blocks of life, molecular Buckel, Wolfgang 163n2 Buchanan, Bob 100, 104 radio emissions and EEG signals 277–9 oxidative Krebs cycle in 187 glucose preference 265–8, 280 electrical fields in 280 brain..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "292 carbon-11 ( 11 C) 80–81, 83–4, 85n4, 178 CARA (Council for At-Risk Academics) 31n1 cancer viruses 205 Cancer Genome Atlas 193 glucose fermentation 197, 201–2, 208–9n4 effect of transplanting 25, 194 effect of glutamine deprivation 216 cancer cells use of radioisotopes 80 as metabolic, rather tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "293 and mitochondria 242 cell death, programmed (apoptosis) 194, 205, 207, 213, 216 catalysts, protein see enzymes thermodynamics and 22 succinate as 46 ornithine as 52–3 nucleic acids and nucleotides 129, 148 metal ions 131, 152 iron-sulfide mineral surfaces 135–9 biochemical cycles as catalytic 53..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "294 CoA-S - 289–90, 292 coenzyme A (CoA) 56–7, 128 , 140, 295–6 coal and oil 139, 177 cloud chambers 86–7 citric acid cycle see Krebs cycle citrate synthase 110–11, 123 301 reverse Krebs cycle 101, 105, 110–11, 128 , 216–19, 221, 287 , 300– in respiration 51–2, 54–5 removal in the Krebs cycle 172–3,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "295 and the effects of ageing 25, 232, 233, 264, 268, 272 and drug response 15 diet diabetes 21, 189, 243, 266, 268n10 Delphi, Temple of Apollo 272–3 dehydration reactions 138 DeBerardinis, Ralph 217 Dayhoff, Margaret 164–8 Davies, Paul 129n6 ‘Darwin’s dilemma’ 157 cytochrome oxidase 35–6n3, 49, 199..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "296 electron-transport chains 174 by ferredoxin 288 in carbon dioxide reduction 133–41 in anaesthesia 277, 279 electron transfers electron spin resonance 276–7 hydrogen from hydrothermal vents 141 H 2 S as 166–7 ferredoxin as 105–6 electron donors, alternative electron bifurcation 163n2 Einstein, Al..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "297 of glucose with ageing 230 of glucose in cancer 197, 201–2, 208–9n4 alcoholic 170 fermentation ‘ferment’, respiratory 35–6, 64n11, 199, 216 Fendt, Sarah-Maria 261n7 FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) 48 extinct species, resurrecting 238–9 exoplanets 119 exercise 25, 223, 232–3, 256, 264, 268 of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "298 late-acting genes 234, 236–7 globin genes 187 activated by HIF 1α 212, 215 genes gene editing 14, 228n7, 282 Gell-Mann, Murray 124 tissue slice experiments 33–8 pressure and hydrogen availability 142 gas pressures fumarate reductase 185, 210–11, 213 fumarate hydratase 210, 215, 217, 220 fumarate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "299 metabolic shift with age 231 metabolic shift in cancer 196, 205, 209, 213, 223–4 growth groups, chemical 38–9n4 greigite 121, 133, 135 Gould, Stephen Jay 156n1 GOE (the Great Oxidation Event) 176, 178, 181, 182n6, 186 Gnaiger, Erich 171–2 and tissue ATP demands 188, 201 NAD + -to-NADH ratios 179..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "300 in biosynthesis 73, 106–7, 108n11, 128 , 206 balanced in Krebs non-cycle 185, 201 hydrogen (2H) hydride ions 136, 297 ‘hybrid breakdown’ 247 lifespan prolongation 235–6, 258, 272 cell numbers and reactions per second 269 ATP synthesis in 66 humans Hudson, Reuben 144 Howard, Richard 285 Hopkins, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "301 and reverse Krebs cycle 118–19 in photosynthesis 174 growth of protocells with 147 FeS clusters/surfaces 147, 151, 254, 255n4 in ferredoxin 105 iron–sulfur clusters/catalysts surfaces as catalytic 133, 135, 139 in alkaline hydrothermal vents 114–15, 121–2, 144, 147 iron-sulfide minerals see also..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "302 and ageing 25, 252–3, 264–7, 272, 280–81 Krebs cycle fluxes mutations affecting 196, 209–10, 215, 220 membrane bound 211 Krebs cycle enzymes Krebs cycle, reverse see reverse Krebs reversal 61n7, 111, 126, 217, 230 oxidative and reductive prongs 184–6, 210, 230 origins and evolution 70–73, 118, 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "303 mitochondrial DNA and 272 metabolic rate and 256–8, 270–71 differences, men and women 247 biological time and 235–6 of bats and birds 271 lifespan Life Itself , by Crick 129 life, origin see origin of life as thermodynamically favoured 275 photosynthesis freeing life from minerals 174–5 emergenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "304 Mendel, Gregor 243–4 see also Ech membrane bound enzymes 211, 219–20, 222 , 226, 253 see also mitochondrial membranes formation of, and primitive life 117, 145 electrical charge on 68, 244, 275, 282–3 anaesthetic effects and 277 membranes Medawar, Peter 234, 236 McGlynn, Shawn 170 mass extinctio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "305 interactions with nuclear 238–41 drug response 249 diseases 240, 247–8, 263–4 mitochondrial genome ‘mitochondrial Eve’ 241–2, 246 response to damage 217 as location of respiration 32, 67–8n13, 70–71 as flux capacitors 244, 266 bacterial origins 68–9, 167, 281 mitochondria Mitchell, Sir Godfrey 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "306 NADPH NADP + (phosphorylated NAD + ) 107, 108n11, 109, 206n3, 218–19 oxidation and age 230, 261, 270–71 NADH 63–4, 108n11, 196, 206n3, 223 NAD + to NADH ratio 179n5, 270 206n3, 220, 261 NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) 63, 108n11, 179n5, 201, NAC ( N -acetyl cysteine) 249–52, 255, 263 f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "307 Orgel, Leslie 128–31 organ transplantation 214 Oppenheimer, Robert 82, 88, 90 oocytes and mitochondria 240–42 oncogenes 192–4, 205 Ochoa, Severo 105, 217 Nunes Palmeira, Raquel 148 see also FAD; NAD + from sugars and amino acids 20, 104, 122, 131, 205, 224 role of glutamine 215, 222 possible ori..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "308 philosophical approaches 58–9, 69, 99, 124, 203 phages (bacteriophages) 282 pH gradient, hydrothermal vents 144, 146 and CO 2 reduction 142–3 and ATP formation 64, 152 pH PET (positron emission tomography) scans 265 pentose phosphate pathway/shunt 108, 131, 207, 224, 253 Pauling, Linus 98, 165 p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "309 ‘protocells’ 24, 117, 145–50, 152–3, 275 protists 3–4, 161, 186, 276, 281 see also enzymes synthesis and ATP demand 208 rubisco as the most abundant 75 peptide templating 149n9 folding mechanisms 13, 258 disulfide bridges 253–4 chirality of amino acids 277 breakdown in cancer 226 proteins prolyl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "310 hydrogen transfer in 37, 47–52 Hans Krebs on 19, 32–3, 37–8 efficiency of aerobic 159 blocking with carbon monoxide 35 respiration redox tone 259, 271 red protein see ferredoxin red beds 176, 178 Rammu, Hanadi 145 Ramakrishnan, Venki 13 Ralser, Markus 131 radioisotopes of carbon see carbon-11; c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "311 from mitochondrial complex I 230 ROS (reactive oxygen species) Rodriguez, Enrique 252 RNA World hypothesis 129 regulatory RNAs 12n2 origins in protocells 148–51, 275 and amino acid hydrophobicity 149n9 RNA (ribonucleic acid) ribulose bisphosphate 94–6 ribosomes 13 reverse Warburg effect 204 side..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "312 senescent (epigenetic) states 259, 262, 269–72 self, sensation of 280 operating on random RNA sequences 149–51 flight and ROS flux 271–2 favouring reproductive fitness 4, 234 favouring biochemical efficiency 116n3, 118 and cancer 191, 217 selection ‘Scopes II’ trial 124 as uncertain 273 testable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "313 Sweetlove, Lee 228n7 sulfur bacteria 100, 104–5, 114 sulfur, in CoA 57, 289–90 sulfate as an oxidant 181 see also glucose overemphasis on, in metabolism 77, 81–3, 90, 95, 103 in the Calvin-Benson cycle 95–6n8, 98 sugars succinyl CoA 128 , 184, 215 , 222 , 231, 260–61n7, 286–7 succinate dehydroge..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "314 The Vital Question (book) 281 viruses 205, 282 Viagra 216 Vesalius, Andreas 243 vertebrates, ancestors of 155–6 ventilation in an anaerobic world 183 Van Leeuwenhoek, Antonie 3 urea cycle 52, 224–7 urea 8, 28, 38–9 uncoupling proteins 228n7, 262n8 twin studies 236–8, 245, 248, 263 Turin, Luca 27..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "315 Zuckerkandl, Emil 165 Z scheme 175, 199 xenon 277–8 Xavier, Joana 269n11 X-ray crystallography 10, 13, 59 X-rays, biological effects 87n5, 245 Wonderful Life , by Gould 156n1 Wimpey Construction 60–61n9 Wilkins, Maurice 10 Wildman, Sam 75 West, Geoffrey 257n5 Watson, James 10, 128 oxygen from, i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "316 Index 288 Acknowledgements 282 Further reading 236 List of abbreviations 233 Appendix 2: The Krebs line 227 Appendix 1: Red protein mechanics 222 The reverse Krebs cycle 221 The forward Krebs cycle 220 Envoi: ‘Like Most Revelations’ 219 Epilogue: Self 211 6. The flux capacitor 181 5. To the dark..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "9 tweezers, read out the code that specifies their structures, deciphered the they function. We have taken them apart, in centrifuges or with optical know what most of these whirring parts do, what they’re made of, how gyrating predator. Some 350 years after van Leeuwenhoek, we now themselves free f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "10 matter? The idea that there is a vital force, that life is fundamentally biology: what processes animate cells and set them apart from inanimate meaningful. A far better question goes back to the formative years of wrong question, which can’t be answered precisely because it is not new laws of ph..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "11 that cells are not made of an amorphous protoplasm composed of information. The golden age of biochemistry began with a realisation first look to where biology has turned a blind eye since the ascent of To understand this flow of energy and matter and all it portends, we must The dynamic side and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "12 reliably going through exactly the same succession. This is the flux that may be several hundred vehicles entering a street every second , each one streets in a cell (with the same thing happening in each of them) but there incomprehensible number. You might say that there’s a lot of repeat cell ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "13 evidence for the unity of biochemistry. His slightly maniacal phrase Dutch pioneer of microbiology, Albert Kluyver, marshalled new heart cells behave in similar circumstances. In the 1920s, another great oxygen or grow in its absence is remarkably similar to how our own life. Painstaking experime..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "14 but technically there is no loss of meaning, and the canon can be might not enjoy listening to the works of Shakespeare in blips and bleeps Morse code only has two letters and can convey the same meaning. We compared with, say, the twenty-six letters of the English alphabet, but the sequence down..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "15 think about everything, it has also helped us forget some lessons from exhaustive exploration of the digital jungle has changed the way we cheats. Nothing in biology has escaped digital scrutiny. But while our bearing suggests; nearly a third of offspring are fathered by philandering example, tur..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "16 the atomic structure of the latest machines. In comparison, even the admiration, for every issue seems to contain at least two papers detailing pages of journals such as Nature with a mixture of jealousy and of us who don’t solve the structure of proteins for a living look at the preoccupied some..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "17 harassed local authorities may procrastinate for months, the genes extra traffic flow? No problem: widen the road. Unlike a city, where immediately implemented. Alternative route too narrow to accommodate frustration travels straight to the genes, where contingency plans are horns. Something simi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "18 take a sample of cells and look at the distribution of flux at one moment, map, showing live congestion, but it’s still a snapshot in time. We can differ from that in one of yours? It is closer to a satnav-enabled road how does the flux of materials and energy through one of my heart cells pathwa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "19 metabolism has changed little in part because it was never powered to generation, without pause, right back to the emergence of life. Core living metabolic network in the egg cell, a flame passed from generation inert information in the form of genes – our inheritance includes this minute by minu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "20 burning very small carbon skeletons is not an efficient process, he just a few simple steps? Krebs himself suggested one plausible answer: discharged into the outside world. But why is it a cycle at all? Why not the cell, while the inert carcasses of water and carbon dioxide are The energy releas..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "21 yin and yang at all. cycle into sharp modern focus but does not explain why the cycle has a the synthesis of new organic molecules. This question brings the Krebs the Krebs cycle – how to offset the needs of energy generation against problem in all these disparate cases is how to balance the yin ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "22 many people an obscure subject, full of runic symbols that suggest a own tantalisingly different ways. I appreciate that biochemistry is for the way we are, and ultimately why we age and die, each of us in our This is the story of our planet from within our cells – what makes us high-octane world..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "23 the universal precursors of life. view) reacting the simple gases hydrogen and carbon dioxide to generate bacteria that run the cycle backwards (or forwards, from their point of the core of metabolism lies in the Krebs cycle – as practised by ancient the sugary chemistry of photosynthesis and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "24 ancestral pathways for dealing with low oxygen levels, driving with age, intermediates such as succinate accumulate and trigger the generation. As the flux through our Krebs cycle becomes more sluggish need to use the same pathway for biosynthesis as well as energy emerges from the yin and yang o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "25 builds up; in effect, a car park. To understand which one requires a lot of context reflect the opposite – almost no downstream flux, so the intermediate gradually flux, with the intermediate being constantly replenished at high levels, or it could in the cell does not necessarily imply high flux..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "26 just be called gnomics. and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "28 bacteria living in stagnant river waters, causing more anguish at the on bacterial metabolism. Her pioneering studies (most famously on research, for example convincing the young Marjory Stephenson to work MRC either), Hopkins did occasionally influence their direction of affectionately as Hoppy ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "29 laboratory included people of many dispositions, convictions and he called ‘the British way of life’, writing that ‘The Cambridge that Krebs had known in Germany. Years later, Krebs reflected on what You can imagine that Hopkins’s lab was very different to anything changes in gas pressure. a carg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "30 stories – but also the more scope they have to colour our thinking. Krebs it was won. That’s only human. The harder the discoveries, the better the way was hard won. And knowledge comes tinged with the stories of how called ‘powerhouses’ of the cell; but every scrap of knowledge along the We now ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "31 reaction step. It took unimaginable patience and skill to figure out gave an indirect view of what was actually happening, for just a single needed to measure one biochemical reaction filled half a room, and still submerged in a water-bath controlled by a thermostat. The apparatus pressure measur..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "32 4. and chlorophyll.’ He wasn’t so far from the truth, as we’ll see in Chapter oxidation. For evidently, the ferment existed earlier than haemoglobin arisen from the ferment – blood pigments by reduction, leaf pigment by before photosynthesis: ‘blood pigment and leaf pigments have both ferment. Fr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "33 rate of respiration in the presence or absence of respiratory inhibitors. amounts of various substances that could be respired, and measure the manometers simultaneously in a single study. He would add known folk sag at the prospect. Krebs sometimes ran as many as ten single method, coupled to a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "34 in his tissue slices, as did adding carboxylic acids. But adding both of Krebs found that adding amino acids increased the rate of respiration matters became interesting. which as we’ve seen consumes and releases gases too. And that’s where measurements, he needed to take into account the rate of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "35 is the three-carbon pyruvic acid: book. What exactly is a carboxylic acid? Let me draw one for you. This It is time to get acquainted with the molecular protagonists of this released captured and put to use? were burned in oxygen. What were the steps? How was the energy ever. Surely, the secret o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "36 touch unstable and reactive. Now the middle oxygen in my picture is bond tends to throw its weight about. That’s what makes pyruvic acid a to oxygen, which likes nothing better than getting into a fight; the extra That’s because the middle carbon atom in pyruvic acid has a double bond suit, or a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "37 something of a Cheshire Cat grin: symmetry and stability. It can be drawn like this, giving pyruvate oxygen atoms, giving a ‘delocalised cloud’ of electrons that confers clarity. But in reality this charge is smeared in space between the two left with a negative charge (–) which I’ve shown on the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "38 one carbon. In other words, the C3 pyruvate should be broken down into that the intermediates should be stripped down to two carbons and then carbon molecules of pyruvate, so a reasonable working assumption was Krebs knew that the six-carbon glucose is initially split into two three- individually..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "39 exactly how much of the carboxylic acid remained in the muscle after the (by up to 600 per cent!!) over prolonged periods. Yet when he analysed acids, notably succinate, dramatically increased the rate of respiration to. Szent-Györgyi found that adding small amounts of C4 carboxylic changes; in r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "40 Pulling hydrogen biology at the time. Almost ... yet had a general catalytic activity, unlike almost anything else known in more perplexing. The bottom line is that succinate was fairly unreactive overall speed of respiration. That only made the individual steps even succinate doesn’t increase th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "41 or more specifically 2H. The product is water, or H 2 O. Warburg had Recall that respiration consumes oxygen by reacting it with hydrogen, respiration. even more intriguing examples of hydrogen transfer, somehow linked to hydrogen was transferred had entranced Szent-Györgyi. Now here were would r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "42 Remember that the formula for glucose is C 6 H 12 O 6 . Szent-Györgyi then CO 2 should be released from the skeletal remains of the sugar. 2H was stripped out from the sugar and passed onto a carboxylic acid, If C4 carboxylic acids were merely hydrogen carriers, then as each point do we just ‘loo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "43 length. Presumably, these steps, in which CO 2 was pulled out, needed the carboxylic acids were clipped down from six to four carbon atoms in escaped Krebs’s notice that these steps released two CO 2 molecules, as (called α-ketoglutarate) to the four C4 carboxylic acids. It had not interconnected..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "44 essence, adding more of any constituent gives rise to more of the next, Krebs realised that biochemical cycles are necessarily catalytic. In systems, that Hopkins had celebrated at the Royal Society in 1932. insight, with just the degree of unexpectedness to be expected of living the addition of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "45 reaction did operate under normal metabolic conditions, catalysed by an quite harsh chemical conditions, and without an enzyme. If a similar from oxaloacetate and pyruvate, in effect welding them together under mattered to Krebs. It had recently been shown that citrate could be made come back to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "46 and we will encounter it repeatedly. Once formed, acetyl CoA reacted metabolism across the whole of life, from ancient bacteria to ourselves, short. This turned out to be perhaps the single most central molecule in named the overall assemblage acetyl coenzyme A or acetyl CoA for attached to a lar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "47 properly. The process by which glucose is oxidised goes like this. First, oxaloacetate, to give the C6 citrate. At last, everything added up Once activated in this way, the C2 acetate can be attached onto the C4 (and that remaining oxygen is beginning to stare a bit): what makes the composite mol..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "48 commented that ‘Peter is too original for his examiners.’ He finally all’. Mitchell’s mentor, the distinguished Polish biochemist David Keilin, and ‘statids’. The examiners dismissed his work as ‘not really a thesis at grounded in his own development of ancient Greek theory on ‘fluctids’ thesis o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "49 ‘Beethovenian’ appearance, with a flowing mane of hair (he too later keen intellect and wide-ranging interests, as well as his cultivated first meeting Mitchell at departmental tea in 1947. She was struck by his joined Marjory Stephenson in Cambridge as a research assistant in 1946, year helping ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "50 frankly, this view is still prevalent today. The goal of biochemistry was about living matter that could not be reduced to mere chemistry; and discredited idea of vitalism, implying that there was something special Many biochemists were uncomfortable with this view, as it recalled the cells’, arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "51 term NADH, just focus on the ‘H’. I hope you will develop a Pavlovian NADH will figure large later in this book, but for now, when you see the leaving another proton nearby, bound onto water) is called NADH. 10 components of hydrogen (or more exactly, two electrons and one proton, dinucleotide’, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "52 in the mid-1960s, laying out the basic experimental approaches still used Moyle together published a series of ground-breaking papers in Nature contribution would surely not have been overlooked today. Mitchell and which he alone was awarded the Nobel prize in 1978. Her essential contributed larg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "53 decades, right up to today. depending on factors that have kept bioenergeticists busy for whole number but a fraction (3.3 in humans) and can vary that the number of ATPs formed from a single NADH is not a ‘wasted’ but are saved up towards the next ATP. Note this means motor, which generates thre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "54 chemiosmotic hypothesis, in the mid-1960s, Lynn Margulis was ‘powerhouses’ of complex cells. When Mitchell was developing his This is how respiration works in our own mitochondria, the pitches – all charged with the power of a bolt of lightning. were flat, they would cover an area equivalent to a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "55 ketoglutarate. The α-ketoglutarate spins round the Krebs cycle to form wasting is glutamine. This is converted into the C5 carboxylic acid α- most common amino acid that is shipped around the body from muscle ammonia plus the carboxylic acids that enter the Krebs cycle. By far the Krebs back in t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "56 with plenty of glucose needed to form acetyl CoA). But had they possible, to provide energy for flying (and the tissue slices were supplied by 600% because that tissue is poised to oxidise glucose as quickly as Adding succinate to pigeon-breast muscle raised the respiratory rate Szent-Györgyi and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "57 synthesis is secondary. That impression is strengthened by the fact that presented it in this chapter: breakdown is its primary purpose, and that’s still how it is presented in most textbooks, and how I have cycle in animals as largely dedicated to the breakdown of organics; and perfectly aware o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "58 protein that Warburg discovered is now called cytochrome oxidase, ‘cytochrome’ that, CO would stifle respiration in your cells for the same reasons. The haem haemoglobin of your red blood cells and displacing oxygen, but if you survived 3 Carbon monoxide poisoning can kill you by binding to the i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "59 refers to two hydrogen atoms, which are typically attached to other molecules, difference but might leave you feeling exasperated with pedantic scientists. 2H 6 Let me just clarify the distinction between 2H and H 2 . It’s an important medical problem, cancer, which took away most of what was dea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "60 work on bioenergetics included demonstrating that respiration takes place in ATP synthesis, in two classic papers in the late 1940s. Lehninger’s pioneering famous textbook) to show that the oxidation of NADH by oxygen was linked to significance. It fell to the great US biochemist Albert Lehninger..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "61 Mitchell. the membrane through precisely the type of spatial coupling proposed by mechanisms, known as the Q cycle, in which quinones transfer protons across errors, Mitchell was in fact correct about one of the most baffling pumping disprove a hypothesis, regardless of whether it was true or not..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "63 unity of biochemistry. In the Introduction, we touched on the value of emblematic of a more interesting and deeper problem: the dogma of the which swiftly came to be seen as the enzyme for carbon fixation – is carrot of improved yields dangling distractingly overhead. Yet rubisco – rubisco with a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "64 of creation. gaze from the lofty pinnacles of evolution down to the obscure canyons understand the deep chemistry of life (and death ...) we must shift our bowels of the Earth. Many had no need for the sun. If we want to already ancient, living from gases and rocks, sometimes deep in the party to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "65 course into a circular path. With each acceleration the circle widens, so every second) while applying an external magnetic field that bends their rapidly reversing an electric voltage (thousands or millions of times centre of a circular vacuum chamber, and their flight is accelerated by targeted..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "66 experimentation was necessary. The results were often unpredictable, experimentation. Indeed, the theory was so unreliable that this commonplace that it had become a matter for respectable head off as alchemists!’ By the 1930s, though, transmutation was so responded ‘For Christ’s sake don’t call ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "67 Kamen and Ruben, but also made clear the importance of proper This bonding experience cemented a strong friendship between the Nobel prize for his pioneering work on cyclotrons in 1939. 3 Luckily, this embarrassing mishap doesn’t stop Lawrence from receiving contamination from laboratory dust bak..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "68 the whole pathway. then track the path of carbon in photosynthesis, giving a route map for to identify them. By building up a time-course, Kamen and Ruben could radioactive molecules and use the standard methods of organic chemistry periods would give later products. All they had to do was isolat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "69 metabolism, but the path was twisted. I mentioned in Chapter 1 that the carboxylic acids and the Krebs cycle for CO 2 fixation and so all of core as Krebs-cycle intermediates. This could have signalled the centrality of the first product was a carboxylic acid, with the same kind of chemistry towa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "70 vanishes in an instant, a ghostly apparition. Larger particles such as through the cloud chamber, leaving a long, spindly vapour trail that through the chamber. A proton is tiny and fast moving. It whizzes part. The vapour trail formed depends on what kind of particle is passing vapour trail simi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "71 developing the new protocols. Ruben was set to work in defending the isotopes, notably uranium and plutonium. Kamen was put in charge of the cyclotrons at the Rad Lab to focus on the production of radioactive Francisco seemed only too real a target. The US government took over 1941 was greeted wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "72 power of 14 C could mark out the path by which carbon was fixed in notion that sugars are the backbone of biochemistry. Only the discerning photosynthesis today, and especially central carbon metabolism – the train a peculiar history that still influences how we understand discovery, coupled with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "73 radioactivity emanating from the 14 C would then betray its presence as a precise place on the paper, depending on its chemical properties. The incorporated into a specific type of molecule, this would migrate to a paper, which darkened in the presence of radioactivity. If the 14 C was first). Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "74 smudge, it is a whole world! why scientists get so excited about the seemingly abstruse. That is no simple molecule that made sense. All that in one dark smudge. This is language of science, of human comprehension, of the rational mind – a tangible clue, which transformed nature’s deepest magic i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "75 through a rejigging process to regenerate three C5 molecules – all the be used anywhere in metabolism, while the other five C3 molecules went cycle produce six C3 molecules. One of these could be siphoned off to arithmetic, albeit a strange numbers game. Three complete turns of the on, giving two..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "76 imploded, so his greatest achievements in the field were more wrong? Calvin’s own cherished ideas on photochemistry had recently to go, and Calvin made no obvious effort on his behalf. What went dismissed Benson with the words ‘It is time to go.’ Benson had no place cycle. For reasons that were n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "77 against the king. That’s exactly what happened next – and why it took so amounted an insurrection against the unity of biochemistry, a rebellion anyone had the temerity to claim another way of fixing CO 2 , that assimilation of CO 2 via the Calvin cycle.’ You can imagine that if ‘One important pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "78 motive force’ from Chapter 1. In the case of photosynthesis, a current of paths, just as they do in respiration. Remember Peter Mitchell’s ‘proton- in turn splits into electrons and protons, which then follow different stripping the 2H from H 2 O through the auspices of chlorophyll. The 2H the sa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "79 highlight the key points): had in mind (I’m just slightly simplifying their original diagram to It could drive growth like a ... well, like a bacterium. Here’s what they would make four, three turns make eight, four turns sixteen, and so on ... complete turn of the cycle generates two molecules, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "80 pyruvate (plus that metabolic link between carboxylic acids and sugars, thought of as Krebs-cycle intermediates, notably acetyl CoA and backwards: it includes several extra carboxylic acids that are not usually reverse cycle is slightly longer than the standard cycle running cycle here – that’s s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "81 saw Krebs-cycle intermediates everywhere – the same carboxylic acids autoradiographs: I had expected to see sugar phosphates but instead I elsewhere. I was astonished when I first looked at Benson’s in autotrophic metabolism became obscured, as the focus shifted don’t contribute to carbon fixatio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "82 whole was deemed to be irreversible. dismissed as energetically too unfavourable. That meant the cycle as a (C2 to C3 and C4 to C5) were taken to be biochemically impossible, as if they were plants. Even so, the remaining two carboxylation steps not animals, yet here were animal tissues – our own..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "83 steps; see Appendix 1 if you want to know – the process is rather Let’s not worry about exactly how that works here (it requires several to form a carbon-to-carbon bond: takes the electrons from the 2H and transfers them onto CO 2 , enabling it CO 2 has to be bound onto something very like itself..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "84 (Fd) to form Fd 2– . In the presence of oxygen, Fd 2– is dangerous as need sunlight to transfer the electrons from 2H onto ferredoxin H 2 S, H 2 or H 2 O depending on the type of photosynthesis – but all photosynthesis, powered by sunlight. The 2H could come from Transfer of electrons from 2H to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "85 sizeable yield, but at least they survive to die another day. The penalty staving off an impending catastrophe. Certainly, this can cost plants a lowering the levels of reactive ferredoxin and oxygen simultaneously, again. So it could be that photorespiration acts as a safety valve, NADPH back to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "86 citrate into acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate. The gene encoding ATP citrate ATP citrate lyase. As it says on the tin, this enzyme uses ATP to split own Krebs cycle running backwards, but by a distinct enzyme called CoA is not catalysed by the familiar ‘citrate synthase’ enzyme from our page 101. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "87 Large Hadron Collider at CERN, in Geneva, with a diameter of 27 km. of cyclotrons are called synchrotrons. The largest cyclic particle accelerator is the with the flight of charged particles. As a result, the higher-powered descendants has to be taken into consideration in synchronising the rever..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "88 budget meeting for anything but the timing of his heart attack. Calvin lost 30 kg in weight and quit smoking. It would be unfair to blame the 7 Calvin’s wife Genevieve took matters in hand: under her strict dietary regime, wonders. detrimental mutations are part of natural selection, driving the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "89 twentieth century. revolutionise our understanding of life, the universe and everything in the lead to fundamentally new ways of seeing the world, and which did so much to to develop better ways of assessing radically new ideas in science – the kind that rise above our own baser instincts. For th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "90 NAD + form. We’ll come back to the significance of NADPH in Chapter 5. electrons, whereas NADH tends to offload its electrons, leaving it mostly in the reaction. NADP + is normally present as NADPH, the form that is replete with maintained at very different ratios, enabling them to promote distin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "92 reverse Krebs cycle uses iron–sulfur proteins, notably ferredoxin, to ripe for a new conception of the origin of life. In broad brushstroke, the autotrophic bacteria depend on the Calvin–Benson cycle. The time was was finally gaining credence, as gene sequences made it clear that not all fixation..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "93 these terms for now. Suffice to say that science is often furiously ultimate guide to life’s origin. Don’t worry about the meaning of all accumulation, local or planetary scales, and biology or chemistry as the genes first, autotrophy or heterotrophy, fast chemistry or slow warm ponds, light ener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "94 origin of life, or a question for gene editing and synthetic biology to intractable outcome of metabolism, written into cells from the very are smart enough? Is the difference between ageing and disease an just a trivial outcome of information systems that could be rewired, if we thermodynamics –..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "95 of the early Earth. Now, if all the carbon in organic matter plus limestone record that barely any limestone was laid down beneath the acidic oceans to form in relatively alkaline oceans. We know from the geological There was also much less limestone on the early Earth, for this tends space. made..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "96 have accumulated in warm ponds on land, there is little evidence for that such as cyanide. While relatively stable forms such as ferricyanide might That certainly can’t be said for the alternative theories based on gases CO 2 , were present at the origin of life in nearly unlimited quantities. th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "97 common ancestor, the last universal common ancestor of all life domains of life, implying that this was the only pathway present in their pathway, is found in both bacteria and archaea, the two great prokaryotic fixation across the living world. Just one of these, the acetyl CoA chapter, we now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "98 pathways form overlapping groups of Krebs-cycle intermediates. topologies that operate optimally under diverse conditions. These ‘crystallised’ into five different pathways, with distinct network multiple ways of making Krebs-cycle intermediates, which eventually bacteria and archaea, but it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "99 evolutionary biology or ‘creation science’ in schools. Being a pioneer of Scopes ‘monkey trial’ in the 1920s. Both trials concerned the teaching of McLean versus Arkansas trial, sometimes known as Scopes II, after the public in the early 1980s when called up as an expert witness at the rigour wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "100 Morowitz could not help but see the Krebs cycle as the perfect cyclone Always an admirer of the iconic metabolic charts of biochemistry, hence energy flow powers the cycling of matter. the dissipation of heat means that no pathway is perfectly reversible, energy balance – another great steady-st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "101 Leslie Orgel. serious was pointed out by another pioneering origin-of-life researcher, some grave problems with Morowitz’s view too. Perhaps the most treacherous guide in science, as in life. Life is rarely simple and there are of chemistry give way to the wiles of biology? But beauty can be a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "102 accident’, meaning that the code was essentially random, and became problem of the genetic code, which Crick had pronounced a ‘frozen seeded on Earth by an alien civilisation. That conception grew from the possibility of directed panspermia – the idea that life was deliberately 1970s, which ende..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "103 precisely nothing to amplify. of the final step. Fat chance of autocatalysis. Each cycle would have came the sucker punch. The first step of any cycle depends on the yield without enzymes increasing the selectivity and yield of each step. Then successive steps to regenerate its starting point, c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "104 geological environment – alkaline hydrothermal vents – to the heart of that already has unique explanatory power in connecting an omnipresent from CO 2 and H 2 . That’s a big deal, because it substantiates a hypothesis years, that these Krebs line intermediates do indeed form spontaneously We’ve..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "105 between the oxygen atoms and the mineral surface, depicted here with apposition with the surface and is held in place by electrical attractions to keep things simple. Imagine that a CO 2 molecule comes into close containing iron and sulfur (such as greigite), shown below as a wavy line Consider ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "106 greigite is nearly identical to the tiny clusters of iron and sulfur that remarkable: the lattice structure of iron and sulfur in minerals such as parallel between mineral surfaces and enzymes such as ferredoxin is transfer of electrons onto CO 2 in cells today (see Appendix 1). The mineral surf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "107 sequence showing roughly what happens: transfer of hydrogen, even in the absence of hydrogen itself. Here’s a Overall, the transfer of electrons and protons onto CO 2 equates to the They can then follow the electrons onto CO 2 attached to the surface. onto the surface of the mineral, positioning..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "108 with a nearby proton, in this case forming an OH (an ‘alcohol’ group): in the middle panel that the electron pair on the oxygen is quickly shared same thing can happen repeatedly. So here’s what happens next. Notice to add a hydrogen atom onto the carbon, giving an organic molecule. The proton p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "109 sometimes said that this kind of dehydration is impossible at the origin of reaction: water is being removed in a watery environment. It’s what’s formed overall – water! This is what’s called a dehydration already an excess of OH – ions in the surroundings. And second, look in acidic environment..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "110 and one of the most important molecules in all metabolism. We have just equivalent to acetyl CoA – discovered, if you recall, by Fritz Lipmann, But now look at the product. This bound molecule is a prebiotic enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase catalyses exactly this reaction. process as well as..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "111 concentration of hydrogen in hydrothermal fluids is high, that tends to gas, bubbling straight out of alkaline hydrothermal vents. If the these electrons being replenished from? The answer is simple: hydrogen experiments that start with CO 2 and minerals. But where exactly are all first half. No..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "112 prebiotic chemistry. The most intriguing possibility, which connects cells complex, and involve multiple enzymes, so don’t seem relevant to CO 2 ? There are several ways of doing that, but most of them are to transfer their electrons onto ferredoxin, which then passes them onto The explicit prob..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "113 electrons from H 2 (in the jargon, it is more easily reduced). And when which is to say, the local pH. So, when Ech binds protons, it can accept channel in the membrane, and their properties depend on proton binding, from H 2 to ferredoxin. Two of the clusters sit right next to a proton protein ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "114 Small steps, giant leaps them. verification – for once, not slain by an ugly fact. I take my hat off to absence of a steep pH gradient. This is beautiful experimental organics were formed at normal air pressure, or without H 2 gas, or in the molecules (mainly formate) really did derive from the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "115 (where I talked about protons crossing cell membranes). The electrons crossing inorganic barriers) and organic synthesis in protocells between organic synthesis in inorganic pores (where I talked about If you are unusually alert, you may have noticed a discrepancy inside the protocells – which i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "116 the membrane, whereas a proportion of amino acids should interact with For reasons of physical chemistry, new fatty acids will go straight into principle make copies of itself, and over time can become more complex. Perhaps the most important property of this system is that it can in barriers mu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "117 against. 9 Meaning emerges with function. In other words, the genetic protocell growth (through ‘selfish’ behaviour) would be selected enhance protocell growth would be favoured, while RNA that impedes genetic sequences in terms of protocell growth. Only strings of RNA that think that means zero..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "118 unquestionably a product of genetic information and natural selection; it ATP synthase motor, as noted in Chapter 1. This awesome nanomotor is 22 here. ATP synthesis is powered by proton gradients, which rotate the enables these difficult steps to happen is ATP. There’s an apparent catch- RNA sy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "119 roughly like this: ADP (adenosine diphosphate) to form ATP at modest (20 per cent) yield, thioacetate. Once formed, acetyl phosphate will pass its phosphate onto really does – acetyl phosphate is formed from a two-carbon precursor should occur under prebiotic conditions too, and we have shown th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "120 within vents are the perfect homes for protocells that nestle in the flow and reaction of gases in the environment. The inorganic pores Growth is the non-stop formation of new organics from the continuous H 2 is replenished, and the same reaction can happen all over again. tiny proportion of H 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "121 Synthetic chemists tend to have little interest in the pathways that biochemistry as nucleotides, at high yield, ideally uncontaminated by unwanted products. 3 The tradition of synthetic chemistry aims to make the products of interest, such have been the primordial energy source. relatively comp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "122 giving rise to us; or perhaps there is some deeper reason, buried in the laws of different cosmological constants, and we have to live in one that was capable of ‘finely tuned’. Perhaps there is a multiverse in which different universes have stars, planets, organic chemistry and life as we know ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "123 through selection on protocell growth. RNA, giving a genetic code linked directly with function, that can evolve amino-acid sequence in short peptides depends on the sequence of letters in RNA polymerisation, would then depend on that location. This templating of and potentially interact with me..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "125 cycle, burning them, the revolution that powered the revolution. from the reverse Krebs cycle, making organics, to our own oxidative explosion more than three billion years later. It turned, quite literally, years ago, to the chemistry of 2H and O 2 , powering the Cambrian from the chemistry of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "126 behaviour of oxygen, the world that we know and love could not exist. predominantly two-electron chemistry of carbon, versus the one-electron It’s sobering to realise that without the quantum rules that govern the energy-history of the Earth is the story of oxygen in the air and oceans. other th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "127 about the Krebs line : a linear pathway that arguably preceded the cycle origin of life, where we left off in the previous chapter. There we talked ageing) we need to take the long view, a view that goes right back to the involved (and later in the book, to understand what goes wrong in composed..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "128 (technically, reduced) metals such as iron and nickel. In contrast, the sources, ultimately the Earth’s mantle, which is rich in electron-dense of the electrons that cells need to grow still derive from geological with less H 2 , or extract it from other sources such as H 2 S. Either way, all fr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "129 methane (CH 4 ) and water (H 2 O) as waste products. In this case, each 2H likely CO 2 itself. Transferring 2H onto CO 2 – repeatedly – generates Earth, the most common electron acceptor was not oxygen, but most released is used to pump protons, just as in respiration. On the early electrons fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "130 her classic paper on ferredoxin in 1966. the history of life on Earth like never before. The beginning of it all was protein sequences – the basis of modern phylogenetics – to reconstruct bond energies) with her pioneering computational work on comparing underpinning planetary processes such as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "131 serious disadvantage compared with the more familiar oxygenic for methanogens. The sun provides this power instead. But there is still a without the need for burning fuel to power pumping – the 40-fold cost from a donor (H 2 S) to an acceptor (ferredoxin) and then onto CO 2 , huge advantage here..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "132 horizons, let’s first see how these limits are built into the universal core explore how the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis opened up new synthesis of ATP. This world left its imprint on biochemistry. Before we systems, which were needed to drive the reduction of ferredoxin and the gases s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "133 the same energy constraints). But this efficiency only works under Calvin–Benson cycle (which with oxygenic photosynthesis doesn’t face pyruvate via the reverse Krebs cycle are less than half those of the respect, it’s striking that the ATP costs to make a single molecule of fixing CO 2 . Make t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "134 reflecting an intimate metabolic relationship between the cells: how stoichiometry. This stoichiometry varied with the cells’ colours, comparable distribution of cells, even consistent numbers – a precise bacteria or archaea. The clumps were usually similar in size, with a displaying two differe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "135 decreased, by removing it to form C: increased, by living next to a good source of it (a vent will do), and B is can be pushed in the forward direction if the concentration of A is the direction of a reaction that is close to equilibrium substrates that enter the pathway while removing the end p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "136 not some virgin to placate a medieval dragon, but water. Zap. Repeat. sacrificial gift offered by the trembling priestly protein. This sacrifice is Transiently angry, chlorophyll snatches a replacement from the off down an electron-transport chain embedded in the membrane. excited electron, zapp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "137 flowing from water – water everywhere! – to synthesise ATP in the first ferredoxin simultaneously. Now, the power of the sun sets electrons scheme, oxygenic photosynthesis could now generate ATP and reduce distinct photosystems used in earlier forms of photosynthesis into the Z ATP, the cramped ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "138 common sense is the worst guide to the history of life. In fact, the levels oxygen in ancient rocks. I admit that doesn’t sound plausible, but being formed reacted swiftly with methane, there would be no trace of evidence against an early evolution of photosynthesis. If all the oxygen may reflec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "139 12 C over 13 C (compared with a standard ratio) by around 30 per mille rubisco, the outcome is that organic carbon becomes slightly enriched in a touch faster, so encounter enzymes more frequently. In the case of bumping into enzymes such as rubisco. Lighter molecules bounce around molecules as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "140 it means. A fall in 13 C relative to 12 C implies that far more carbon was uninterestingly dry and technical? It’s actually shocking! Just think what content), recovering slowly over ten million years. Does that sound standard, to a record 12 per mille below (much lower than the mantle 13 C 13 C..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "141 accumulations of sulfate were raised up high as continents collided and Gondwana together, around 560 million years ago, these great minerals such as gypsum. When the drifting continents brought partially evaporated to form massive deposits of evaporitic sulfate apart, large land masses became s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "142 burrowing through the stagnant muds, remaining active in even the most excess CO 2 or sulfide. Those tough survivors had already adapted to managed to deliver scraps of oxygen to their muscles and clear out circulatory systems that could be actively ventilated, animals that from random, but prim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "143 fumarate and succinate. This is the reverse pathway used in biosynthesis runs through the C3 pyruvate to the C4 oxaloacetate, then onto malate, other oxidative. The reductive prong begins with the C2 acetyl CoA and cycle (see the scheme below). One prong of this fork is reductive, the time they ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "144 switched off, and an alternative enzyme is expressed instead – succinate on and off. Conversely, when oxygen is available fumarate reductase is adaptation to low-oxygen (hypoxic) conditions, switching many genes Accumulation of succinate is a powerful signal for physiological proton pumping and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "145 sulfide, growing and reproducing in this stench, puts a premium on Cambrian explosion? Crawling around in the mud, snuffling through the organisms? And what happened in that traumatic age before the synthesis? What is the difference between microbes and multicellular So why do textbooks still cl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "146 consumes the waste products of another. That helps them to stabilise living symbiotically, with a precise stoichiometry in which one cell type We’ve seen that bacteria and archaea often benefit from company, could underpin the evolution of complex multicellularity in animals. balancing that in a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "147 web of symbiosis between tissues begins to fray. And so we age. biosynthetic pathways falter, ATP synthesis declines and the delicate cells and tissues. Tissue function eventually becomes strained, hundreds or thousands of genes, changing the stable (epigenetic) state of through the Krebs cycle,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "148 citrate. The trouble here is that high levels of oxaloacetate could interfere with broken down into acetyl CoA plus oxaloacetate, both of which can regenerate 4 The eagle-eyed will notice that statement is slightly ambiguous. Citrate is Innsbruck. philosophy), Gnaiger has a wonderful collection ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "149 burial and oxygenation is clearly misguided. levels plummeted to nearly zero. The idea that 13 C variations only reflect carbon That could explain why the 13 C signal is so large, yet soon afterwards oxygen the GOE might have been caused partly by the sequestration of sulfate on land. sulfate fl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "151 cause cancer are not set in stone, but take their meaning from the reflects the society in which we live, so the effects of oncogenes said to human delinquency cannot be blamed on individuals only, but partly is too close to dogma. Biology is not only about information. Just as to dogmas even to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "152 for cancer is older age: cancer incidence increases exponentially with of these actually causes cancer is unclear. Perhaps the greatest risk factor proliferate through pulling on the normal levers of cell division. Which can mutate genes (as they insert into DNA) but also induce cells to chronic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "153 The Warburg effect to explain the root cause of cancer. between energy and growth, the yin and yang of the Krebs cycle, begins those that suppress growth)? In this chapter, we’ll see how the tension growth (whether it be to press down the levers that drive growth, or lift words: how does any met..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "154 quartets: ‘You know Albert, your trouble is that you can’t count!’ Fritz Kreisler to his friend Einstein – the two played together in string people, though I can’t help calling to mind a quip from the great violinist It’s striking how many great scientists are also culturally rounded interest in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "155 Einstein’s reaction to the quirkiness of quantum mechanics: ‘God does itself, nearly perfect.’ To my mind, this remark is in the same vein as applied light energy is lost; on the contrary, the reaction is like the world organic world is based, is not so imperfect that the greater part of the sun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "156 produces ATP, albeit barely a tenth as much. The breakdown of glucose the Krebs cycle and respiration. Like respiration, fermentation also betrays a shortage of oxygen: an inability to make enough ATP through but still somewhat intoxicating. The accumulation of lactate normally has been replaced..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "157 had a deep-seated fear of cancer. His mother, said to be the only person who is a Jew.’ The reasons are shrouded in mystery, but Hitler apparently But he was swiftly reinstated, under Göring’s declaration ‘I will decide 50 per cent Jewish, and he was for a brief period relieved of his position. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "158 cancer. In which case, why has the number of papers citing it risen so Warburg effect. So, the Warburg effect is certainly not a universal key to outside and burn it in their mitochondria, in what’s called the reverse for their energy needs. Some cancer cells even take up lactate from to new cel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "159 rather than a genetic disease, but his focus on cell respiration missed the Warburg was arguably right that cancer is fundamentally a metabolic do indeed all induce some form of metabolic rewiring. know that many oncogenes, tumour suppressor genes and cancer viruses Warburg dismissed as obscurin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "160 get the balance between ATP, NADPH and carbon skeletons right. ATP for growth (and so cancer), and cells must wire their metabolism to NADPH. All in all, making NADPH is at least as important as making programmed cell death. Cancer cells escape this fate by making more vulnerable to oxidative st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "161 on how many proteins are actually made. The workhorses of tissues are carbon or NADPH), although in this case the demand depends primarily ATP demands (joining monomers together in chains costs ATP but not ATP. The synthesis of RNA, DNA and especially proteins has higher nucleotides also consume..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "162 excitement of his perspective on the Krebs cycle in cancer has never left his department. I have no idea what I talked about that day – but the the first time from Christian Frezza in Cambridge, before I gave a talk in the C4 intermediate succinate. I’ve never forgotten hearing about this for hy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "163 complex II and the right-hand complex is the nanomotor ATP synthase): enzyme. Overall, it works like this (where CI depicts complex I, CII is little ATP synthesis in animals that possess the fumarate reductase electron flow allows the pumping of four protons at complex I, driving a to fumarate i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "164 certain death? Look at the genes that it targets. They include genes for So how does HIF 1α making it to the nucleus in time save the cell from oxygen emergency. the protein can make it to the nucleus in time, in the rare event of an continuously just to ensure that fully functional (spanking ne..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "165 sobering. I’ll come back to a couple of these in the next chapter but just of medical conditions where this mechanism turns out to be relevant is levels, which are counteracted through changes in gene activity. The list slight impairments in Krebs-cycle flux give a read-out of succinate time fee..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "166 cancers glutamine. I have a vivid memory of discussing glutamine and substrates serve all of their needs. And of the two of them ... give the Most cancers need no more than glucose and glutamine to grow. These Another reversal Krebs cycle. in the form of the amino acid glutamine. And that, too, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "167 DeBerardinis and colleagues in 2012. They reported in Nature that cells The first wave of the storm came from Navdeep Chandel, Ralph urgently before his blackboard. Molecules acquire personality this way. whenever I think of glutamine, I can’t help but see Moncada pacing Institute for Cancer Sci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "168 means that the ATP synthase stops spinning. So protons no longer flow series. If demand for ATP is low, then ATP is not being consumed, which inside your cells right now? Everything in your mitochondria is linked in around reading this book), so demand for ATP is low. What’s going on into explos..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "169 NADH flips the direction of transhydrogenase enzyme. This now so NADH levels fall. The shift in the balance between NADPH and falls. Now NADH can transfer electrons into the respiratory chain again, though its rotary motor. As protons flow back inside, membrane potential spent, the ATP synthase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "170 glutamine looks something like the diagram on the next page: making citrate, supporting cancer cell growth. Overall, the flux from Mutations keep the enzyme jammed in reverse mode, so it keeps on because they lock in a flux that is already beneficial for cancer cells. reinforce this shift in can..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "171 strip out the acetyl group, switching off the growth signal. But their is reinforced by the context. The sirtuins are a group of enzymes that and proliferation – another signal that says grow! This epigenetic switch switch’ known as acetylation. The genes switched on drive cell growth histones. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "172 broken down to acetyl CoA. And we’ve seen the havoc that can cause. from glutamine in this way. Alternatively, from pyruvate, you can be washed out as waste. Much of the lactate excreted by cancer cells comes needed for biosynthesis. From pyruvate, you can form lactate and be C3 pyruvate, plus (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "173 oxygen in the normal way. Glycerol phosphate can be recycled by from outside the mitochondria. These electrons are transferred onto stripped of 2H, which is fed into complex III of the respiratory chain involving the Krebs cycle. It works like this. Glycerol phosphate is to generate electrical m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "174 splurged as ammonia rather than urea, promoting this vicious cycle while mutations in genes for the urea cycle. That way, excess nitrogen is free fossil fuels for the filthiest polluters. Cancer cells often acquire maintains a copious supply of free glutamine. It’s as if a state provides From th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "175 cancer cells. acetone). Yet even these metabolic hurdles are not insurmountable for make sugars from fats (although it can be done via the C3 intermediary presence tends to switch off growth signals. It’s also notoriously tricky to Because our physiology links ketone bodies with starvation, thei..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "176 deriving from the Krebs cycle. Electrons enter from NADH and pass on through the respiratory chain, and the only entry point for NADH us to the second problem. Complex I is the beginning of the longest route compensated somewhat through suppression of complex I. That brings We’ll see in the next..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "177 or don’t know about the treatments he was receiving; but also, how many for fun. He was acutely aware of his chances, and exactly what we know think. Full of zest. Always active. A man who would run up mountains and a smile to light a room, who taught me much about how to write and education, a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "178 structure, which is functionally identical, but relates to how far each one has been 3 The reason NAD P H has more power than NADH has nothing to do with the physical danger. unquestionably applied to both Warburg and Haldane – and a tendency to enjoy there is any correlation between those given..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "179 former chloroplasts. This has retained some genes that derive from the original malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum , which has a plastid derived from its called a plastid) which they use for other purposes. A famous example is the ability to photosynthesise altogether, but retained their ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "180 immunity to viral infections. Who knew they had an immune system? editing technology of CRISPR was discovered by scientists studying bacterial insights deriving from plant scientists. In a similar way, remember that the gene quarters. Focusing funding on research into human cancer would miss pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "182 to counter the effects of hundreds, nay thousands or millions of SNPs, a consume us from within. To reverse the afflictions of older age would be then we will be afflicted by a maelstrom of implacable spectres that our expected chronological time (protected by the wonders of society), and so on...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "183 genomics. Genome-wide association studies assign additive risk to The problem of missing heritability is more startling in this age of heritability of height is about 0.8. too, regardless of their upbringing. For comparison’s sake, the condition, then the other twin has about a 50 per cent chanc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "184 Wallace made ‘cybrids’, in which the genes in the nucleus came from between the mitochondria and nuclear genes. To study these interactions, nucleus too. That cooperation can be undermined by incompatibilities on the mitochondrial gene; it needs to cooperate with the genes in the cell to grow no..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "185 mitochondrial DNA into diagnostic chunks using ‘restriction enzymes’, passed on) but Wallace used a spanking new method (cutting up mitochondrial genes (the father’s mitochondrial genes are usually not Others had already established the idea of ‘uniparental inheritance’ of humans, mitochondrial ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "186 groups can be used to track the migrations of humans out of Africa into accumulation of differences in mitochondrial DNA between diverging human mitochondrial DNA, around 160,000 years ago. The gradual female, now known as ‘mitochondrial Eve’, the ancestor of all modern mitochondrial variations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "187 only dared to disagree; he was usually right. His legacy can be seen in anatomy. Galen had been undisputed for 1,400 years, but Vesalius not Vesalius did not fear to pick a fight with the ancients on points of landscapes. These plates pack a punch that has echoed down centuries. in various state..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "188 That signals directly to the nucleus, through succinate and citrate, is not being consumed) then Krebs-cycle flux must slow or even reverse. we saw in Chapter 5, if the electrical potential is too high (because ATP feeds back, shaping forward or reverse flux through the Krebs cycle. As strengthe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "189 genetics and mitochondrial function in Melbourne and was now full of mine at University College London. She had done her PhD in fly I knew little of this until Flo Camus arrived in the lab next door to confess to quite a strong fellow feeling. gaining their proteins from the yeast that ferments ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "190 people from other cultures is as human as we can get, and I will always divergent populations within the same species? Falling in love with mitochondrial and nuclear genes. So what about crosses between cause ‘hybrid breakdown’, attributed to incompatibilities between But where should we draw th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "191 Just one line. The other lines looked a bit ropey but seemed OK. We affect the males much. Yet it killed most of the females in one fly line! antioxidant. We tried one called NAC (for N -acetylcysteine), but it didn’t The cure seemed obvious: lower the stress. Give the flies an stressing the tes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "192 the suppression of respiration by NAC. That’s surprising, because ROS flight muscles of the thorax – it remained more or less constant, despite finding was that ROS flux hardly changed, least of all in the powerful The answer seems to be linked to the flux of ROS. A really striking the antioxida..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "193 Gla Inwongwan in my lab are looking into that right now, so I can’t tell of tissues: which genes are switched on or off. Enrique Rodriguez and respiration, NAC has to be having serious effects on the epigenetic state downstream effects on the activity of thousands of genes. By suppressing lower ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "194 linking together different bits of a protein, disulfide bridges change the with GSSG, oxidised thiols in proteins tend to form disulfide bridges. By There are more layers. GSH can also regenerate thiols in proteins. As the form GSSG in the flies that died. glutathione pool was more oxidised – a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "195 within a normal range. We know that the only difference between our fly suppression of complex I did indeed bring elevated ROS flux back flux was in fact unchanged in muscle tissue, so presumably the complex I, which in principle decreases ROS flux. We know that ROS that oxidation of glutathione..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "196 correlation between metabolic rate (the rate of living) and lifespan. The rate would have slowed down too). My point is that there is a broad done so, they would likely have lived a little longer (albeit their heart intend to use up any of mine running around doing exercises.’ If they had the wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "197 why lifespan only correlates loosely with metabolic rate – but to ignore in the first place? The contrasting answers to these questions explain spend on cleaning up the mess or preventing the mess from building up in reproduction or competing for a mate? How much do you want to to live anyway? W..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "198 or Krebs-cycle flux much when we’re strutting our stuff in our tails). Presumably, any incremental damage does not impede respiration glucose to react with proteins and lipids, decorating them with ‘sticky’ linking, oxidation by ROS or glycation (the tendency of sugars such as damage, whether th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "199 whereas less fit individuals can’t sustain both biosynthesis and energy once, with the Krebs cycle in full forwards mode much of the time, individuals have a respiratory system that is capable of doing both at on the relative allocation of resources to growth or energy: the fittest the amazing e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "200 linked with ageing? variations in nuclear genes. So how exactly are age-related diseases established genetic risk for these conditions is explained by known spectre of missing heritability means that only a small proportion of the or some heart condition. Take your pick. We’re all individuals. B..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "201 on which genes are active, overlaid on the energetic and biosynthetic tissues express different genes, with the effects of each SNP depending activation in the nucleus, tissue by tissue. By their very nature, different to the dwindling availability of ATP and the shifting pattern of gene rather ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "202 easily by the brain, despite high levels in the bloodstream. Perpetually insulin secretion. As secreted insulin levels fall, glucose is taken up less glucose itself – lowers the membrane potentials achievable, which saps islet mitochondria – damage that’s typically caused by the reactivity of pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "203 the mitochondria, activating pyruvate dehydrogenase further and MAMs attempt to compensate for this deficit by pumping more Ca 2+ into glucose, but insulin resistance means that they struggle to do so. 10 The Think about the problem here. To fire normally, neurons must take up now let’s just see..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "204 (10 23 , or 100,000,000,000, 000,000,000,000). I’m now in my mid-fifties, sustained by an incomprehensible one hundred billion trillion reactions thirty trillion cells, so in the last second your tranquil demeanour was billion metabolic reactions every second. 11 You are composed of at least loo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "205 longer-lived animals restrict ROS flux from complex I, simply by down- rate. Recent work from Gustavo Barja in Madrid suggests that these their land-lubber cousins with a similar body size or resting metabolic Animals with the power of flight live as much as ten times longer than repairing damag..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "206 maxim was ‘Nothing to excess’. Think about how hard it is to change and die. We each need to learn that lesson for ourselves. The second defines us as individuals and humans, but they knew well how to live have imagined the invisible metabolic flux dancing through genes that inscribed three maxi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "207 immature oocytes, why most of those die before birth, why oocytes are then female germline – why germ cells proliferate to form up to eight million quality operates gives striking insights into the developmental architecture of the found in human populations. Thinking about how selection for mit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "208 that are not still not fully explained. the demands on visceral organs such as the liver fall with body size, for reasons size. The great Canadian comparative biochemist Peter Hochachka showed that Sex, Suicide for a critique of this idea). And it partly relates to the economies of networks, as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "209 resistant, to the point that Alzheimer’s disease has been termed ‘type 3 diabetes’. resistant’, but more recent work indicates that neurons do indeed become insulin affect the uptake of glucose by the brain, hence the brain could not be ‘insulin directly toxic to proteins). For a long time, it w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "210 environments or response to infections, but that’s another story. responsiveness to rapid change, perhaps in terms of adaptability to variable respiration. That would predict there are evolutionary costs in limiting the why mitochondria retain genes at all; he argues they are needed to control a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "212 such as fruit flies. As Turin puts it, ‘While it is not known to what extent means we can study consciousness in some simple experimental models but is something more fundamental that works at the level of cells. This emergent property of the complex nervous systems of higher animals, paramecium..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "213 the hydrophobic pockets of proteins sitting within the mitochondrial Let’s get back to xenon. All this suggests that xenon concentrates in stuff of science fiction. But it seems they do. known. Even he admits that brains emitting radio waves sounds like the reputation for being difficult. His sc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "214 interfere with each other (cancelling out) or can link in phase to generate that electromagnetic fields interact with each other – separate fields can mitochondria. But there are some broader principles too about the way attempting to measure the strength of electromagnetic fields in individual ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "215 behaviour under the microscope, the way they move around, explore, fields on their mitochondrial membranes. Just watch their amazing think about protists such as paramecium, which also generate electrical Let’s put aside multicellular organisms with their nervous systems and music as the fields ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "216 counterattack, chopping up the DNA into bits before the virus can copy exposure to the virus, it can recognise the viral DNA and marshal a editing. If the bacterium (or indeed its ancestors) has had an earlier learnt to exploit, called CRISPR, which allow for sophisticated gene much chance, but ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "217 malate, then oxaloacetate, or perhaps an amino acid or sugar. You are a succinate for long. In a tiny fraction of a second, you will transform into are you part of the same entity, the same self? You won’t even be molecule of succinate across the city, twenty miles away? In what sense scale of L..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "218 that forges the oneness of self. You are a moment in a life. through a living cell on this restless planet of ours, the rush of change bacterium. You have just been part of something magic, the flow of life dancing electromagnetic fields, shifting the mood, the living states of a oxygen, heat or..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "219 it is the movement that creates the form. to this mortal process of continuing, Even though we give (give up) ourselves it is the movement that negates the form? Were we mistaken? What does it matter if it is the movement that achieves the form. beguiling our attention – we supposed it is the mo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "220 The forward Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "221 The reverse Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "222 CH 3 ). The first step goes like this: ‘R’ depicted in the example above corresponds to a methyl group (- activated to react with CO 2 , to form the C3 pyruvate. In other words, the Let’s think about a specific example – how acetate (a C2 molecule) is works. central to modern metabolism that it’..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "223 molecule of CO 2 , giving the C3 pyruvate: willing to react. In the final step, the CoA-S – can now be substituted for a way (as there is in acetyl phosphate). And that makes the carbon more joined directly to a sulfur atom, without there being an oxygen in the The important thing to notice here..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "224 electrical charge), which is symbolised by the Greek symbol delta (δ). towards themselves, giving them a slightly negative charge (not a full-on because the oxygen atoms have a strong tendency to pull electrons bond structure. But this structure is under some electrical strain. That’s that faces..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "225 water is shown as a product. Yet that seems to have gone missing in There’s only one other thing to notice here. In the first scheme above, exits the stage. instant that the CoA-S – grabs the electrons in its bond with acetate and from ferredoxin are transferred onto the two carbon atoms in the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "226 Biology magics water away. on the phosphate), but it’s nowhere to be seen as an independent entity. marked by the dashed lines (one of the oxygens plus two of the protons As happens so often in the chemistry of life, the water is there alright, newly released phosphate ion. So the overall reacti..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "227 bound onto the surface of the mineral: this time giving pyruvate (or more technically, a pyruvyl group), again hops across to join the CO (the same Fischer–Tropsch-type chemistry), can’t recall where the CO comes from). Once again, the acetyl group group is bound on near to another CO (check bac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "228 called ‘alpha carbon’. This arrangement is unusually reactive. Here’s oxygen on the first carbon atom next to the carboxylate group, a so- pattern slightly, because pyruvate possesses an extra double-bonded The next few steps build on what we’ve already seen, but alter the beautifully simple. pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "229 you can see it interacting with the surface better: the charge on one of the two oxygens of the carboxylate group. That way Cheshire Cat smile, but in the more conventional way that emphasises here. In this case, I’m not going to draw the pyruvate with its normal mineral surface) can abstract a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "230 reacting with CO to form the C4 oxaloacetate: before. Here’s the enol form of pyruvate binding to a surface and then to react with other bound molecules such as CO, exactly as we’ve seen means an enol can bind to a mineral surface, and once bound will be able easily if the oxygen picks up a prot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "231 plentiful. I’m not showing their movements any more, but recall that two Remember that we’re in a mildly acidic environment, where protons are oxaloacetate, allowing the oxygen to wrest its electrons from the carbon: of electrons transfers from the surface onto the alpha carbon of continue to re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "232 experiments. mineral surfaces, and at last, the results of some revolutionary on the known reactivity of carboxylic acids, the known behaviour of but the first few steps are exactly as predicted from first principles, based prebiotic chemistry will form citrate or the complete reverse Krebs cycl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "233 molecules). An important cellular antioxidant. oxidised form (where an H has been extracted from each of two GSH GSH Glutathione. GSH is the reduced form (containing H) and GSSG is the classic is the 4Fe4S cluster. sulfur, containing just a few atoms, with structures similar to minerals. The FeS..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "234 antioxidant glutathione. Found in coenzyme A, the amino acid cysteine (and so many proteins) and the -SH A thiol, containing a sulfur joined to a hydrogen, which is quite reactive. ‘free radicals’ and related molecules. oxygen grabs single electrons from FeS clusters in the respiratory chain to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "235 SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "236 Finally Solving the Mystery of Life (London, Penguin, 2019). An eloquent Paul Davies, The Demon in the Machine: How Hidden Webs of Information are The paradox of information in biology published scientific journal. Includes a light-touch historical overview. Philosophical Transactions of the Roy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "237 bacterial evolution. transfer has refocused attention on physiology as an organising principle in power of genetic information. Ironically, the scrambling power of lateral gene brought to an end the classical era of microbiology, ceding precedence to the Mikrobiologie 42 (1962) 17–35. A paper of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "238 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101 (2004) 13168–13173. E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, ‘Universality in intermediary metabolism’, Deep unity of biochemistry – the conserved city-centre plan (and justly famous). larger group; as close to the paradigm of molecular medicine as it ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "239 869–871. The text of Gowland Hopkins’s anniversary address to the Royal F. Gowland Hopkins, ‘Atomic physics and vital activities’, Nature 130 (1932) Hopkins’s biochemistry lab Chapter 1: Discovering the nanocosm which, in the way of science, has since been proved at least partly wrong. appeal to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "240 instrument invented by T. G. Brodie and others. short history that explains how Warburg’s name came to be associated with an use’, Journal of Chemical Education 41 (1964) 294–296. An enjoyably breezy P. Oesper, ‘The history of the Warburg apparatus. Some reminiscences on its inspiring piece, whi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "241 Volume 1 (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991). A monumental tome of Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: The Formation of a Scientific Life 1900–1933 . aimed at medics. 736–738. An immediate perspective on the cycle, written by Krebs alone and H. A. Krebs, ‘The intermediate metabolism of carbohydr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "242 Royal Society Memoirs . Features the memorable closing line that Lipmann died 88 (2006) 246–266. The US National Academy of Sciences equivalent to the W. P. Jenks and R. V. Wolfenden, ‘Fritz Albert Lipmann’, Biographical Memoirs system is essential at the very start of life.’ Plus ça change. an ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "243 recognised. to my mind Moyle’s vital experimental contribution has not been sufficiently Mitchell’s original paper on chemiosmotic coupling or his ‘little grey books’, but by Mitchell and Moyle in Nature in the mid-1960s, less heavily cited than mitochondria’, Nature 208 (1965) 147–151. One of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "244 (1981) 381–382. An influential paper that stands out in my mind for not even J. E. Baldwin and H. A. Krebs, ‘The evolution of metabolic cycles’, Nature 291 Evolution of the Krebs cycle University Press, 2021), a unique distillation from a remarkable nonagenarian. latest is On Life: Cells, Genes ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "245 scientific biography, with many memorable character portraits of the leading (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). A remarkable and absorbing Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age Lawrence and the Rad Lab discovered by Ellis himself. Rubisco by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "246 trying hard not to be bitter. Calvin until decades later, when he finally broke his silence. One senses he was Photosynthesis Research 73 (2002) 29–49. Benson said little about his time with A. A. Benson, ‘Following the path of carbon in photosynthesis: a personal story’, that those who fund res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "247 of recollections from the main protagonists of the reverse Krebs cycle, fifty years 2016’, Photosynthesis Research 134 (2017) 117–131. A fascinating compendium R. Tabita and I. A. Berg, ‘The Arnon–Buchanan cycle: a retrospective, 1966– B. B. Buchanan, R. Sirevåg, G. Fuchs, R. N. Ivanovsky, Y. Ig..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "248 autotrophic growth of a thermophilic bacterium’, Science 359 (2018) 563–567. A A. Mall, J. Sobotta, C. Huber et al ., ‘Reversibility of citrate synthase allows Widespread reverse Krebs cycle when oxygen is present. this paper just highlights how difficult it is to operate the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "249 from two distinguished marine biologists, John Baross and Deb Kelley, who had overview of the different types of vent system and their roles at the origin of life, origin of life’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 805–814. A good W. Martin, J. Baross, D. Kelley and M. J. Russell, ‘Hydrotherm..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "250 prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells’, Philosophical evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the Krebs cycle. their detailed thinking on Peter Mitchell’s protonmotive force and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "251 would have had to take place in high-pressure atmospheres. Here he teams up the origin of life involving an unusual form of ‘zinc sulfide photosynthesis’ that is a distinguished bioenergeticist who has had some strikingly original ideas on National Academy of Sciences USA 109 (2012) E821–830. Ar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "252 that they trained as synthetic chemists, yet are thinking from a biochemical point Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018) 1019–1024. Joseph Moran’s group is unusual in CO 2 to intermediates and end-products of the acetyl-CoA pathway’, Nature S. J. Varma, K. B. Muchowska, P. Chatelain and J. Moran, ‘Nati..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "253 lived from H 2 and CO 2 using proton gradients and iron–sulfur proteins. While some details have been decried, the paper reinforces the idea that LUCA simple cells subsisting in vents in the neverland between the abiotic and biotic. advance a striking portrait of the physiology of LUCA – as a po..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "254 with his long-term collaborator, the equally brilliant Eric Smith. Deserves a place 2016). A magisterial volume, and fitting final testament of Morowitz, written Emergence of the Fourth Geosphere (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, Eric Smith and Harold J. Morowitz, The Origin and Nature of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "255 the thermodynamically permissible. of data and mechanisms on the energetics of making a living at the margins of conservation’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 579–591. A treasure-trove ‘Methanogenic archaea: ecologically relevant differences in energy R. K. Thauer, A.-K. Kaster, H. Seedorf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "256 steep pH gradients (as much as 3 or 4 pH units across single nanocrystals). million times faster than hydroxide ions going the other way, giving rise to very experimental results, showing that protons can cross iron–sulfur barriers two Interface Focus 9 (2019) 20190073. A detailed theoretical pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "257 our own current thinking on the origins of the genetic code. possible for protocells to get better at copying themselves. The basis for much of acids) and iron–sulfur clusters drive a form of membrane heredity that makes it show that positive feedbacks between organic molecules (fatty acids and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "258 and pushes its central thesis a little too far. generation of young minds into palaeontology. But it has not weathered so well, (New York, W. W. Norton, 1989). A heady book that must have drawn a Stephen Jay Gould, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the History of Nature Cambrian explosion Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "259 1 (2017) 0138. A sweeping take from Olivia Judson on how a succession of O. Judson, ‘The energy expansions of evolution’, Nature Ecology and Evolution environmental change to the simple gas oxygen. A valuable corrective. Geobiology 7 (2009) 1–7. Quite a diatribe against the lazy ascription of dr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "260 of eukaryotes. An honour to contribute. issue of the journal in which she published her classic 1967 paper on the origin Margulis’s contribution to cell evolution, written for a special fiftieth anniversary Journal of Theoretical Biology 434 (2017) 58–67. My own appraisal of Lynn N. Lane, ‘Seria..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "261 abruptly. The intellectual son and grandson of James Lovelock (using PhD Gaia) can flip from one stable state to another as conditions change, sometimes Oxford University Press, 2013). A detailed overview of how the Earth system (or Tim Lenton and Andrew Watson, Revolutions that Made the Earth (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "262 was linked to the Cambrian explosion. Not a straightforward case! A marshalling of the evidence that the rise in oxygen in the late Neoproterozoic geochemical evidence and biological consequences’, GSA Today 21 (2011) 4–11. G. Shields-Zhou and L. Och, ‘The case for a Neoproterozoic oxygenation e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "263 gave rise to eukaryotic cells with large, complex genomes. They have to be right. cross-talk between the host cells and endosymbionts (proto-mitochondria) that I spotted it earlier. Argues that Krebs-cycle intermediates were critical to the read this paper after finishing the book and would have..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "264 Warburg’s papers. Much has changed since then, of course, but his closing line cause of cancer, and with a similar anger (but a completely different view) to the same year that Rous received the Nobel prize for his work on viruses as a 1361. Quite a diatribe against the somatic mutation theory o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "265 impacts on tumor metabolism’, Cancer & Metabolism 4 (2016) 5. A lively and A. M. Otto, ‘Warburg effect(s)—a biographical sketch of Otto Warburg and his side. accomplishments, while finding kind words to allay Warburg’s less appealing Krebs at his most gentlemanly in highlighting his mentor’s gre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "266 searing piece that I quote from in some detail in my chapter. Worth taking a look O. Warburg, ‘On the origin of cancer cells’, Science 123 (1956) 309–314. A decades. in cancer cells, which became the basis for his work on cancer over the following Warburg’s first publication on cancer, showing e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "267 An ancient switch critical role of mitochondria in cancer. hardly need to say that he was one of the strongest voices calling attention to the chapter, in part because I discussed his ideas at some length in Chapter 6. I 685–698. I neglected to say much about Doug Wallace’s work on cancer in thi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "268 to glutamine, in this case in HeLa cells. On that count, I feel obliged to point you (1955) 501–514. One of the first papers to point to the addiction of cancer cells H. Eagle, ‘Nutrition needs of mammalian cells in tissue culture’, Science 122 Glutamine in cancer easily achieved in humans. oxyg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "269 the Krebs cycle can be turbocharged. mitochondria’, FEBS Letters 344 (1994) 109–116. A lovely paper showing how which contributes to fine regulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle activity in NAD- and NADP-linked isocitrate dehydrogenases operate in a substrate cycle L. A. Sazanov and J. B. Jac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "270 Introduction to OXPHOS Analysis (Innsbruck, Bioenergetics Communications, Erich Gnaiger, Mitochondrial Pathways and Respiratory Control. An paper. inputs to the respiratory chain in this book. If you want diagrams, check out this and fed into the Krebs cycle. I’ve talked about a few of these alt..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "271 this book does not focus on ageing it is one of the finest and most influential positive benefits in youth that outweigh disadvantages with older age). While known forbiddingly as antagonistic pleiotropy (meaning that genes can have Williams independently put forward a similar view of ageing to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "272 paper from Doug Wallace’s PhD thesis on cybrids treated with antibiotics. inheritance in mammalian tissue culture cells’, In Vitro 12 (1976) 758–776. The D. C. Wallace, Y. Pollack, C. L. Bunn and J. M. Eisenstadt, ‘Cytoplasmic Doug Wallace and advances in mitochondrial research DNA. and heartfel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "273 boundaries of Western medicine, with its twin pillars grounded in the work of D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondria as chi’, Genetics 179 (2008) 727–735. Pushing the mutations in mitochondrial DNA. the female germline can be understood in terms of selection against detrimental eLife 10 (2021) e69344. A m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "274 mitochondria under different stress compared with adult flies. Giving them the Frontiers in Genetics 12 (2021) 734255. Larvae just eat and grow, placing the interactions produce diverging responses to mild stress in Drosophila larvae’, E. Rodríguez, F. Grover Thomas, M. F. Camus and N. Lane, ‘Mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "275 plenty of objections, but the ideas are stimulating. Here, West develops them at Enquist and James Brown, which I’m not citing individually here. There are physicist who has published revolutionary papers on fractal scaling, with Brian Cities and Companies (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "276 respiratory suppression producing a shift in metabolic flux and epigenetic state. weak, at older age, to shut down. I explain the same observations in terms of results from the overrun of other developmental programs that selection is too theory’. According to this theory there is no program ‘fo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "277 of the term ‘sweet mitochondria’ (the term ‘diabetes mellitus’ means sweet Alzheimer’s Disease 62 (2018) 1391–1401. Never was there a more sinister use P. I. Moreira, ‘Sweet mitochondria: a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’, Journal of need to mind my diet. 1113. The evidence is mounting that Alz..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "278 Epilogue: Self that you really should know about. calculate this particular parameter, but they calculate many other amazing things calculations on the number of metabolic reactions per second in cells. They don’t knew you had about cells. I’m citing this book in relation to Joana Xavier’s Scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "279 medium for dynamic control of growth and form’, Biosystems 164 (2018) 76–93. M. Levin and C. J. Martyniuk, ‘The bioelectric code: an ancient computational Electrical fields in development mitochondrial membranes generate the EEG. with autism in humans. At least consistent with the much bolder hy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "280 summarises their ideas. free energy’ to distinguish it from more conventional usage. This formal paper Friston, whose concept of free energy in this context is sometimes called ‘Friston 25 (2018) 202–238. Solms’s ideas on consciousness were developed with Karl considerations from physics and phy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "281 fields give cells their unity. suspect that this loss of orientation is just one manifestation of how electrical – collapse the potential and bacteria can’t figure out how to divide in two. I is that they can only achieve this when there is an electrical membrane potential the constricting appar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "282 intermediates, either as a product of CO 2 fixation at the origin of life, or both groups, in their different ways, have been working on Krebs-cycle subjects had little in common beyond the centrality of energy flow. Yet in fruit flies. Before reading this book, you might have thought those one ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "283 read the whole book, pointing out more stylistic faux pas than I would used to climb together, but now we reminisce. Allyson Jones has also to say nothing of the music, conversation, sea walks and good cheer. We me going through darker days with unreasonably enthusiastic comments, Carter has rea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "284 intermediary metabolism. I’ll never forget our lunch together, where we cycle than Lee, yet he can still barely trammel his excitement about bigger picture. No one in the world today knows more about the Krebs whole book and made many penetrating comments, while celebrating the friendship. I am ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "285 on salt balance and thirst in animals. I confess that I had put the question energy and plans. He had been drawn into the subject through his work with Prof. Derek Denton, now in his nineties, yet still overflowing with alone in that). That led me into a long and enjoyable correspondence Life As..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "286 touched strive to be the best we can be. I hadn’t appreciated how many a zestful sense that anything is possible, which would make those he immense impact on my life. He had buoyant energy, warmth of spirit and legacy is to influence the lives of others for the better. Ian had an dedicate this b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "287 dimension. I have tried to say in this book, yet in a few lines from another permission to reprint the poem. It somehow captures the essence of what Revelations’ to my attention, and Richard Howard for his gracious Finally, I thank Cliff Hanks for bringing the poem ‘Like Most (and for responding..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "288 and individuality 234–6, 238, 243 compensatory 247 alleles suppression of respiration 230, 259–60, 262, 264 predisposing to cancer 25, 195, 229–32 mechanism of 260–67 Krebs cycle reversal and 111, 259 glycolysis and carbon fixation 230–31 free radical theory 257–9, 262 and flux capacitance 245 d..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "289 see also GOE atmospheric oxygen balance 177 of other planets 165 early/primordial 76, 109–10, 114, 119, 165 atmospheres assembly line analogy 170, 208 aspartate 179n5, 224–7 Asimov, Isaac 248 ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 44–5, 48, 252 artificial intelligence (AI) 13, 274 Arnon, Daniel 98–100, 102, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "290 acetyl CoA pathway in 122–3, 151 bacteria and archaea bacteria, autotrophic 85n4, 102, 114 rubisco in 108 reverse Krebs cycle 73, 78, 100, 101 origins of mitochondria 68–9, 167, 281 non-photosynthetic 110 molecular phylogenetics 166 bacteria, ancient vent bacteria 110, 163n2 sulfur bacteria 100,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "291 prebiotic 24, 275 Krebs cycle as source 20, 33, 115, 161 as fundamental 4, 6, 9–10, 131 building blocks of life, molecular Buckel, Wolfgang 163n2 Buchanan, Bob 100, 104 radio emissions and EEG signals 277–9 oxidative Krebs cycle in 187 glucose preference 265–8, 280 electrical fields in 280 brain..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "292 carbon-11 ( 11 C) 80–81, 83–4, 85n4, 178 CARA (Council for At-Risk Academics) 31n1 cancer viruses 205 Cancer Genome Atlas 193 glucose fermentation 197, 201–2, 208–9n4 effect of transplanting 25, 194 effect of glutamine deprivation 216 cancer cells use of radioisotopes 80 as metabolic, rather tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "293 and mitochondria 242 cell death, programmed (apoptosis) 194, 205, 207, 213, 216 catalysts, protein see enzymes thermodynamics and 22 succinate as 46 ornithine as 52–3 nucleic acids and nucleotides 129, 148 metal ions 131, 152 iron-sulfide mineral surfaces 135–9 biochemical cycles as catalytic 53..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "294 CoA-S - 289–90, 292 coenzyme A (CoA) 56–7, 128 , 140, 295–6 coal and oil 139, 177 cloud chambers 86–7 citric acid cycle see Krebs cycle citrate synthase 110–11, 123 301 reverse Krebs cycle 101, 105, 110–11, 128 , 216–19, 221, 287 , 300– in respiration 51–2, 54–5 removal in the Krebs cycle 172–3,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "295 and the effects of ageing 25, 232, 233, 264, 268, 272 and drug response 15 diet diabetes 21, 189, 243, 266, 268n10 Delphi, Temple of Apollo 272–3 dehydration reactions 138 DeBerardinis, Ralph 217 Dayhoff, Margaret 164–8 Davies, Paul 129n6 ‘Darwin’s dilemma’ 157 cytochrome oxidase 35–6n3, 49, 199..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "296 electron-transport chains 174 by ferredoxin 288 in carbon dioxide reduction 133–41 in anaesthesia 277, 279 electron transfers electron spin resonance 276–7 hydrogen from hydrothermal vents 141 H 2 S as 166–7 ferredoxin as 105–6 electron donors, alternative electron bifurcation 163n2 Einstein, Al..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "297 of glucose with ageing 230 of glucose in cancer 197, 201–2, 208–9n4 alcoholic 170 fermentation ‘ferment’, respiratory 35–6, 64n11, 199, 216 Fendt, Sarah-Maria 261n7 FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) 48 extinct species, resurrecting 238–9 exoplanets 119 exercise 25, 223, 232–3, 256, 264, 268 of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "298 late-acting genes 234, 236–7 globin genes 187 activated by HIF 1α 212, 215 genes gene editing 14, 228n7, 282 Gell-Mann, Murray 124 tissue slice experiments 33–8 pressure and hydrogen availability 142 gas pressures fumarate reductase 185, 210–11, 213 fumarate hydratase 210, 215, 217, 220 fumarate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "299 metabolic shift with age 231 metabolic shift in cancer 196, 205, 209, 213, 223–4 growth groups, chemical 38–9n4 greigite 121, 133, 135 Gould, Stephen Jay 156n1 GOE (the Great Oxidation Event) 176, 178, 181, 182n6, 186 Gnaiger, Erich 171–2 and tissue ATP demands 188, 201 NAD + -to-NADH ratios 179..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "300 in biosynthesis 73, 106–7, 108n11, 128 , 206 balanced in Krebs non-cycle 185, 201 hydrogen (2H) hydride ions 136, 297 ‘hybrid breakdown’ 247 lifespan prolongation 235–6, 258, 272 cell numbers and reactions per second 269 ATP synthesis in 66 humans Hudson, Reuben 144 Howard, Richard 285 Hopkins, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "301 and reverse Krebs cycle 118–19 in photosynthesis 174 growth of protocells with 147 FeS clusters/surfaces 147, 151, 254, 255n4 in ferredoxin 105 iron–sulfur clusters/catalysts surfaces as catalytic 133, 135, 139 in alkaline hydrothermal vents 114–15, 121–2, 144, 147 iron-sulfide minerals see also..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "302 and ageing 25, 252–3, 264–7, 272, 280–81 Krebs cycle fluxes mutations affecting 196, 209–10, 215, 220 membrane bound 211 Krebs cycle enzymes Krebs cycle, reverse see reverse Krebs reversal 61n7, 111, 126, 217, 230 oxidative and reductive prongs 184–6, 210, 230 origins and evolution 70–73, 118, 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "303 mitochondrial DNA and 272 metabolic rate and 256–8, 270–71 differences, men and women 247 biological time and 235–6 of bats and birds 271 lifespan Life Itself , by Crick 129 life, origin see origin of life as thermodynamically favoured 275 photosynthesis freeing life from minerals 174–5 emergenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "304 Mendel, Gregor 243–4 see also Ech membrane bound enzymes 211, 219–20, 222 , 226, 253 see also mitochondrial membranes formation of, and primitive life 117, 145 electrical charge on 68, 244, 275, 282–3 anaesthetic effects and 277 membranes Medawar, Peter 234, 236 McGlynn, Shawn 170 mass extinctio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "305 interactions with nuclear 238–41 drug response 249 diseases 240, 247–8, 263–4 mitochondrial genome ‘mitochondrial Eve’ 241–2, 246 response to damage 217 as location of respiration 32, 67–8n13, 70–71 as flux capacitors 244, 266 bacterial origins 68–9, 167, 281 mitochondria Mitchell, Sir Godfrey 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "306 NADPH NADP + (phosphorylated NAD + ) 107, 108n11, 109, 206n3, 218–19 oxidation and age 230, 261, 270–71 NADH 63–4, 108n11, 196, 206n3, 223 NAD + to NADH ratio 179n5, 270 206n3, 220, 261 NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) 63, 108n11, 179n5, 201, NAC ( N -acetyl cysteine) 249–52, 255, 263 f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "307 Orgel, Leslie 128–31 organ transplantation 214 Oppenheimer, Robert 82, 88, 90 oocytes and mitochondria 240–42 oncogenes 192–4, 205 Ochoa, Severo 105, 217 Nunes Palmeira, Raquel 148 see also FAD; NAD + from sugars and amino acids 20, 104, 122, 131, 205, 224 role of glutamine 215, 222 possible ori..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "308 philosophical approaches 58–9, 69, 99, 124, 203 phages (bacteriophages) 282 pH gradient, hydrothermal vents 144, 146 and CO 2 reduction 142–3 and ATP formation 64, 152 pH PET (positron emission tomography) scans 265 pentose phosphate pathway/shunt 108, 131, 207, 224, 253 Pauling, Linus 98, 165 p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "309 ‘protocells’ 24, 117, 145–50, 152–3, 275 protists 3–4, 161, 186, 276, 281 see also enzymes synthesis and ATP demand 208 rubisco as the most abundant 75 peptide templating 149n9 folding mechanisms 13, 258 disulfide bridges 253–4 chirality of amino acids 277 breakdown in cancer 226 proteins prolyl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "310 hydrogen transfer in 37, 47–52 Hans Krebs on 19, 32–3, 37–8 efficiency of aerobic 159 blocking with carbon monoxide 35 respiration redox tone 259, 271 red protein see ferredoxin red beds 176, 178 Rammu, Hanadi 145 Ramakrishnan, Venki 13 Ralser, Markus 131 radioisotopes of carbon see carbon-11; c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "311 from mitochondrial complex I 230 ROS (reactive oxygen species) Rodriguez, Enrique 252 RNA World hypothesis 129 regulatory RNAs 12n2 origins in protocells 148–51, 275 and amino acid hydrophobicity 149n9 RNA (ribonucleic acid) ribulose bisphosphate 94–6 ribosomes 13 reverse Warburg effect 204 side..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "312 senescent (epigenetic) states 259, 262, 269–72 self, sensation of 280 operating on random RNA sequences 149–51 flight and ROS flux 271–2 favouring reproductive fitness 4, 234 favouring biochemical efficiency 116n3, 118 and cancer 191, 217 selection ‘Scopes II’ trial 124 as uncertain 273 testable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "313 Sweetlove, Lee 228n7 sulfur bacteria 100, 104–5, 114 sulfur, in CoA 57, 289–90 sulfate as an oxidant 181 see also glucose overemphasis on, in metabolism 77, 81–3, 90, 95, 103 in the Calvin-Benson cycle 95–6n8, 98 sugars succinyl CoA 128 , 184, 215 , 222 , 231, 260–61n7, 286–7 succinate dehydroge..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "314 The Vital Question (book) 281 viruses 205, 282 Viagra 216 Vesalius, Andreas 243 vertebrates, ancestors of 155–6 ventilation in an anaerobic world 183 Van Leeuwenhoek, Antonie 3 urea cycle 52, 224–7 urea 8, 28, 38–9 uncoupling proteins 228n7, 262n8 twin studies 236–8, 245, 248, 263 Turin, Luca 27..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "315 Zuckerkandl, Emil 165 Z scheme 175, 199 xenon 277–8 Xavier, Joana 269n11 X-ray crystallography 10, 13, 59 X-rays, biological effects 87n5, 245 Wonderful Life , by Gould 156n1 Wimpey Construction 60–61n9 Wilkins, Maurice 10 Wildman, Sam 75 West, Geoffrey 257n5 Watson, James 10, 128 oxygen from, i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "316 Index 288 Acknowledgements 282 Further reading 236 List of abbreviations 233 Appendix 2: The Krebs line 227 Appendix 1: Red protein mechanics 222 The reverse Krebs cycle 221 The forward Krebs cycle 220 Envoi: ‘Like Most Revelations’ 219 Epilogue: Self 211 6. The flux capacitor 181 5. To the dark..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "9 tweezers, read out the code that specifies their structures, deciphered the they function. We have taken them apart, in centrifuges or with optical know what most of these whirring parts do, what they’re made of, how gyrating predator. Some 350 years after van Leeuwenhoek, we now themselves free f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "10 matter? The idea that there is a vital force, that life is fundamentally biology: what processes animate cells and set them apart from inanimate meaningful. A far better question goes back to the formative years of wrong question, which can’t be answered precisely because it is not new laws of ph..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "11 that cells are not made of an amorphous protoplasm composed of information. The golden age of biochemistry began with a realisation first look to where biology has turned a blind eye since the ascent of To understand this flow of energy and matter and all it portends, we must The dynamic side and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "12 reliably going through exactly the same succession. This is the flux that may be several hundred vehicles entering a street every second , each one streets in a cell (with the same thing happening in each of them) but there incomprehensible number. You might say that there’s a lot of repeat cell ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "13 evidence for the unity of biochemistry. His slightly maniacal phrase Dutch pioneer of microbiology, Albert Kluyver, marshalled new heart cells behave in similar circumstances. In the 1920s, another great oxygen or grow in its absence is remarkably similar to how our own life. Painstaking experime..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "14 but technically there is no loss of meaning, and the canon can be might not enjoy listening to the works of Shakespeare in blips and bleeps Morse code only has two letters and can convey the same meaning. We compared with, say, the twenty-six letters of the English alphabet, but the sequence down..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "15 think about everything, it has also helped us forget some lessons from exhaustive exploration of the digital jungle has changed the way we cheats. Nothing in biology has escaped digital scrutiny. But while our bearing suggests; nearly a third of offspring are fathered by philandering example, tur..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "16 the atomic structure of the latest machines. In comparison, even the admiration, for every issue seems to contain at least two papers detailing pages of journals such as Nature with a mixture of jealousy and of us who don’t solve the structure of proteins for a living look at the preoccupied some..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "17 harassed local authorities may procrastinate for months, the genes extra traffic flow? No problem: widen the road. Unlike a city, where immediately implemented. Alternative route too narrow to accommodate frustration travels straight to the genes, where contingency plans are horns. Something simi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "18 take a sample of cells and look at the distribution of flux at one moment, map, showing live congestion, but it’s still a snapshot in time. We can differ from that in one of yours? It is closer to a satnav-enabled road how does the flux of materials and energy through one of my heart cells pathwa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "19 metabolism has changed little in part because it was never powered to generation, without pause, right back to the emergence of life. Core living metabolic network in the egg cell, a flame passed from generation inert information in the form of genes – our inheritance includes this minute by minu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "20 burning very small carbon skeletons is not an efficient process, he just a few simple steps? Krebs himself suggested one plausible answer: discharged into the outside world. But why is it a cycle at all? Why not the cell, while the inert carcasses of water and carbon dioxide are The energy releas..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "21 yin and yang at all. cycle into sharp modern focus but does not explain why the cycle has a the synthesis of new organic molecules. This question brings the Krebs the Krebs cycle – how to offset the needs of energy generation against problem in all these disparate cases is how to balance the yin ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "22 many people an obscure subject, full of runic symbols that suggest a own tantalisingly different ways. I appreciate that biochemistry is for the way we are, and ultimately why we age and die, each of us in our This is the story of our planet from within our cells – what makes us high-octane world..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "23 the universal precursors of life. view) reacting the simple gases hydrogen and carbon dioxide to generate bacteria that run the cycle backwards (or forwards, from their point of the core of metabolism lies in the Krebs cycle – as practised by ancient the sugary chemistry of photosynthesis and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "24 ancestral pathways for dealing with low oxygen levels, driving with age, intermediates such as succinate accumulate and trigger the generation. As the flux through our Krebs cycle becomes more sluggish need to use the same pathway for biosynthesis as well as energy emerges from the yin and yang o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "25 builds up; in effect, a car park. To understand which one requires a lot of context reflect the opposite – almost no downstream flux, so the intermediate gradually flux, with the intermediate being constantly replenished at high levels, or it could in the cell does not necessarily imply high flux..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "26 just be called gnomics. and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "28 bacteria living in stagnant river waters, causing more anguish at the on bacterial metabolism. Her pioneering studies (most famously on research, for example convincing the young Marjory Stephenson to work MRC either), Hopkins did occasionally influence their direction of affectionately as Hoppy ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "29 laboratory included people of many dispositions, convictions and he called ‘the British way of life’, writing that ‘The Cambridge that Krebs had known in Germany. Years later, Krebs reflected on what You can imagine that Hopkins’s lab was very different to anything changes in gas pressure. a carg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "30 stories – but also the more scope they have to colour our thinking. Krebs it was won. That’s only human. The harder the discoveries, the better the way was hard won. And knowledge comes tinged with the stories of how called ‘powerhouses’ of the cell; but every scrap of knowledge along the We now ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "31 reaction step. It took unimaginable patience and skill to figure out gave an indirect view of what was actually happening, for just a single needed to measure one biochemical reaction filled half a room, and still submerged in a water-bath controlled by a thermostat. The apparatus pressure measur..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "32 4. and chlorophyll.’ He wasn’t so far from the truth, as we’ll see in Chapter oxidation. For evidently, the ferment existed earlier than haemoglobin arisen from the ferment – blood pigments by reduction, leaf pigment by before photosynthesis: ‘blood pigment and leaf pigments have both ferment. Fr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "33 rate of respiration in the presence or absence of respiratory inhibitors. amounts of various substances that could be respired, and measure the manometers simultaneously in a single study. He would add known folk sag at the prospect. Krebs sometimes ran as many as ten single method, coupled to a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "34 in his tissue slices, as did adding carboxylic acids. But adding both of Krebs found that adding amino acids increased the rate of respiration matters became interesting. which as we’ve seen consumes and releases gases too. And that’s where measurements, he needed to take into account the rate of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "35 is the three-carbon pyruvic acid: book. What exactly is a carboxylic acid? Let me draw one for you. This It is time to get acquainted with the molecular protagonists of this released captured and put to use? were burned in oxygen. What were the steps? How was the energy ever. Surely, the secret o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "36 touch unstable and reactive. Now the middle oxygen in my picture is bond tends to throw its weight about. That’s what makes pyruvic acid a to oxygen, which likes nothing better than getting into a fight; the extra That’s because the middle carbon atom in pyruvic acid has a double bond suit, or a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "37 something of a Cheshire Cat grin: symmetry and stability. It can be drawn like this, giving pyruvate oxygen atoms, giving a ‘delocalised cloud’ of electrons that confers clarity. But in reality this charge is smeared in space between the two left with a negative charge (–) which I’ve shown on the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "38 one carbon. In other words, the C3 pyruvate should be broken down into that the intermediates should be stripped down to two carbons and then carbon molecules of pyruvate, so a reasonable working assumption was Krebs knew that the six-carbon glucose is initially split into two three- individually..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "39 exactly how much of the carboxylic acid remained in the muscle after the (by up to 600 per cent!!) over prolonged periods. Yet when he analysed acids, notably succinate, dramatically increased the rate of respiration to. Szent-Györgyi found that adding small amounts of C4 carboxylic changes; in r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "40 Pulling hydrogen biology at the time. Almost ... yet had a general catalytic activity, unlike almost anything else known in more perplexing. The bottom line is that succinate was fairly unreactive overall speed of respiration. That only made the individual steps even succinate doesn’t increase th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "41 or more specifically 2H. The product is water, or H 2 O. Warburg had Recall that respiration consumes oxygen by reacting it with hydrogen, respiration. even more intriguing examples of hydrogen transfer, somehow linked to hydrogen was transferred had entranced Szent-Györgyi. Now here were would r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "42 Remember that the formula for glucose is C 6 H 12 O 6 . Szent-Györgyi then CO 2 should be released from the skeletal remains of the sugar. 2H was stripped out from the sugar and passed onto a carboxylic acid, If C4 carboxylic acids were merely hydrogen carriers, then as each point do we just ‘loo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "43 length. Presumably, these steps, in which CO 2 was pulled out, needed the carboxylic acids were clipped down from six to four carbon atoms in escaped Krebs’s notice that these steps released two CO 2 molecules, as (called α-ketoglutarate) to the four C4 carboxylic acids. It had not interconnected..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "44 essence, adding more of any constituent gives rise to more of the next, Krebs realised that biochemical cycles are necessarily catalytic. In systems, that Hopkins had celebrated at the Royal Society in 1932. insight, with just the degree of unexpectedness to be expected of living the addition of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "45 reaction did operate under normal metabolic conditions, catalysed by an quite harsh chemical conditions, and without an enzyme. If a similar from oxaloacetate and pyruvate, in effect welding them together under mattered to Krebs. It had recently been shown that citrate could be made come back to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "46 and we will encounter it repeatedly. Once formed, acetyl CoA reacted metabolism across the whole of life, from ancient bacteria to ourselves, short. This turned out to be perhaps the single most central molecule in named the overall assemblage acetyl coenzyme A or acetyl CoA for attached to a lar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "47 properly. The process by which glucose is oxidised goes like this. First, oxaloacetate, to give the C6 citrate. At last, everything added up Once activated in this way, the C2 acetate can be attached onto the C4 (and that remaining oxygen is beginning to stare a bit): what makes the composite mol..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "48 commented that ‘Peter is too original for his examiners.’ He finally all’. Mitchell’s mentor, the distinguished Polish biochemist David Keilin, and ‘statids’. The examiners dismissed his work as ‘not really a thesis at grounded in his own development of ancient Greek theory on ‘fluctids’ thesis o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "49 ‘Beethovenian’ appearance, with a flowing mane of hair (he too later keen intellect and wide-ranging interests, as well as his cultivated first meeting Mitchell at departmental tea in 1947. She was struck by his joined Marjory Stephenson in Cambridge as a research assistant in 1946, year helping ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "50 frankly, this view is still prevalent today. The goal of biochemistry was about living matter that could not be reduced to mere chemistry; and discredited idea of vitalism, implying that there was something special Many biochemists were uncomfortable with this view, as it recalled the cells’, arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "51 term NADH, just focus on the ‘H’. I hope you will develop a Pavlovian NADH will figure large later in this book, but for now, when you see the leaving another proton nearby, bound onto water) is called NADH. 10 components of hydrogen (or more exactly, two electrons and one proton, dinucleotide’, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "52 in the mid-1960s, laying out the basic experimental approaches still used Moyle together published a series of ground-breaking papers in Nature contribution would surely not have been overlooked today. Mitchell and which he alone was awarded the Nobel prize in 1978. Her essential contributed larg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "53 decades, right up to today. depending on factors that have kept bioenergeticists busy for whole number but a fraction (3.3 in humans) and can vary that the number of ATPs formed from a single NADH is not a ‘wasted’ but are saved up towards the next ATP. Note this means motor, which generates thre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "54 chemiosmotic hypothesis, in the mid-1960s, Lynn Margulis was ‘powerhouses’ of complex cells. When Mitchell was developing his This is how respiration works in our own mitochondria, the pitches – all charged with the power of a bolt of lightning. were flat, they would cover an area equivalent to a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "55 ketoglutarate. The α-ketoglutarate spins round the Krebs cycle to form wasting is glutamine. This is converted into the C5 carboxylic acid α- most common amino acid that is shipped around the body from muscle ammonia plus the carboxylic acids that enter the Krebs cycle. By far the Krebs back in t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "56 with plenty of glucose needed to form acetyl CoA). But had they possible, to provide energy for flying (and the tissue slices were supplied by 600% because that tissue is poised to oxidise glucose as quickly as Adding succinate to pigeon-breast muscle raised the respiratory rate Szent-Györgyi and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "57 synthesis is secondary. That impression is strengthened by the fact that presented it in this chapter: breakdown is its primary purpose, and that’s still how it is presented in most textbooks, and how I have cycle in animals as largely dedicated to the breakdown of organics; and perfectly aware o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "58 protein that Warburg discovered is now called cytochrome oxidase, ‘cytochrome’ that, CO would stifle respiration in your cells for the same reasons. The haem haemoglobin of your red blood cells and displacing oxygen, but if you survived 3 Carbon monoxide poisoning can kill you by binding to the i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "59 refers to two hydrogen atoms, which are typically attached to other molecules, difference but might leave you feeling exasperated with pedantic scientists. 2H 6 Let me just clarify the distinction between 2H and H 2 . It’s an important medical problem, cancer, which took away most of what was dea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "60 work on bioenergetics included demonstrating that respiration takes place in ATP synthesis, in two classic papers in the late 1940s. Lehninger’s pioneering famous textbook) to show that the oxidation of NADH by oxygen was linked to significance. It fell to the great US biochemist Albert Lehninger..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "61 Mitchell. the membrane through precisely the type of spatial coupling proposed by mechanisms, known as the Q cycle, in which quinones transfer protons across errors, Mitchell was in fact correct about one of the most baffling pumping disprove a hypothesis, regardless of whether it was true or not..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "63 unity of biochemistry. In the Introduction, we touched on the value of emblematic of a more interesting and deeper problem: the dogma of the which swiftly came to be seen as the enzyme for carbon fixation – is carrot of improved yields dangling distractingly overhead. Yet rubisco – rubisco with a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "64 of creation. gaze from the lofty pinnacles of evolution down to the obscure canyons understand the deep chemistry of life (and death ...) we must shift our bowels of the Earth. Many had no need for the sun. If we want to already ancient, living from gases and rocks, sometimes deep in the party to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "65 course into a circular path. With each acceleration the circle widens, so every second) while applying an external magnetic field that bends their rapidly reversing an electric voltage (thousands or millions of times centre of a circular vacuum chamber, and their flight is accelerated by targeted..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "66 experimentation was necessary. The results were often unpredictable, experimentation. Indeed, the theory was so unreliable that this commonplace that it had become a matter for respectable head off as alchemists!’ By the 1930s, though, transmutation was so responded ‘For Christ’s sake don’t call ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "67 Kamen and Ruben, but also made clear the importance of proper This bonding experience cemented a strong friendship between the Nobel prize for his pioneering work on cyclotrons in 1939. 3 Luckily, this embarrassing mishap doesn’t stop Lawrence from receiving contamination from laboratory dust bak..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "68 the whole pathway. then track the path of carbon in photosynthesis, giving a route map for to identify them. By building up a time-course, Kamen and Ruben could radioactive molecules and use the standard methods of organic chemistry periods would give later products. All they had to do was isolat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "69 metabolism, but the path was twisted. I mentioned in Chapter 1 that the carboxylic acids and the Krebs cycle for CO 2 fixation and so all of core as Krebs-cycle intermediates. This could have signalled the centrality of the first product was a carboxylic acid, with the same kind of chemistry towa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "70 vanishes in an instant, a ghostly apparition. Larger particles such as through the cloud chamber, leaving a long, spindly vapour trail that through the chamber. A proton is tiny and fast moving. It whizzes part. The vapour trail formed depends on what kind of particle is passing vapour trail simi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "71 developing the new protocols. Ruben was set to work in defending the isotopes, notably uranium and plutonium. Kamen was put in charge of the cyclotrons at the Rad Lab to focus on the production of radioactive Francisco seemed only too real a target. The US government took over 1941 was greeted wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "72 power of 14 C could mark out the path by which carbon was fixed in notion that sugars are the backbone of biochemistry. Only the discerning photosynthesis today, and especially central carbon metabolism – the train a peculiar history that still influences how we understand discovery, coupled with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "73 radioactivity emanating from the 14 C would then betray its presence as a precise place on the paper, depending on its chemical properties. The incorporated into a specific type of molecule, this would migrate to a paper, which darkened in the presence of radioactivity. If the 14 C was first). Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "74 smudge, it is a whole world! why scientists get so excited about the seemingly abstruse. That is no simple molecule that made sense. All that in one dark smudge. This is language of science, of human comprehension, of the rational mind – a tangible clue, which transformed nature’s deepest magic i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "75 through a rejigging process to regenerate three C5 molecules – all the be used anywhere in metabolism, while the other five C3 molecules went cycle produce six C3 molecules. One of these could be siphoned off to arithmetic, albeit a strange numbers game. Three complete turns of the on, giving two..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "76 imploded, so his greatest achievements in the field were more wrong? Calvin’s own cherished ideas on photochemistry had recently to go, and Calvin made no obvious effort on his behalf. What went dismissed Benson with the words ‘It is time to go.’ Benson had no place cycle. For reasons that were n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "77 against the king. That’s exactly what happened next – and why it took so amounted an insurrection against the unity of biochemistry, a rebellion anyone had the temerity to claim another way of fixing CO 2 , that assimilation of CO 2 via the Calvin cycle.’ You can imagine that if ‘One important pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "78 motive force’ from Chapter 1. In the case of photosynthesis, a current of paths, just as they do in respiration. Remember Peter Mitchell’s ‘proton- in turn splits into electrons and protons, which then follow different stripping the 2H from H 2 O through the auspices of chlorophyll. The 2H the sa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "79 highlight the key points): had in mind (I’m just slightly simplifying their original diagram to It could drive growth like a ... well, like a bacterium. Here’s what they would make four, three turns make eight, four turns sixteen, and so on ... complete turn of the cycle generates two molecules, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "80 pyruvate (plus that metabolic link between carboxylic acids and sugars, thought of as Krebs-cycle intermediates, notably acetyl CoA and backwards: it includes several extra carboxylic acids that are not usually reverse cycle is slightly longer than the standard cycle running cycle here – that’s s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "81 saw Krebs-cycle intermediates everywhere – the same carboxylic acids autoradiographs: I had expected to see sugar phosphates but instead I elsewhere. I was astonished when I first looked at Benson’s in autotrophic metabolism became obscured, as the focus shifted don’t contribute to carbon fixatio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "82 whole was deemed to be irreversible. dismissed as energetically too unfavourable. That meant the cycle as a (C2 to C3 and C4 to C5) were taken to be biochemically impossible, as if they were plants. Even so, the remaining two carboxylation steps not animals, yet here were animal tissues – our own..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "83 steps; see Appendix 1 if you want to know – the process is rather Let’s not worry about exactly how that works here (it requires several to form a carbon-to-carbon bond: takes the electrons from the 2H and transfers them onto CO 2 , enabling it CO 2 has to be bound onto something very like itself..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "84 (Fd) to form Fd 2– . In the presence of oxygen, Fd 2– is dangerous as need sunlight to transfer the electrons from 2H onto ferredoxin H 2 S, H 2 or H 2 O depending on the type of photosynthesis – but all photosynthesis, powered by sunlight. The 2H could come from Transfer of electrons from 2H to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "85 sizeable yield, but at least they survive to die another day. The penalty staving off an impending catastrophe. Certainly, this can cost plants a lowering the levels of reactive ferredoxin and oxygen simultaneously, again. So it could be that photorespiration acts as a safety valve, NADPH back to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "86 citrate into acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate. The gene encoding ATP citrate ATP citrate lyase. As it says on the tin, this enzyme uses ATP to split own Krebs cycle running backwards, but by a distinct enzyme called CoA is not catalysed by the familiar ‘citrate synthase’ enzyme from our page 101. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "87 Large Hadron Collider at CERN, in Geneva, with a diameter of 27 km. of cyclotrons are called synchrotrons. The largest cyclic particle accelerator is the with the flight of charged particles. As a result, the higher-powered descendants has to be taken into consideration in synchronising the rever..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "88 budget meeting for anything but the timing of his heart attack. Calvin lost 30 kg in weight and quit smoking. It would be unfair to blame the 7 Calvin’s wife Genevieve took matters in hand: under her strict dietary regime, wonders. detrimental mutations are part of natural selection, driving the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "89 twentieth century. revolutionise our understanding of life, the universe and everything in the lead to fundamentally new ways of seeing the world, and which did so much to to develop better ways of assessing radically new ideas in science – the kind that rise above our own baser instincts. For th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "90 NAD + form. We’ll come back to the significance of NADPH in Chapter 5. electrons, whereas NADH tends to offload its electrons, leaving it mostly in the reaction. NADP + is normally present as NADPH, the form that is replete with maintained at very different ratios, enabling them to promote distin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "92 reverse Krebs cycle uses iron–sulfur proteins, notably ferredoxin, to ripe for a new conception of the origin of life. In broad brushstroke, the autotrophic bacteria depend on the Calvin–Benson cycle. The time was was finally gaining credence, as gene sequences made it clear that not all fixation..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "93 these terms for now. Suffice to say that science is often furiously ultimate guide to life’s origin. Don’t worry about the meaning of all accumulation, local or planetary scales, and biology or chemistry as the genes first, autotrophy or heterotrophy, fast chemistry or slow warm ponds, light ener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "94 origin of life, or a question for gene editing and synthetic biology to intractable outcome of metabolism, written into cells from the very are smart enough? Is the difference between ageing and disease an just a trivial outcome of information systems that could be rewired, if we thermodynamics –..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "95 of the early Earth. Now, if all the carbon in organic matter plus limestone record that barely any limestone was laid down beneath the acidic oceans to form in relatively alkaline oceans. We know from the geological There was also much less limestone on the early Earth, for this tends space. made..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "96 have accumulated in warm ponds on land, there is little evidence for that such as cyanide. While relatively stable forms such as ferricyanide might That certainly can’t be said for the alternative theories based on gases CO 2 , were present at the origin of life in nearly unlimited quantities. th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "97 common ancestor, the last universal common ancestor of all life domains of life, implying that this was the only pathway present in their pathway, is found in both bacteria and archaea, the two great prokaryotic fixation across the living world. Just one of these, the acetyl CoA chapter, we now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "98 pathways form overlapping groups of Krebs-cycle intermediates. topologies that operate optimally under diverse conditions. These ‘crystallised’ into five different pathways, with distinct network multiple ways of making Krebs-cycle intermediates, which eventually bacteria and archaea, but it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "99 evolutionary biology or ‘creation science’ in schools. Being a pioneer of Scopes ‘monkey trial’ in the 1920s. Both trials concerned the teaching of McLean versus Arkansas trial, sometimes known as Scopes II, after the public in the early 1980s when called up as an expert witness at the rigour wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "100 Morowitz could not help but see the Krebs cycle as the perfect cyclone Always an admirer of the iconic metabolic charts of biochemistry, hence energy flow powers the cycling of matter. the dissipation of heat means that no pathway is perfectly reversible, energy balance – another great steady-st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "101 Leslie Orgel. serious was pointed out by another pioneering origin-of-life researcher, some grave problems with Morowitz’s view too. Perhaps the most treacherous guide in science, as in life. Life is rarely simple and there are of chemistry give way to the wiles of biology? But beauty can be a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "102 accident’, meaning that the code was essentially random, and became problem of the genetic code, which Crick had pronounced a ‘frozen seeded on Earth by an alien civilisation. That conception grew from the possibility of directed panspermia – the idea that life was deliberately 1970s, which ende..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "103 precisely nothing to amplify. of the final step. Fat chance of autocatalysis. Each cycle would have came the sucker punch. The first step of any cycle depends on the yield without enzymes increasing the selectivity and yield of each step. Then successive steps to regenerate its starting point, c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "104 geological environment – alkaline hydrothermal vents – to the heart of that already has unique explanatory power in connecting an omnipresent from CO 2 and H 2 . That’s a big deal, because it substantiates a hypothesis years, that these Krebs line intermediates do indeed form spontaneously We’ve..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "105 between the oxygen atoms and the mineral surface, depicted here with apposition with the surface and is held in place by electrical attractions to keep things simple. Imagine that a CO 2 molecule comes into close containing iron and sulfur (such as greigite), shown below as a wavy line Consider ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "106 greigite is nearly identical to the tiny clusters of iron and sulfur that remarkable: the lattice structure of iron and sulfur in minerals such as parallel between mineral surfaces and enzymes such as ferredoxin is transfer of electrons onto CO 2 in cells today (see Appendix 1). The mineral surf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "107 sequence showing roughly what happens: transfer of hydrogen, even in the absence of hydrogen itself. Here’s a Overall, the transfer of electrons and protons onto CO 2 equates to the They can then follow the electrons onto CO 2 attached to the surface. onto the surface of the mineral, positioning..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "108 with a nearby proton, in this case forming an OH (an ‘alcohol’ group): in the middle panel that the electron pair on the oxygen is quickly shared same thing can happen repeatedly. So here’s what happens next. Notice to add a hydrogen atom onto the carbon, giving an organic molecule. The proton p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "109 sometimes said that this kind of dehydration is impossible at the origin of reaction: water is being removed in a watery environment. It’s what’s formed overall – water! This is what’s called a dehydration already an excess of OH – ions in the surroundings. And second, look in acidic environment..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "110 and one of the most important molecules in all metabolism. We have just equivalent to acetyl CoA – discovered, if you recall, by Fritz Lipmann, But now look at the product. This bound molecule is a prebiotic enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase catalyses exactly this reaction. process as well as..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "111 concentration of hydrogen in hydrothermal fluids is high, that tends to gas, bubbling straight out of alkaline hydrothermal vents. If the these electrons being replenished from? The answer is simple: hydrogen experiments that start with CO 2 and minerals. But where exactly are all first half. No..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "112 prebiotic chemistry. The most intriguing possibility, which connects cells complex, and involve multiple enzymes, so don’t seem relevant to CO 2 ? There are several ways of doing that, but most of them are to transfer their electrons onto ferredoxin, which then passes them onto The explicit prob..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "113 electrons from H 2 (in the jargon, it is more easily reduced). And when which is to say, the local pH. So, when Ech binds protons, it can accept channel in the membrane, and their properties depend on proton binding, from H 2 to ferredoxin. Two of the clusters sit right next to a proton protein ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "114 Small steps, giant leaps them. verification – for once, not slain by an ugly fact. I take my hat off to absence of a steep pH gradient. This is beautiful experimental organics were formed at normal air pressure, or without H 2 gas, or in the molecules (mainly formate) really did derive from the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "115 (where I talked about protons crossing cell membranes). The electrons crossing inorganic barriers) and organic synthesis in protocells between organic synthesis in inorganic pores (where I talked about If you are unusually alert, you may have noticed a discrepancy inside the protocells – which i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "116 the membrane, whereas a proportion of amino acids should interact with For reasons of physical chemistry, new fatty acids will go straight into principle make copies of itself, and over time can become more complex. Perhaps the most important property of this system is that it can in barriers mu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "117 against. 9 Meaning emerges with function. In other words, the genetic protocell growth (through ‘selfish’ behaviour) would be selected enhance protocell growth would be favoured, while RNA that impedes genetic sequences in terms of protocell growth. Only strings of RNA that think that means zero..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "118 unquestionably a product of genetic information and natural selection; it ATP synthase motor, as noted in Chapter 1. This awesome nanomotor is 22 here. ATP synthesis is powered by proton gradients, which rotate the enables these difficult steps to happen is ATP. There’s an apparent catch- RNA sy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "119 roughly like this: ADP (adenosine diphosphate) to form ATP at modest (20 per cent) yield, thioacetate. Once formed, acetyl phosphate will pass its phosphate onto really does – acetyl phosphate is formed from a two-carbon precursor should occur under prebiotic conditions too, and we have shown th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "120 within vents are the perfect homes for protocells that nestle in the flow and reaction of gases in the environment. The inorganic pores Growth is the non-stop formation of new organics from the continuous H 2 is replenished, and the same reaction can happen all over again. tiny proportion of H 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "121 Synthetic chemists tend to have little interest in the pathways that biochemistry as nucleotides, at high yield, ideally uncontaminated by unwanted products. 3 The tradition of synthetic chemistry aims to make the products of interest, such have been the primordial energy source. relatively comp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "122 giving rise to us; or perhaps there is some deeper reason, buried in the laws of different cosmological constants, and we have to live in one that was capable of ‘finely tuned’. Perhaps there is a multiverse in which different universes have stars, planets, organic chemistry and life as we know ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "123 through selection on protocell growth. RNA, giving a genetic code linked directly with function, that can evolve amino-acid sequence in short peptides depends on the sequence of letters in RNA polymerisation, would then depend on that location. This templating of and potentially interact with me..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "125 cycle, burning them, the revolution that powered the revolution. from the reverse Krebs cycle, making organics, to our own oxidative explosion more than three billion years later. It turned, quite literally, years ago, to the chemistry of 2H and O 2 , powering the Cambrian from the chemistry of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "126 behaviour of oxygen, the world that we know and love could not exist. predominantly two-electron chemistry of carbon, versus the one-electron It’s sobering to realise that without the quantum rules that govern the energy-history of the Earth is the story of oxygen in the air and oceans. other th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "127 about the Krebs line : a linear pathway that arguably preceded the cycle origin of life, where we left off in the previous chapter. There we talked ageing) we need to take the long view, a view that goes right back to the involved (and later in the book, to understand what goes wrong in composed..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "128 (technically, reduced) metals such as iron and nickel. In contrast, the sources, ultimately the Earth’s mantle, which is rich in electron-dense of the electrons that cells need to grow still derive from geological with less H 2 , or extract it from other sources such as H 2 S. Either way, all fr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "129 methane (CH 4 ) and water (H 2 O) as waste products. In this case, each 2H likely CO 2 itself. Transferring 2H onto CO 2 – repeatedly – generates Earth, the most common electron acceptor was not oxygen, but most released is used to pump protons, just as in respiration. On the early electrons fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "130 her classic paper on ferredoxin in 1966. the history of life on Earth like never before. The beginning of it all was protein sequences – the basis of modern phylogenetics – to reconstruct bond energies) with her pioneering computational work on comparing underpinning planetary processes such as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "131 serious disadvantage compared with the more familiar oxygenic for methanogens. The sun provides this power instead. But there is still a without the need for burning fuel to power pumping – the 40-fold cost from a donor (H 2 S) to an acceptor (ferredoxin) and then onto CO 2 , huge advantage here..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "132 horizons, let’s first see how these limits are built into the universal core explore how the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis opened up new synthesis of ATP. This world left its imprint on biochemistry. Before we systems, which were needed to drive the reduction of ferredoxin and the gases s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "133 the same energy constraints). But this efficiency only works under Calvin–Benson cycle (which with oxygenic photosynthesis doesn’t face pyruvate via the reverse Krebs cycle are less than half those of the respect, it’s striking that the ATP costs to make a single molecule of fixing CO 2 . Make t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "134 reflecting an intimate metabolic relationship between the cells: how stoichiometry. This stoichiometry varied with the cells’ colours, comparable distribution of cells, even consistent numbers – a precise bacteria or archaea. The clumps were usually similar in size, with a displaying two differe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "135 decreased, by removing it to form C: increased, by living next to a good source of it (a vent will do), and B is can be pushed in the forward direction if the concentration of A is the direction of a reaction that is close to equilibrium substrates that enter the pathway while removing the end p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "136 not some virgin to placate a medieval dragon, but water. Zap. Repeat. sacrificial gift offered by the trembling priestly protein. This sacrifice is Transiently angry, chlorophyll snatches a replacement from the off down an electron-transport chain embedded in the membrane. excited electron, zapp..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "137 flowing from water – water everywhere! – to synthesise ATP in the first ferredoxin simultaneously. Now, the power of the sun sets electrons scheme, oxygenic photosynthesis could now generate ATP and reduce distinct photosystems used in earlier forms of photosynthesis into the Z ATP, the cramped ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "138 common sense is the worst guide to the history of life. In fact, the levels oxygen in ancient rocks. I admit that doesn’t sound plausible, but being formed reacted swiftly with methane, there would be no trace of evidence against an early evolution of photosynthesis. If all the oxygen may reflec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "139 12 C over 13 C (compared with a standard ratio) by around 30 per mille rubisco, the outcome is that organic carbon becomes slightly enriched in a touch faster, so encounter enzymes more frequently. In the case of bumping into enzymes such as rubisco. Lighter molecules bounce around molecules as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "140 it means. A fall in 13 C relative to 12 C implies that far more carbon was uninterestingly dry and technical? It’s actually shocking! Just think what content), recovering slowly over ten million years. Does that sound standard, to a record 12 per mille below (much lower than the mantle 13 C 13 C..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "141 accumulations of sulfate were raised up high as continents collided and Gondwana together, around 560 million years ago, these great minerals such as gypsum. When the drifting continents brought partially evaporated to form massive deposits of evaporitic sulfate apart, large land masses became s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "142 burrowing through the stagnant muds, remaining active in even the most excess CO 2 or sulfide. Those tough survivors had already adapted to managed to deliver scraps of oxygen to their muscles and clear out circulatory systems that could be actively ventilated, animals that from random, but prim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "143 fumarate and succinate. This is the reverse pathway used in biosynthesis runs through the C3 pyruvate to the C4 oxaloacetate, then onto malate, other oxidative. The reductive prong begins with the C2 acetyl CoA and cycle (see the scheme below). One prong of this fork is reductive, the time they ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "144 switched off, and an alternative enzyme is expressed instead – succinate on and off. Conversely, when oxygen is available fumarate reductase is adaptation to low-oxygen (hypoxic) conditions, switching many genes Accumulation of succinate is a powerful signal for physiological proton pumping and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "145 sulfide, growing and reproducing in this stench, puts a premium on Cambrian explosion? Crawling around in the mud, snuffling through the organisms? And what happened in that traumatic age before the synthesis? What is the difference between microbes and multicellular So why do textbooks still cl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "146 consumes the waste products of another. That helps them to stabilise living symbiotically, with a precise stoichiometry in which one cell type We’ve seen that bacteria and archaea often benefit from company, could underpin the evolution of complex multicellularity in animals. balancing that in a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "147 web of symbiosis between tissues begins to fray. And so we age. biosynthetic pathways falter, ATP synthesis declines and the delicate cells and tissues. Tissue function eventually becomes strained, hundreds or thousands of genes, changing the stable (epigenetic) state of through the Krebs cycle,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "148 citrate. The trouble here is that high levels of oxaloacetate could interfere with broken down into acetyl CoA plus oxaloacetate, both of which can regenerate 4 The eagle-eyed will notice that statement is slightly ambiguous. Citrate is Innsbruck. philosophy), Gnaiger has a wonderful collection ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "149 burial and oxygenation is clearly misguided. levels plummeted to nearly zero. The idea that 13 C variations only reflect carbon That could explain why the 13 C signal is so large, yet soon afterwards oxygen the GOE might have been caused partly by the sequestration of sulfate on land. sulfate fl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "151 cause cancer are not set in stone, but take their meaning from the reflects the society in which we live, so the effects of oncogenes said to human delinquency cannot be blamed on individuals only, but partly is too close to dogma. Biology is not only about information. Just as to dogmas even to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "152 for cancer is older age: cancer incidence increases exponentially with of these actually causes cancer is unclear. Perhaps the greatest risk factor proliferate through pulling on the normal levers of cell division. Which can mutate genes (as they insert into DNA) but also induce cells to chronic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "153 The Warburg effect to explain the root cause of cancer. between energy and growth, the yin and yang of the Krebs cycle, begins those that suppress growth)? In this chapter, we’ll see how the tension growth (whether it be to press down the levers that drive growth, or lift words: how does any met..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "154 quartets: ‘You know Albert, your trouble is that you can’t count!’ Fritz Kreisler to his friend Einstein – the two played together in string people, though I can’t help calling to mind a quip from the great violinist It’s striking how many great scientists are also culturally rounded interest in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "155 Einstein’s reaction to the quirkiness of quantum mechanics: ‘God does itself, nearly perfect.’ To my mind, this remark is in the same vein as applied light energy is lost; on the contrary, the reaction is like the world organic world is based, is not so imperfect that the greater part of the sun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "156 produces ATP, albeit barely a tenth as much. The breakdown of glucose the Krebs cycle and respiration. Like respiration, fermentation also betrays a shortage of oxygen: an inability to make enough ATP through but still somewhat intoxicating. The accumulation of lactate normally has been replaced..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "157 had a deep-seated fear of cancer. His mother, said to be the only person who is a Jew.’ The reasons are shrouded in mystery, but Hitler apparently But he was swiftly reinstated, under Göring’s declaration ‘I will decide 50 per cent Jewish, and he was for a brief period relieved of his position. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "158 cancer. In which case, why has the number of papers citing it risen so Warburg effect. So, the Warburg effect is certainly not a universal key to outside and burn it in their mitochondria, in what’s called the reverse for their energy needs. Some cancer cells even take up lactate from to new cel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "159 rather than a genetic disease, but his focus on cell respiration missed the Warburg was arguably right that cancer is fundamentally a metabolic do indeed all induce some form of metabolic rewiring. know that many oncogenes, tumour suppressor genes and cancer viruses Warburg dismissed as obscurin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "160 get the balance between ATP, NADPH and carbon skeletons right. ATP for growth (and so cancer), and cells must wire their metabolism to NADPH. All in all, making NADPH is at least as important as making programmed cell death. Cancer cells escape this fate by making more vulnerable to oxidative st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "161 on how many proteins are actually made. The workhorses of tissues are carbon or NADPH), although in this case the demand depends primarily ATP demands (joining monomers together in chains costs ATP but not ATP. The synthesis of RNA, DNA and especially proteins has higher nucleotides also consume..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "162 excitement of his perspective on the Krebs cycle in cancer has never left his department. I have no idea what I talked about that day – but the the first time from Christian Frezza in Cambridge, before I gave a talk in the C4 intermediate succinate. I’ve never forgotten hearing about this for hy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "163 complex II and the right-hand complex is the nanomotor ATP synthase): enzyme. Overall, it works like this (where CI depicts complex I, CII is little ATP synthesis in animals that possess the fumarate reductase electron flow allows the pumping of four protons at complex I, driving a to fumarate i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "164 certain death? Look at the genes that it targets. They include genes for So how does HIF 1α making it to the nucleus in time save the cell from oxygen emergency. the protein can make it to the nucleus in time, in the rare event of an continuously just to ensure that fully functional (spanking ne..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "165 sobering. I’ll come back to a couple of these in the next chapter but just of medical conditions where this mechanism turns out to be relevant is levels, which are counteracted through changes in gene activity. The list slight impairments in Krebs-cycle flux give a read-out of succinate time fee..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "166 cancers glutamine. I have a vivid memory of discussing glutamine and substrates serve all of their needs. And of the two of them ... give the Most cancers need no more than glucose and glutamine to grow. These Another reversal Krebs cycle. in the form of the amino acid glutamine. And that, too, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "167 DeBerardinis and colleagues in 2012. They reported in Nature that cells The first wave of the storm came from Navdeep Chandel, Ralph urgently before his blackboard. Molecules acquire personality this way. whenever I think of glutamine, I can’t help but see Moncada pacing Institute for Cancer Sci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "168 means that the ATP synthase stops spinning. So protons no longer flow series. If demand for ATP is low, then ATP is not being consumed, which inside your cells right now? Everything in your mitochondria is linked in around reading this book), so demand for ATP is low. What’s going on into explos..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "169 NADH flips the direction of transhydrogenase enzyme. This now so NADH levels fall. The shift in the balance between NADPH and falls. Now NADH can transfer electrons into the respiratory chain again, though its rotary motor. As protons flow back inside, membrane potential spent, the ATP synthase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "170 glutamine looks something like the diagram on the next page: making citrate, supporting cancer cell growth. Overall, the flux from Mutations keep the enzyme jammed in reverse mode, so it keeps on because they lock in a flux that is already beneficial for cancer cells. reinforce this shift in can..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "171 strip out the acetyl group, switching off the growth signal. But their is reinforced by the context. The sirtuins are a group of enzymes that and proliferation – another signal that says grow! This epigenetic switch switch’ known as acetylation. The genes switched on drive cell growth histones. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "172 broken down to acetyl CoA. And we’ve seen the havoc that can cause. from glutamine in this way. Alternatively, from pyruvate, you can be washed out as waste. Much of the lactate excreted by cancer cells comes needed for biosynthesis. From pyruvate, you can form lactate and be C3 pyruvate, plus (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "173 oxygen in the normal way. Glycerol phosphate can be recycled by from outside the mitochondria. These electrons are transferred onto stripped of 2H, which is fed into complex III of the respiratory chain involving the Krebs cycle. It works like this. Glycerol phosphate is to generate electrical m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "174 splurged as ammonia rather than urea, promoting this vicious cycle while mutations in genes for the urea cycle. That way, excess nitrogen is free fossil fuels for the filthiest polluters. Cancer cells often acquire maintains a copious supply of free glutamine. It’s as if a state provides From th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "175 cancer cells. acetone). Yet even these metabolic hurdles are not insurmountable for make sugars from fats (although it can be done via the C3 intermediary presence tends to switch off growth signals. It’s also notoriously tricky to Because our physiology links ketone bodies with starvation, thei..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "176 deriving from the Krebs cycle. Electrons enter from NADH and pass on through the respiratory chain, and the only entry point for NADH us to the second problem. Complex I is the beginning of the longest route compensated somewhat through suppression of complex I. That brings We’ll see in the next..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "177 or don’t know about the treatments he was receiving; but also, how many for fun. He was acutely aware of his chances, and exactly what we know think. Full of zest. Always active. A man who would run up mountains and a smile to light a room, who taught me much about how to write and education, a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "178 structure, which is functionally identical, but relates to how far each one has been 3 The reason NAD P H has more power than NADH has nothing to do with the physical danger. unquestionably applied to both Warburg and Haldane – and a tendency to enjoy there is any correlation between those given..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "179 former chloroplasts. This has retained some genes that derive from the original malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum , which has a plastid derived from its called a plastid) which they use for other purposes. A famous example is the ability to photosynthesise altogether, but retained their ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "180 immunity to viral infections. Who knew they had an immune system? editing technology of CRISPR was discovered by scientists studying bacterial insights deriving from plant scientists. In a similar way, remember that the gene quarters. Focusing funding on research into human cancer would miss pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "182 to counter the effects of hundreds, nay thousands or millions of SNPs, a consume us from within. To reverse the afflictions of older age would be then we will be afflicted by a maelstrom of implacable spectres that our expected chronological time (protected by the wonders of society), and so on...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "183 genomics. Genome-wide association studies assign additive risk to The problem of missing heritability is more startling in this age of heritability of height is about 0.8. too, regardless of their upbringing. For comparison’s sake, the condition, then the other twin has about a 50 per cent chanc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "184 Wallace made ‘cybrids’, in which the genes in the nucleus came from between the mitochondria and nuclear genes. To study these interactions, nucleus too. That cooperation can be undermined by incompatibilities on the mitochondrial gene; it needs to cooperate with the genes in the cell to grow no..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "185 mitochondrial DNA into diagnostic chunks using ‘restriction enzymes’, passed on) but Wallace used a spanking new method (cutting up mitochondrial genes (the father’s mitochondrial genes are usually not Others had already established the idea of ‘uniparental inheritance’ of humans, mitochondrial ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "186 groups can be used to track the migrations of humans out of Africa into accumulation of differences in mitochondrial DNA between diverging human mitochondrial DNA, around 160,000 years ago. The gradual female, now known as ‘mitochondrial Eve’, the ancestor of all modern mitochondrial variations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "187 only dared to disagree; he was usually right. His legacy can be seen in anatomy. Galen had been undisputed for 1,400 years, but Vesalius not Vesalius did not fear to pick a fight with the ancients on points of landscapes. These plates pack a punch that has echoed down centuries. in various state..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "188 That signals directly to the nucleus, through succinate and citrate, is not being consumed) then Krebs-cycle flux must slow or even reverse. we saw in Chapter 5, if the electrical potential is too high (because ATP feeds back, shaping forward or reverse flux through the Krebs cycle. As strengthe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "189 genetics and mitochondrial function in Melbourne and was now full of mine at University College London. She had done her PhD in fly I knew little of this until Flo Camus arrived in the lab next door to confess to quite a strong fellow feeling. gaining their proteins from the yeast that ferments ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "190 people from other cultures is as human as we can get, and I will always divergent populations within the same species? Falling in love with mitochondrial and nuclear genes. So what about crosses between cause ‘hybrid breakdown’, attributed to incompatibilities between But where should we draw th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "191 Just one line. The other lines looked a bit ropey but seemed OK. We affect the males much. Yet it killed most of the females in one fly line! antioxidant. We tried one called NAC (for N -acetylcysteine), but it didn’t The cure seemed obvious: lower the stress. Give the flies an stressing the tes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "192 the suppression of respiration by NAC. That’s surprising, because ROS flight muscles of the thorax – it remained more or less constant, despite finding was that ROS flux hardly changed, least of all in the powerful The answer seems to be linked to the flux of ROS. A really striking the antioxida..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "193 Gla Inwongwan in my lab are looking into that right now, so I can’t tell of tissues: which genes are switched on or off. Enrique Rodriguez and respiration, NAC has to be having serious effects on the epigenetic state downstream effects on the activity of thousands of genes. By suppressing lower ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "194 linking together different bits of a protein, disulfide bridges change the with GSSG, oxidised thiols in proteins tend to form disulfide bridges. By There are more layers. GSH can also regenerate thiols in proteins. As the form GSSG in the flies that died. glutathione pool was more oxidised – a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "195 within a normal range. We know that the only difference between our fly suppression of complex I did indeed bring elevated ROS flux back flux was in fact unchanged in muscle tissue, so presumably the complex I, which in principle decreases ROS flux. We know that ROS that oxidation of glutathione..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "196 correlation between metabolic rate (the rate of living) and lifespan. The rate would have slowed down too). My point is that there is a broad done so, they would likely have lived a little longer (albeit their heart intend to use up any of mine running around doing exercises.’ If they had the wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "197 why lifespan only correlates loosely with metabolic rate – but to ignore in the first place? The contrasting answers to these questions explain spend on cleaning up the mess or preventing the mess from building up in reproduction or competing for a mate? How much do you want to to live anyway? W..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "198 or Krebs-cycle flux much when we’re strutting our stuff in our tails). Presumably, any incremental damage does not impede respiration glucose to react with proteins and lipids, decorating them with ‘sticky’ linking, oxidation by ROS or glycation (the tendency of sugars such as damage, whether th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "199 whereas less fit individuals can’t sustain both biosynthesis and energy once, with the Krebs cycle in full forwards mode much of the time, individuals have a respiratory system that is capable of doing both at on the relative allocation of resources to growth or energy: the fittest the amazing e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "200 linked with ageing? variations in nuclear genes. So how exactly are age-related diseases established genetic risk for these conditions is explained by known spectre of missing heritability means that only a small proportion of the or some heart condition. Take your pick. We’re all individuals. B..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "201 on which genes are active, overlaid on the energetic and biosynthetic tissues express different genes, with the effects of each SNP depending activation in the nucleus, tissue by tissue. By their very nature, different to the dwindling availability of ATP and the shifting pattern of gene rather ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "202 easily by the brain, despite high levels in the bloodstream. Perpetually insulin secretion. As secreted insulin levels fall, glucose is taken up less glucose itself – lowers the membrane potentials achievable, which saps islet mitochondria – damage that’s typically caused by the reactivity of pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "203 the mitochondria, activating pyruvate dehydrogenase further and MAMs attempt to compensate for this deficit by pumping more Ca 2+ into glucose, but insulin resistance means that they struggle to do so. 10 The Think about the problem here. To fire normally, neurons must take up now let’s just see..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "204 (10 23 , or 100,000,000,000, 000,000,000,000). I’m now in my mid-fifties, sustained by an incomprehensible one hundred billion trillion reactions thirty trillion cells, so in the last second your tranquil demeanour was billion metabolic reactions every second. 11 You are composed of at least loo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "205 longer-lived animals restrict ROS flux from complex I, simply by down- rate. Recent work from Gustavo Barja in Madrid suggests that these their land-lubber cousins with a similar body size or resting metabolic Animals with the power of flight live as much as ten times longer than repairing damag..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "206 maxim was ‘Nothing to excess’. Think about how hard it is to change and die. We each need to learn that lesson for ourselves. The second defines us as individuals and humans, but they knew well how to live have imagined the invisible metabolic flux dancing through genes that inscribed three maxi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "207 immature oocytes, why most of those die before birth, why oocytes are then female germline – why germ cells proliferate to form up to eight million quality operates gives striking insights into the developmental architecture of the found in human populations. Thinking about how selection for mit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "208 that are not still not fully explained. the demands on visceral organs such as the liver fall with body size, for reasons size. The great Canadian comparative biochemist Peter Hochachka showed that Sex, Suicide for a critique of this idea). And it partly relates to the economies of networks, as ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "209 resistant, to the point that Alzheimer’s disease has been termed ‘type 3 diabetes’. resistant’, but more recent work indicates that neurons do indeed become insulin affect the uptake of glucose by the brain, hence the brain could not be ‘insulin directly toxic to proteins). For a long time, it w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "210 environments or response to infections, but that’s another story. responsiveness to rapid change, perhaps in terms of adaptability to variable respiration. That would predict there are evolutionary costs in limiting the why mitochondria retain genes at all; he argues they are needed to control a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "212 such as fruit flies. As Turin puts it, ‘While it is not known to what extent means we can study consciousness in some simple experimental models but is something more fundamental that works at the level of cells. This emergent property of the complex nervous systems of higher animals, paramecium..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "213 the hydrophobic pockets of proteins sitting within the mitochondrial Let’s get back to xenon. All this suggests that xenon concentrates in stuff of science fiction. But it seems they do. known. Even he admits that brains emitting radio waves sounds like the reputation for being difficult. His sc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "214 interfere with each other (cancelling out) or can link in phase to generate that electromagnetic fields interact with each other – separate fields can mitochondria. But there are some broader principles too about the way attempting to measure the strength of electromagnetic fields in individual ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "215 behaviour under the microscope, the way they move around, explore, fields on their mitochondrial membranes. Just watch their amazing think about protists such as paramecium, which also generate electrical Let’s put aside multicellular organisms with their nervous systems and music as the fields ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "216 counterattack, chopping up the DNA into bits before the virus can copy exposure to the virus, it can recognise the viral DNA and marshal a editing. If the bacterium (or indeed its ancestors) has had an earlier learnt to exploit, called CRISPR, which allow for sophisticated gene much chance, but ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "217 malate, then oxaloacetate, or perhaps an amino acid or sugar. You are a succinate for long. In a tiny fraction of a second, you will transform into are you part of the same entity, the same self? You won’t even be molecule of succinate across the city, twenty miles away? In what sense scale of L..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "218 that forges the oneness of self. You are a moment in a life. through a living cell on this restless planet of ours, the rush of change bacterium. You have just been part of something magic, the flow of life dancing electromagnetic fields, shifting the mood, the living states of a oxygen, heat or..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "219 it is the movement that creates the form. to this mortal process of continuing, Even though we give (give up) ourselves it is the movement that negates the form? Were we mistaken? What does it matter if it is the movement that achieves the form. beguiling our attention – we supposed it is the mo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "220 The forward Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "221 The reverse Krebs cycle"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "222 CH 3 ). The first step goes like this: ‘R’ depicted in the example above corresponds to a methyl group (- activated to react with CO 2 , to form the C3 pyruvate. In other words, the Let’s think about a specific example – how acetate (a C2 molecule) is works. central to modern metabolism that it’..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "223 molecule of CO 2 , giving the C3 pyruvate: willing to react. In the final step, the CoA-S – can now be substituted for a way (as there is in acetyl phosphate). And that makes the carbon more joined directly to a sulfur atom, without there being an oxygen in the The important thing to notice here..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "224 electrical charge), which is symbolised by the Greek symbol delta (δ). towards themselves, giving them a slightly negative charge (not a full-on because the oxygen atoms have a strong tendency to pull electrons bond structure. But this structure is under some electrical strain. That’s that faces..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "225 water is shown as a product. Yet that seems to have gone missing in There’s only one other thing to notice here. In the first scheme above, exits the stage. instant that the CoA-S – grabs the electrons in its bond with acetate and from ferredoxin are transferred onto the two carbon atoms in the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "226 Biology magics water away. on the phosphate), but it’s nowhere to be seen as an independent entity. marked by the dashed lines (one of the oxygens plus two of the protons As happens so often in the chemistry of life, the water is there alright, newly released phosphate ion. So the overall reacti..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "227 bound onto the surface of the mineral: this time giving pyruvate (or more technically, a pyruvyl group), again hops across to join the CO (the same Fischer–Tropsch-type chemistry), can’t recall where the CO comes from). Once again, the acetyl group group is bound on near to another CO (check bac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "228 called ‘alpha carbon’. This arrangement is unusually reactive. Here’s oxygen on the first carbon atom next to the carboxylate group, a so- pattern slightly, because pyruvate possesses an extra double-bonded The next few steps build on what we’ve already seen, but alter the beautifully simple. pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "229 you can see it interacting with the surface better: the charge on one of the two oxygens of the carboxylate group. That way Cheshire Cat smile, but in the more conventional way that emphasises here. In this case, I’m not going to draw the pyruvate with its normal mineral surface) can abstract a ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "230 reacting with CO to form the C4 oxaloacetate: before. Here’s the enol form of pyruvate binding to a surface and then to react with other bound molecules such as CO, exactly as we’ve seen means an enol can bind to a mineral surface, and once bound will be able easily if the oxygen picks up a prot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "231 plentiful. I’m not showing their movements any more, but recall that two Remember that we’re in a mildly acidic environment, where protons are oxaloacetate, allowing the oxygen to wrest its electrons from the carbon: of electrons transfers from the surface onto the alpha carbon of continue to re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "232 experiments. mineral surfaces, and at last, the results of some revolutionary on the known reactivity of carboxylic acids, the known behaviour of but the first few steps are exactly as predicted from first principles, based prebiotic chemistry will form citrate or the complete reverse Krebs cycl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "233 molecules). An important cellular antioxidant. oxidised form (where an H has been extracted from each of two GSH GSH Glutathione. GSH is the reduced form (containing H) and GSSG is the classic is the 4Fe4S cluster. sulfur, containing just a few atoms, with structures similar to minerals. The FeS..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "234 antioxidant glutathione. Found in coenzyme A, the amino acid cysteine (and so many proteins) and the -SH A thiol, containing a sulfur joined to a hydrogen, which is quite reactive. ‘free radicals’ and related molecules. oxygen grabs single electrons from FeS clusters in the respiratory chain to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "235 SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "236 Finally Solving the Mystery of Life (London, Penguin, 2019). An eloquent Paul Davies, The Demon in the Machine: How Hidden Webs of Information are The paradox of information in biology published scientific journal. Includes a light-touch historical overview. Philosophical Transactions of the Roy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "237 bacterial evolution. transfer has refocused attention on physiology as an organising principle in power of genetic information. Ironically, the scrambling power of lateral gene brought to an end the classical era of microbiology, ceding precedence to the Mikrobiologie 42 (1962) 17–35. A paper of..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "238 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 101 (2004) 13168–13173. E. Smith and H. J. Morowitz, ‘Universality in intermediary metabolism’, Deep unity of biochemistry – the conserved city-centre plan (and justly famous). larger group; as close to the paradigm of molecular medicine as it ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "239 869–871. The text of Gowland Hopkins’s anniversary address to the Royal F. Gowland Hopkins, ‘Atomic physics and vital activities’, Nature 130 (1932) Hopkins’s biochemistry lab Chapter 1: Discovering the nanocosm which, in the way of science, has since been proved at least partly wrong. appeal to..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "240 instrument invented by T. G. Brodie and others. short history that explains how Warburg’s name came to be associated with an use’, Journal of Chemical Education 41 (1964) 294–296. An enjoyably breezy P. Oesper, ‘The history of the Warburg apparatus. Some reminiscences on its inspiring piece, whi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "241 Volume 1 (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991). A monumental tome of Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: The Formation of a Scientific Life 1900–1933 . aimed at medics. 736–738. An immediate perspective on the cycle, written by Krebs alone and H. A. Krebs, ‘The intermediate metabolism of carbohydr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "242 Royal Society Memoirs . Features the memorable closing line that Lipmann died 88 (2006) 246–266. The US National Academy of Sciences equivalent to the W. P. Jenks and R. V. Wolfenden, ‘Fritz Albert Lipmann’, Biographical Memoirs system is essential at the very start of life.’ Plus ça change. an ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "243 recognised. to my mind Moyle’s vital experimental contribution has not been sufficiently Mitchell’s original paper on chemiosmotic coupling or his ‘little grey books’, but by Mitchell and Moyle in Nature in the mid-1960s, less heavily cited than mitochondria’, Nature 208 (1965) 147–151. One of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "244 (1981) 381–382. An influential paper that stands out in my mind for not even J. E. Baldwin and H. A. Krebs, ‘The evolution of metabolic cycles’, Nature 291 Evolution of the Krebs cycle University Press, 2021), a unique distillation from a remarkable nonagenarian. latest is On Life: Cells, Genes ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "245 scientific biography, with many memorable character portraits of the leading (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). A remarkable and absorbing Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age Lawrence and the Rad Lab discovered by Ellis himself. Rubisco by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "246 trying hard not to be bitter. Calvin until decades later, when he finally broke his silence. One senses he was Photosynthesis Research 73 (2002) 29–49. Benson said little about his time with A. A. Benson, ‘Following the path of carbon in photosynthesis: a personal story’, that those who fund res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "247 of recollections from the main protagonists of the reverse Krebs cycle, fifty years 2016’, Photosynthesis Research 134 (2017) 117–131. A fascinating compendium R. Tabita and I. A. Berg, ‘The Arnon–Buchanan cycle: a retrospective, 1966– B. B. Buchanan, R. Sirevåg, G. Fuchs, R. N. Ivanovsky, Y. Ig..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "248 autotrophic growth of a thermophilic bacterium’, Science 359 (2018) 563–567. A A. Mall, J. Sobotta, C. Huber et al ., ‘Reversibility of citrate synthase allows Widespread reverse Krebs cycle when oxygen is present. this paper just highlights how difficult it is to operate the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "249 from two distinguished marine biologists, John Baross and Deb Kelley, who had overview of the different types of vent system and their roles at the origin of life, origin of life’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 805–814. A good W. Martin, J. Baross, D. Kelley and M. J. Russell, ‘Hydrotherm..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "250 prokaryotes, and from prokaryotes to nucleated cells’, Philosophical evolutionary transitions from abiotic geochemistry to chemoautotrophic W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origins of cells: a hypothesis for the Krebs cycle. their detailed thinking on Peter Mitchell’s protonmotive force and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "251 would have had to take place in high-pressure atmospheres. Here he teams up the origin of life involving an unusual form of ‘zinc sulfide photosynthesis’ that is a distinguished bioenergeticist who has had some strikingly original ideas on National Academy of Sciences USA 109 (2012) E821–830. Ar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "252 that they trained as synthetic chemists, yet are thinking from a biochemical point Ecology and Evolution 2 (2018) 1019–1024. Joseph Moran’s group is unusual in CO 2 to intermediates and end-products of the acetyl-CoA pathway’, Nature S. J. Varma, K. B. Muchowska, P. Chatelain and J. Moran, ‘Nati..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "253 lived from H 2 and CO 2 using proton gradients and iron–sulfur proteins. While some details have been decried, the paper reinforces the idea that LUCA simple cells subsisting in vents in the neverland between the abiotic and biotic. advance a striking portrait of the physiology of LUCA – as a po..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "254 with his long-term collaborator, the equally brilliant Eric Smith. Deserves a place 2016). A magisterial volume, and fitting final testament of Morowitz, written Emergence of the Fourth Geosphere (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, Eric Smith and Harold J. Morowitz, The Origin and Nature of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "255 the thermodynamically permissible. of data and mechanisms on the energetics of making a living at the margins of conservation’, Nature Reviews Microbiology 6 (2008) 579–591. A treasure-trove ‘Methanogenic archaea: ecologically relevant differences in energy R. K. Thauer, A.-K. Kaster, H. Seedorf..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "256 steep pH gradients (as much as 3 or 4 pH units across single nanocrystals). million times faster than hydroxide ions going the other way, giving rise to very experimental results, showing that protons can cross iron–sulfur barriers two Interface Focus 9 (2019) 20190073. A detailed theoretical pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "257 our own current thinking on the origins of the genetic code. possible for protocells to get better at copying themselves. The basis for much of acids) and iron–sulfur clusters drive a form of membrane heredity that makes it show that positive feedbacks between organic molecules (fatty acids and ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "258 and pushes its central thesis a little too far. generation of young minds into palaeontology. But it has not weathered so well, (New York, W. W. Norton, 1989). A heady book that must have drawn a Stephen Jay Gould, Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the History of Nature Cambrian explosion Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "259 1 (2017) 0138. A sweeping take from Olivia Judson on how a succession of O. Judson, ‘The energy expansions of evolution’, Nature Ecology and Evolution environmental change to the simple gas oxygen. A valuable corrective. Geobiology 7 (2009) 1–7. Quite a diatribe against the lazy ascription of dr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "260 of eukaryotes. An honour to contribute. issue of the journal in which she published her classic 1967 paper on the origin Margulis’s contribution to cell evolution, written for a special fiftieth anniversary Journal of Theoretical Biology 434 (2017) 58–67. My own appraisal of Lynn N. Lane, ‘Seria..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "261 abruptly. The intellectual son and grandson of James Lovelock (using PhD Gaia) can flip from one stable state to another as conditions change, sometimes Oxford University Press, 2013). A detailed overview of how the Earth system (or Tim Lenton and Andrew Watson, Revolutions that Made the Earth (..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "262 was linked to the Cambrian explosion. Not a straightforward case! A marshalling of the evidence that the rise in oxygen in the late Neoproterozoic geochemical evidence and biological consequences’, GSA Today 21 (2011) 4–11. G. Shields-Zhou and L. Och, ‘The case for a Neoproterozoic oxygenation e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "263 gave rise to eukaryotic cells with large, complex genomes. They have to be right. cross-talk between the host cells and endosymbionts (proto-mitochondria) that I spotted it earlier. Argues that Krebs-cycle intermediates were critical to the read this paper after finishing the book and would have..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "264 Warburg’s papers. Much has changed since then, of course, but his closing line cause of cancer, and with a similar anger (but a completely different view) to the same year that Rous received the Nobel prize for his work on viruses as a 1361. Quite a diatribe against the somatic mutation theory o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "265 impacts on tumor metabolism’, Cancer & Metabolism 4 (2016) 5. A lively and A. M. Otto, ‘Warburg effect(s)—a biographical sketch of Otto Warburg and his side. accomplishments, while finding kind words to allay Warburg’s less appealing Krebs at his most gentlemanly in highlighting his mentor’s gre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "266 searing piece that I quote from in some detail in my chapter. Worth taking a look O. Warburg, ‘On the origin of cancer cells’, Science 123 (1956) 309–314. A decades. in cancer cells, which became the basis for his work on cancer over the following Warburg’s first publication on cancer, showing e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "267 An ancient switch critical role of mitochondria in cancer. hardly need to say that he was one of the strongest voices calling attention to the chapter, in part because I discussed his ideas at some length in Chapter 6. I 685–698. I neglected to say much about Doug Wallace’s work on cancer in thi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "268 to glutamine, in this case in HeLa cells. On that count, I feel obliged to point you (1955) 501–514. One of the first papers to point to the addiction of cancer cells H. Eagle, ‘Nutrition needs of mammalian cells in tissue culture’, Science 122 Glutamine in cancer easily achieved in humans. oxyg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "269 the Krebs cycle can be turbocharged. mitochondria’, FEBS Letters 344 (1994) 109–116. A lovely paper showing how which contributes to fine regulation of the tricarboxylic acid cycle activity in NAD- and NADP-linked isocitrate dehydrogenases operate in a substrate cycle L. A. Sazanov and J. B. Jac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "270 Introduction to OXPHOS Analysis (Innsbruck, Bioenergetics Communications, Erich Gnaiger, Mitochondrial Pathways and Respiratory Control. An paper. inputs to the respiratory chain in this book. If you want diagrams, check out this and fed into the Krebs cycle. I’ve talked about a few of these alt..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "271 this book does not focus on ageing it is one of the finest and most influential positive benefits in youth that outweigh disadvantages with older age). While known forbiddingly as antagonistic pleiotropy (meaning that genes can have Williams independently put forward a similar view of ageing to ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "272 paper from Doug Wallace’s PhD thesis on cybrids treated with antibiotics. inheritance in mammalian tissue culture cells’, In Vitro 12 (1976) 758–776. The D. C. Wallace, Y. Pollack, C. L. Bunn and J. M. Eisenstadt, ‘Cytoplasmic Doug Wallace and advances in mitochondrial research DNA. and heartfel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "273 boundaries of Western medicine, with its twin pillars grounded in the work of D. C. Wallace, ‘Mitochondria as chi’, Genetics 179 (2008) 727–735. Pushing the mutations in mitochondrial DNA. the female germline can be understood in terms of selection against detrimental eLife 10 (2021) e69344. A m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "274 mitochondria under different stress compared with adult flies. Giving them the Frontiers in Genetics 12 (2021) 734255. Larvae just eat and grow, placing the interactions produce diverging responses to mild stress in Drosophila larvae’, E. Rodríguez, F. Grover Thomas, M. F. Camus and N. Lane, ‘Mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "275 plenty of objections, but the ideas are stimulating. Here, West develops them at Enquist and James Brown, which I’m not citing individually here. There are physicist who has published revolutionary papers on fractal scaling, with Brian Cities and Companies (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "276 respiratory suppression producing a shift in metabolic flux and epigenetic state. weak, at older age, to shut down. I explain the same observations in terms of results from the overrun of other developmental programs that selection is too theory’. According to this theory there is no program ‘fo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "277 of the term ‘sweet mitochondria’ (the term ‘diabetes mellitus’ means sweet Alzheimer’s Disease 62 (2018) 1391–1401. Never was there a more sinister use P. I. Moreira, ‘Sweet mitochondria: a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’, Journal of need to mind my diet. 1113. The evidence is mounting that Alz..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "278 Epilogue: Self that you really should know about. calculate this particular parameter, but they calculate many other amazing things calculations on the number of metabolic reactions per second in cells. They don’t knew you had about cells. I’m citing this book in relation to Joana Xavier’s Scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "279 medium for dynamic control of growth and form’, Biosystems 164 (2018) 76–93. M. Levin and C. J. Martyniuk, ‘The bioelectric code: an ancient computational Electrical fields in development mitochondrial membranes generate the EEG. with autism in humans. At least consistent with the much bolder hy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "280 summarises their ideas. free energy’ to distinguish it from more conventional usage. This formal paper Friston, whose concept of free energy in this context is sometimes called ‘Friston 25 (2018) 202–238. Solms’s ideas on consciousness were developed with Karl considerations from physics and phy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "281 fields give cells their unity. suspect that this loss of orientation is just one manifestation of how electrical – collapse the potential and bacteria can’t figure out how to divide in two. I is that they can only achieve this when there is an electrical membrane potential the constricting appar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "282 intermediates, either as a product of CO 2 fixation at the origin of life, or both groups, in their different ways, have been working on Krebs-cycle subjects had little in common beyond the centrality of energy flow. Yet in fruit flies. Before reading this book, you might have thought those one ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "283 read the whole book, pointing out more stylistic faux pas than I would used to climb together, but now we reminisce. Allyson Jones has also to say nothing of the music, conversation, sea walks and good cheer. We me going through darker days with unreasonably enthusiastic comments, Carter has rea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "284 intermediary metabolism. I’ll never forget our lunch together, where we cycle than Lee, yet he can still barely trammel his excitement about bigger picture. No one in the world today knows more about the Krebs whole book and made many penetrating comments, while celebrating the friendship. I am ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "285 on salt balance and thirst in animals. I confess that I had put the question energy and plans. He had been drawn into the subject through his work with Prof. Derek Denton, now in his nineties, yet still overflowing with alone in that). That led me into a long and enjoyable correspondence Life As..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "286 touched strive to be the best we can be. I hadn’t appreciated how many a zestful sense that anything is possible, which would make those he immense impact on my life. He had buoyant energy, warmth of spirit and legacy is to influence the lives of others for the better. Ian had an dedicate this b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "287 dimension. I have tried to say in this book, yet in a few lines from another permission to reprint the poem. It somehow captures the essence of what Revelations’ to my attention, and Richard Howard for his gracious Finally, I thank Cliff Hanks for bringing the poem ‘Like Most (and for responding..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "288 and individuality 234–6, 238, 243 compensatory 247 alleles suppression of respiration 230, 259–60, 262, 264 predisposing to cancer 25, 195, 229–32 mechanism of 260–67 Krebs cycle reversal and 111, 259 glycolysis and carbon fixation 230–31 free radical theory 257–9, 262 and flux capacitance 245 d..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "289 see also GOE atmospheric oxygen balance 177 of other planets 165 early/primordial 76, 109–10, 114, 119, 165 atmospheres assembly line analogy 170, 208 aspartate 179n5, 224–7 Asimov, Isaac 248 ascorbic acid (vitamin C) 44–5, 48, 252 artificial intelligence (AI) 13, 274 Arnon, Daniel 98–100, 102, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "290 acetyl CoA pathway in 122–3, 151 bacteria and archaea bacteria, autotrophic 85n4, 102, 114 rubisco in 108 reverse Krebs cycle 73, 78, 100, 101 origins of mitochondria 68–9, 167, 281 non-photosynthetic 110 molecular phylogenetics 166 bacteria, ancient vent bacteria 110, 163n2 sulfur bacteria 100,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "291 prebiotic 24, 275 Krebs cycle as source 20, 33, 115, 161 as fundamental 4, 6, 9–10, 131 building blocks of life, molecular Buckel, Wolfgang 163n2 Buchanan, Bob 100, 104 radio emissions and EEG signals 277–9 oxidative Krebs cycle in 187 glucose preference 265–8, 280 electrical fields in 280 brain..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "292 carbon-11 ( 11 C) 80–81, 83–4, 85n4, 178 CARA (Council for At-Risk Academics) 31n1 cancer viruses 205 Cancer Genome Atlas 193 glucose fermentation 197, 201–2, 208–9n4 effect of transplanting 25, 194 effect of glutamine deprivation 216 cancer cells use of radioisotopes 80 as metabolic, rather tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "293 and mitochondria 242 cell death, programmed (apoptosis) 194, 205, 207, 213, 216 catalysts, protein see enzymes thermodynamics and 22 succinate as 46 ornithine as 52–3 nucleic acids and nucleotides 129, 148 metal ions 131, 152 iron-sulfide mineral surfaces 135–9 biochemical cycles as catalytic 53..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "294 CoA-S - 289–90, 292 coenzyme A (CoA) 56–7, 128 , 140, 295–6 coal and oil 139, 177 cloud chambers 86–7 citric acid cycle see Krebs cycle citrate synthase 110–11, 123 301 reverse Krebs cycle 101, 105, 110–11, 128 , 216–19, 221, 287 , 300– in respiration 51–2, 54–5 removal in the Krebs cycle 172–3,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "295 and the effects of ageing 25, 232, 233, 264, 268, 272 and drug response 15 diet diabetes 21, 189, 243, 266, 268n10 Delphi, Temple of Apollo 272–3 dehydration reactions 138 DeBerardinis, Ralph 217 Dayhoff, Margaret 164–8 Davies, Paul 129n6 ‘Darwin’s dilemma’ 157 cytochrome oxidase 35–6n3, 49, 199..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "296 electron-transport chains 174 by ferredoxin 288 in carbon dioxide reduction 133–41 in anaesthesia 277, 279 electron transfers electron spin resonance 276–7 hydrogen from hydrothermal vents 141 H 2 S as 166–7 ferredoxin as 105–6 electron donors, alternative electron bifurcation 163n2 Einstein, Al..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "297 of glucose with ageing 230 of glucose in cancer 197, 201–2, 208–9n4 alcoholic 170 fermentation ‘ferment’, respiratory 35–6, 64n11, 199, 216 Fendt, Sarah-Maria 261n7 FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) 48 extinct species, resurrecting 238–9 exoplanets 119 exercise 25, 223, 232–3, 256, 264, 268 of t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "298 late-acting genes 234, 236–7 globin genes 187 activated by HIF 1α 212, 215 genes gene editing 14, 228n7, 282 Gell-Mann, Murray 124 tissue slice experiments 33–8 pressure and hydrogen availability 142 gas pressures fumarate reductase 185, 210–11, 213 fumarate hydratase 210, 215, 217, 220 fumarate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "299 metabolic shift with age 231 metabolic shift in cancer 196, 205, 209, 213, 223–4 growth groups, chemical 38–9n4 greigite 121, 133, 135 Gould, Stephen Jay 156n1 GOE (the Great Oxidation Event) 176, 178, 181, 182n6, 186 Gnaiger, Erich 171–2 and tissue ATP demands 188, 201 NAD + -to-NADH ratios 179..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "300 in biosynthesis 73, 106–7, 108n11, 128 , 206 balanced in Krebs non-cycle 185, 201 hydrogen (2H) hydride ions 136, 297 ‘hybrid breakdown’ 247 lifespan prolongation 235–6, 258, 272 cell numbers and reactions per second 269 ATP synthesis in 66 humans Hudson, Reuben 144 Howard, Richard 285 Hopkins, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "301 and reverse Krebs cycle 118–19 in photosynthesis 174 growth of protocells with 147 FeS clusters/surfaces 147, 151, 254, 255n4 in ferredoxin 105 iron–sulfur clusters/catalysts surfaces as catalytic 133, 135, 139 in alkaline hydrothermal vents 114–15, 121–2, 144, 147 iron-sulfide minerals see also..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "302 and ageing 25, 252–3, 264–7, 272, 280–81 Krebs cycle fluxes mutations affecting 196, 209–10, 215, 220 membrane bound 211 Krebs cycle enzymes Krebs cycle, reverse see reverse Krebs reversal 61n7, 111, 126, 217, 230 oxidative and reductive prongs 184–6, 210, 230 origins and evolution 70–73, 118, 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "303 mitochondrial DNA and 272 metabolic rate and 256–8, 270–71 differences, men and women 247 biological time and 235–6 of bats and birds 271 lifespan Life Itself , by Crick 129 life, origin see origin of life as thermodynamically favoured 275 photosynthesis freeing life from minerals 174–5 emergenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "304 Mendel, Gregor 243–4 see also Ech membrane bound enzymes 211, 219–20, 222 , 226, 253 see also mitochondrial membranes formation of, and primitive life 117, 145 electrical charge on 68, 244, 275, 282–3 anaesthetic effects and 277 membranes Medawar, Peter 234, 236 McGlynn, Shawn 170 mass extinctio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "305 interactions with nuclear 238–41 drug response 249 diseases 240, 247–8, 263–4 mitochondrial genome ‘mitochondrial Eve’ 241–2, 246 response to damage 217 as location of respiration 32, 67–8n13, 70–71 as flux capacitors 244, 266 bacterial origins 68–9, 167, 281 mitochondria Mitchell, Sir Godfrey 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "306 NADPH NADP + (phosphorylated NAD + ) 107, 108n11, 109, 206n3, 218–19 oxidation and age 230, 261, 270–71 NADH 63–4, 108n11, 196, 206n3, 223 NAD + to NADH ratio 179n5, 270 206n3, 220, 261 NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) 63, 108n11, 179n5, 201, NAC ( N -acetyl cysteine) 249–52, 255, 263 f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "307 Orgel, Leslie 128–31 organ transplantation 214 Oppenheimer, Robert 82, 88, 90 oocytes and mitochondria 240–42 oncogenes 192–4, 205 Ochoa, Severo 105, 217 Nunes Palmeira, Raquel 148 see also FAD; NAD + from sugars and amino acids 20, 104, 122, 131, 205, 224 role of glutamine 215, 222 possible ori..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "308 philosophical approaches 58–9, 69, 99, 124, 203 phages (bacteriophages) 282 pH gradient, hydrothermal vents 144, 146 and CO 2 reduction 142–3 and ATP formation 64, 152 pH PET (positron emission tomography) scans 265 pentose phosphate pathway/shunt 108, 131, 207, 224, 253 Pauling, Linus 98, 165 p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "309 ‘protocells’ 24, 117, 145–50, 152–3, 275 protists 3–4, 161, 186, 276, 281 see also enzymes synthesis and ATP demand 208 rubisco as the most abundant 75 peptide templating 149n9 folding mechanisms 13, 258 disulfide bridges 253–4 chirality of amino acids 277 breakdown in cancer 226 proteins prolyl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "310 hydrogen transfer in 37, 47–52 Hans Krebs on 19, 32–3, 37–8 efficiency of aerobic 159 blocking with carbon monoxide 35 respiration redox tone 259, 271 red protein see ferredoxin red beds 176, 178 Rammu, Hanadi 145 Ramakrishnan, Venki 13 Ralser, Markus 131 radioisotopes of carbon see carbon-11; c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "311 from mitochondrial complex I 230 ROS (reactive oxygen species) Rodriguez, Enrique 252 RNA World hypothesis 129 regulatory RNAs 12n2 origins in protocells 148–51, 275 and amino acid hydrophobicity 149n9 RNA (ribonucleic acid) ribulose bisphosphate 94–6 ribosomes 13 reverse Warburg effect 204 side..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "312 senescent (epigenetic) states 259, 262, 269–72 self, sensation of 280 operating on random RNA sequences 149–51 flight and ROS flux 271–2 favouring reproductive fitness 4, 234 favouring biochemical efficiency 116n3, 118 and cancer 191, 217 selection ‘Scopes II’ trial 124 as uncertain 273 testable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "313 Sweetlove, Lee 228n7 sulfur bacteria 100, 104–5, 114 sulfur, in CoA 57, 289–90 sulfate as an oxidant 181 see also glucose overemphasis on, in metabolism 77, 81–3, 90, 95, 103 in the Calvin-Benson cycle 95–6n8, 98 sugars succinyl CoA 128 , 184, 215 , 222 , 231, 260–61n7, 286–7 succinate dehydroge..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "314 The Vital Question (book) 281 viruses 205, 282 Viagra 216 Vesalius, Andreas 243 vertebrates, ancestors of 155–6 ventilation in an anaerobic world 183 Van Leeuwenhoek, Antonie 3 urea cycle 52, 224–7 urea 8, 28, 38–9 uncoupling proteins 228n7, 262n8 twin studies 236–8, 245, 248, 263 Turin, Luca 27..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "315 Zuckerkandl, Emil 165 Z scheme 175, 199 xenon 277–8 Xavier, Joana 269n11 X-ray crystallography 10, 13, 59 X-rays, biological effects 87n5, 245 Wonderful Life , by Gould 156n1 Wimpey Construction 60–61n9 Wilkins, Maurice 10 Wildman, Sam 75 West, Geoffrey 257n5 Watson, James 10, 128 oxygen from, i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "316 Index 288 Acknowledgements 282 Further reading 236 List of abbreviations 233 Appendix 2: The Krebs line 227 Appendix 1: Red protein mechanics 222 The reverse Krebs cycle 221 The forward Krebs cycle 220 Envoi: ‘Like Most Revelations’ 219 Epilogue: Self 211 6. The flux capacitor 181 5. To the dark..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (480 words): "down to the size of a molecule, the ‘cityscape’ is dizzying. Membranes sweep past your view: curving, fluid walls, swooping overhead or plunging down below. Traffic streams past on colossal cables, extending out in all directions. Traffic as you’ve never seen before: great mechanical contraptions, m..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "regulatory loops that lend an illusion of purpose, listed all their parts. And yet underneath it all, we are barely any closer to understanding what breathes life into these flicks of matter. How did they first emerge from the sterile inorganic Earth? What forces coordinate their exquisite behaviour..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "different from inanimate matter, was disproved long ago and is now only wheeled out as a straw man to burn – even though it’s an understandable illusion for anyone who has shared van Leeuwenhoek’s captivation with busy animalcules. Yet biochemistry – my own discipline, which deals with the flow of e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (483 words): "inscrutably complex ‘living’ molecules. One of the founding fathers of biochemistry, Sir Frederick Gowland Hopkins, dedicated much of his long career through the first four decades of the twentieth century to promoting what he called the ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry: the idea that the basic molecu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (457 words): "makes up the metabolism of the cell, which we will grapple with in this book. Metabolism is what keeps us alive – it is what being alive is – the sum of the continuous transformations of small molecules on a timescale of nanoseconds, nanosecond after nanosecond. If we live to the age of eighty, we w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "‘From the elephant to butyric acid bacterium – it is all the same!’ (I hear it accompanied by a burst of hysterical laughter) was later famously paraphrased as ‘Anything found to be true of E. coli must also be true of elephants.’ While deliberately mischievous, there is more than a little truth in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "reconstituted in full. The same goes for DNA; indeed, Shakespeare’s sonnets have been encoded in synthetic DNA. Likewise, the 3,000 million letters that make up the entire human genome are enough to code for you – your limbs, your heart, your eyes, your predispositions, albeit with a Shakespearean s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "the past. The ‘dynamic side’ of biochemistry now rarely escapes the pages of dusty textbook histories. It does not seem to add much to the power of information. That’s a fallacy. This book aims to show that the flow of energy and matter through cells structures biological information rather than the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "whole genome sequence of another domesticated species, once all the rage, has begun to pale. These two themes, information and structure, have combined as the dominant paradigm of medical research in recent decades. We can sequence genomes and search for small differences in sequence between people ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "encoding alternative pathways are upregulated in hours, in effect widening the bypasses to accommodate extra traffic. So the flux of energy and materials through the cell shifts. It might not be quite as good as the main highway, but you could hardly tell the difference. Now think about alternative ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "or over a short period of minutes or hours. 3 Will it be the same next week, next month, next year? Start over. We are a long way from rising above the cell and picturing the combined flux of energy and materials in real time over a lifetime. Metabolism remains invisible and elusive, even if we know..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "down in its four-billion-year history. The genes are custodians of this flame, but without the flame life is – dead. Yet despite its unceasing flow, metabolism has been turned on its head. There is no better example of the crazy contingency of evolution, or the ability of life to cobble together a w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "argued, so a cycle was necessary. The later discovery of bacteria that burn tiny carbon skeletons perfectly well disproved that idea. The raison d’être for the Krebs cycle is muddied even further by the fact that the cycle supplies many of the basic building blocks for the fabric of the cell. Most a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (471 words): "In my view, we can’t hope to understand what goes wrong in cancer or Alzheimer’s disease if we do not know why the Krebs cycle is so central to the flow of both energy and matter in cells. What rules govern this flux? Genes are only part of the picture. Let’s put aside our traffic metaphor and think..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (456 words): "priesthood intent on concealing the path to meaning. Yet nothing could be further from the truth. What is more meaningful than the chemistry that brings life alive? Or the chemistry that sends us to our death? Or the chemistry that forges our conscious self? Yet astonishingly, all of this is the sam..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "In Chapter 3, we’ll go right back to the beginning, to see how this same chemistry can take place spontaneously in nature, and specifically in deep-sea hydrothermal vents, where the reaction between H 2 and CO 2 is facilitated by steep gradients of protons across thin inorganic barriers, with struct..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (484 words): "inflammation, cellular growth and proliferation, all of which promote cancer. In Chapter 6, we’ll examine why Krebs-cycle flux gets more sluggish with age, unmasking different age-related diseases in each one of us. Much of the answer can be ascribed to a gradual depression of cell respiration with ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (18 words) [SHORT]: "and subtle interpretation. There are times when it feels as if metabolomics should just be called gnomics. 26"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "process. In the audience, Hopkins’s many friends are smiling. They know his obsession with the dynamic side of biochemistry. And they also know he’s right. There is no more beloved figure in science than Sir Frederick. Nobel Prize, Knight of the Realm and soon to be elevated to Order of Merit: a pil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (398 words): "MRC) forced open the doors of the Royal Society; she was elected its first female Fellow in 1945, alongside the crystallographer Kathleen Lonsdale. But Hopkins’s real mission was the development of biochemistry as an experimental discipline, with its own methodology and way of seeing the world. It w..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "abilities. I saw them argue without quarrelling, quarrel without suspecting, suspect without abusing, criticize without vilifying or ridiculing, and praise without flattering.’ I hope that Britain today does not forget those values. 1 Krebs felt immediately at home (indeed he was literally welcomed ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (396 words): "started out lacking any blueprint for how respiration might work, and he ended up with a detailed set of steps in his famous, justly eponymous cycle. Yet his approach also coloured the way successive generations have thought about respiration ever since, to the point that the Krebs cycle has become ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "exactly what was going on in the multiple steps of a biochemical pathway. This method gives a good feel for how indirect and convoluted it is to measure anything in biochemistry. We can’t ‘see’ any of these small molecules even today (where more sophisticated methods are still harder to interpret). ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "I’ve never forgotten reading Warburg’s Nobel address, where he described all this, while I was sitting outside my tent near Cader Idris in Wales one beautiful morning, unable to tear myself away towards the beckoning mountain. My head was singing along with the birds in the hedgerows around. It was ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (410 words): "The devil really was in the detail. For a modern-day biochemist, it is hard to appreciate just how little was known, how utterly opaque the workings of the cell. As usual in science, some experiments worked well first go and others did precisely the opposite of what had been expected. Sometimes that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "them together did not have an additive effect on the rate of respiration; rather, the breakdown of amino acids (and the release of ammonia) was inhibited by adding carboxylic acids. You can imagine how many months of hard work it took Krebs to come to this anodyne conclusion. But what did it mean? P..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (333 words): "I’m depicting carbon atoms as black balls, hydrogen atoms as small grey balls, and oxygen atoms as white balls containing the symbol O. I’ve drawn the atoms roughly to scale. Oxygen is slightly smaller than carbon, for example, because it has eight rather than six protons in the nucleus, and the ext..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (329 words): "staring back at me like Mad-Eye Moody. This bad-ass oxygen is technically called an ‘alpha-keto’ group, but we don’t need to worry about the terminology; we just need to know that it makes things happen. This part of the molecule reacts to form an amino acid, for example, where the oxygen is switche..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (294 words): "In cells, carboxylic acids are normally found in this negatively charged form, which changes its name to end in ‘ate’. Pyruvic acid (with a proton) becomes ‘pyruvate’ after it has lost the proton. The same convention applies to all carboxylic acids. Notice too that the carboxylate group has the form..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "the C2 acetate and ultimately the C1 CO 2 . Yet it seemed the opposite happened. Instead of getting shorter, the C3 pyruvate somehow became a C4 or even a C6 carboxylic acid. Why would the carbon chain get longer instead of shorter? It made no sense. The first clue came from a madcap Hungarian scien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "experiment, he found that none had disappeared. These simple molecules sped up reactions without being consumed themselves. That is, by definition, a catalyst . It might appear strange, Szent-Györgyi remarked, to attribute to a substance as simple as succinate the role of a catalyst. But what else c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (278 words): "Szent-Györgyi had a hypothesis. It’s an excellent example of how an ingenious hypothesis can drive science forward down a blind alley. Luckily not for long in this case. The idea was this. Succinate was one of four C4 carboxylic acids (the others being fumarate, malate and oxaloacetate), all of whic..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "already shown that the enzyme that catalyses this final step is the haem protein cytochrome oxidase, but it had to get its 2H from somewhere. Szent-Györgyi pictured a shuttle of carriers that stripped 2H from sugars, and then passed them from one to another, and eventually to oxygen to form H 2 O. I..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "imagined that all the hydrogens were stripped out from glucose to give six sets of 2H, which were transferred onto the C4 carboxylic acids before being passed onwards to oxygen to form water. Carboxylic acids were acting as shuttles. In the meantime, the carbon husks of the glucose molecule had to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "oxygen to go ahead. Krebs also found that adding citrate to his pigeon- breast slices (he’d modified Szent-Györgyi’s method) sped up respiration in a similar way to succinate. Citrate was definitely involved in respiration. In a coup de grâce , Krebs showed that if he added citrate to the tissue sli..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (475 words): "and so on in turn, until the cycle has run full circle and regenerated the first constituent again. That explains why none of the constituents are consumed: each one has to be regenerated from its precursor indefinitely. This might sound suspiciously like a perpetual motion machine that operates wit..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (339 words): "enzyme, then Krebs had completed a first draft of his cycle: pyruvate was fed into the cycle by cobbling it onto oxaloacetate, equivalent to loading a full trailer onto the tractor unit. It was a quick experiment to do, and it worked as well as he must have most fervently desired. Adding pyruvate an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (353 words): "with oxaloacetate to make citrate. So the ‘full trailer’ was really acetyl CoA. Lipmann had trained in Berlin in the late 1920s, in the lab next door to Krebs. He, too, later fled from the Nazis, in his case from Denmark to New York and eventually Boston. Lipmann was a notoriously slow thinker, who ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "the C6 glucose is split into two molecules of the C3 pyruvate, each of which is broken down to acetyl CoA. These are then fed into the Krebs cycle. One complete spin of the cycle (from pyruvate) generates three molecules of CO 2 and five sets of 2H, equivalent to five molecules of H 2 . 8 This hydro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "passed his PhD in 1951, with a more conventional thesis on the mechanism of action of penicillin. Like Francis Crick, who took seven years to complete his own PhD thesis, having taught himself the mathematical theory of X-ray crystallography along the way, Mitchell might not have thrived in today’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (445 words): "went deaf). Moyle herself was an enthusiastic musician, who sang in choirs throughout her life. Marjory Stephenson could hardly have been more prescient in recommending that Mitchell and Moyle work together. They formed a lifelong scientific partnership, which drove a paradigm shift in twentieth- ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (422 words): "to grind up tissue, isolate an enzyme, then measure its precise function in as pure and uncontaminated a preparation as was humanly possible. Fermentation was the classic example: it did indeed proceed in homogenised tissues. Other biochemical reactions did not work initially, but with better prepar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "response, and when you see NADH, you’ll think ‘Aha! Once more this is the beast that transfers hydrogen, or rather, the two electrons and two protons that constitute 2H!’ In cell respiration, NADH transfers its 2H to oxygen to form water (H 2 O), capturing some of the energy released in the process...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (299 words): "today. Let me just give you a flavour (don’t worry about the details). They demonstrated that mitochondrial membranes really do pump protons when given various substrates (including succinate) and oxygen, transiently acidifying the medium. They showed that inhibitors of electron transfer, such as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Such experiments established the indispensable role of the membrane in respiration, as well as the basic topology of proton pumping and ATP synthesis, but said little about how protons were actually pumped. Mitchell had revolutionary ideas here too, although he was wrong about some of the specifics...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "beginning to marshal the evidence that mitochondria derived from free- living bacteria that had moved inside other cells (in what’s called an endosymbiosis) nearly two billion years ago. I’ve discussed the singular importance of mitochondria to complex life in other books and we can put it aside her..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "... more α-ketoglutarate. Don’t think of the Krebs cycle as a furnace burning organic molecules. It’s catalytic – and it catalyses the breakdown of the 2C acetate, not the carboxylic acids themselves. So the Krebs cycle can only spin faster if it’s provided with more acetate. Normally that comes fro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "repeated the experiment with liver tissue, they would not have seen the same thing. That’s because the liver does all kinds of other jobs which require flux in and out of the Krebs cycle, such as making glucose from amino acids. It’s not really a cycle so much as a roundabout, where traffic enters a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (485 words): "key metabolic branch-points such as phosphoenol-pyruvate lie outside the mitochondria, off the Krebs cycle itself, which therefore seems to fall slightly outside the metabolic centre of gravity in animals. Krebs knew that many microbes living in the absence of oxygen use the cycle mainly for synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (570 words): "meaning ‘cell colour’. Without cytochromes, cells are nearly colourless (in fact they’re a pale yellow from flavins, also discovered by Warburg). At much lower levels, CO is an important cellular signal that operates in part by modulating the rate of respiration, as does another important gaseous si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (533 words): "such as the carboxylic acids shown in the figure. A hydrogen atom comprises a single proton in the nucleus along with a single electron around the nucleus. 2H therefore refers to two protons and two electrons, which can be drawn from almost anywhere. In contrast H 2 is a gas: two hydrogen atoms boun..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "mitochondria, the ‘power-houses’ of the cell. Yet for all his brilliance, Lehninger could not solve exactly how NADH oxidation was coupled to ATP synthesis. The entire field got stuck for two decades. It took Mitchell’s unprecedented conceptual leap to answer the question. 11 A much-loved figure, wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "retirement, the name stuck (it was admittedly better than his own ‘fraction-1 protein’). If rubisco sounds more like a breakfast cereal, that was precisely the point; Wildman had spent some years trying to produce a health supplement from his protein (in effect, a cereal) as it is a well- balanced s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "this idea; in this chapter, we’ll see that it can be malignantly misleading too. Every dogma has its day, but this particular meme still bedevils the textbooks. The meme is this: photosynthesis converts CO 2 into sugars (using rubisco), while respiration burns those sugars. To twist a phrase, this i..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "In this chapter, we’ll see that some of the most ancient bacteria turn the familiar Krebs cycle on its head – they use it in reverse, as a biosynthetic engine that converts the gases CO 2 and H 2 into organic molecules, driving growth. I’ll stick with the term ‘reverse’ here, as these bacteria do in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "the protons spiral out from the source. The first ‘proton merry-go-round’ was just five inches in diameter, but larger diameters enabled more spirals, and so greater acceleration and higher energy. By the end of the 1930s, Lawrence had built a cyclotron with a sixty-inch diameter, which could produc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "depending on the energy and composition of the beam (protons or deuterons, for example) as well as the duration of collisions and the target material. 11 C has a half-life of just 20 minutes, meaning that half of it will have decomposed back to boron (by emitting ‘positrons’) every 20 minutes. After..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "chemical analysis and preparation in a physics lab. For the first time, chemistry, even biology, was encouraged. That segued into the pair thinking about the possible applications of cleanly prepared radioisotopes such as 11 C in biology. Their initial plans to study sugar metabolism in rats were co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "Beautiful, simple ... and doomed to failure. Problems dogged them from the beginning. Their venture was a sideline for the Rad Lab, so they were only granted occasional access to the powerful 37-inch cyclotron. When they did get access, it was all systems go. Kamen had to separate the radioactive CO..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "carboxylate group is essentially a CO 2 unit, and it can break off as such. That’s true the other way around too; when CO 2 is added onto another organic molecule, you end up with a carboxylic acid. The first step is deceptively simple, for we’ll see there’s a lot hidden behind this façade: Note tha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "alpha particles (the nuclei of helium atoms with two protons and two neutrons) form shorter, stubbier trails. What Martin Kamen noticed was that when he bombarded a cloud chamber containing nitrogen gas with neutrons emanating from a cyclotron, 5 he saw long thin vapour trails corresponding to proto..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "US coastline from invasions using the poison gas phosgene. Exhausted from working long hours so he could return to his beloved work on photosynthesis, Ruben fell asleep at the wheel and crashed his car. Nobody was seriously injured, but Ruben broke his arm. Soon afterwards, while preparing a batch o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "photo-synthesis at that time, and only the Rad Lab had enough 14 C to do the job. The dice were loaded. The one true path Keen to progress the work on photosynthesis, Lawrence hired Melvin Calvin, a colleague from the Manhattan Project, immediately after the war. The story has it that on the day of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (304 words): "dark smudge on the photographic film. For example, a specific sugar that incorporated 14 C would always migrate to the same place on the paper, giving a diagnostic dark spot on the photographic film – an ‘autoradiograph’. The bit of paper responsible for the dark spot could then be cut out, the suga..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (482 words): "But it was also the only cheap insight. In less than a minute, the radioactivity had spread into many other products, each one of which took days, weeks, sometimes months, in the lab to identify, with the most careful chemistry. Amongst the most common radioactive spots were various (but not all) Kr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (280 words): "ribulose bisphosphate needed to enable another three turns of the cycle. The full scheme, now in textbooks as the Calvin–Benson cycle, was published in the classic 1954 paper, ‘The Path of Carbon in Photosynthesis. XXI.’ Here’s a slightly modified scheme from that paper, which captures the essence o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "attributable to Benson, which must have rankled. And I suspect that Benson didn’t mince his words in telling Calvin what he thought of some of Calvin’s more wayward ideas. Benson was certainly capable of being caustic in his judgements. Calvin’s wife Genevieve told Benson that Calvin would have anot..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (401 words): "long to make any headway. Has it really made headway, even today? The idea that CO 2 fixation makes sugars is still the paradigm that most students imbibe today – the central dogma of metabolism. And so long as it stays that way, we will never understand the deeper currents in the chemistry of life...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "electrons, streaming from water, powers the extrusion of protons across a membrane, generating a proton-motive force. This drives the synthesis of ATP through that extraordinary nanoturbine, the ATP synthase. Plants use almost exactly the same machinery as respiration, except that it is buried deep ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (226 words): "Instead of pulling out hydrogen and CO 2 from organic molecules to generate ATP, the reverse Krebs cycle does the opposite: it uses CO 2 and hydrogen to make new organic molecules (and costs some ATP). One complete turn of the cycle regenerates the starting point plus another molecule – oxaloacetate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate, as you can see on page 287). The reverse cycle integrates them into a biosynthetic engine at the very heart of metabolism, in a way that makes perfect sense. The Krebs cycle provides C2 to C6 carbon skeletons, the Lego bricks of life, to make virtually everything else. The idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "that threw Calvin and Benson off the trail for half a decade. In one sense these were not misleading at all. They pointed to something equally important: sugars are peripheral. They’re needed for the Calvin–Benson cycle (and of course to make nucleotides) but for everything else, materials need to b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (347 words): "Yet tiny sulfur bacteria could apparently reverse the Krebs cycle without problem. They did so by using a small, red protein discovered in the early 1960s which seemed to be capable of magic – this same protein was essential for photosynthesis to make ATP and to fix CO 2 . Now it seemed that it coul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (312 words): "beautiful). The critical point here is that ferredoxin has a biologically unparalleled ability to press electrons onto even the most unreactive molecules. But that comes at a cost. Ferredoxin reacts spontaneously with oxygen, becoming readily oxidised by even low levels of the gas. So in the presenc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "it can generate reactive free radicals. This eventuality is largely avoided by Fd 2– swiftly passing its electrons on to NADP + to form NADPH, rather than directly to CO 2 . Rather than dealing in single electrons, like ferredoxin, NADPH transfers pairs of electrons, which makes it far less reactive..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "for replacing rubisco with an ‘improved’ enzyme could be sudden death. No doubt we’ll find out in due course. All that reasoning is consistent with a relatively late evolution of the Calvin–Benson cycle in a world of rising oxygen. The implication is that the reverse Krebs cycle was more widespread ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "lyase was thought to be present in the genomes of all bacteria using the reverse Krebs cycle. In phylogenetic analyses, this gene was taken to be diagnostic for the presence of the reverse cycle; that’s the basis for inferring its patchy distribution. But now a study shows that the familiar citrate ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (544 words): "3 The very idea behind the cyclotron had been criticised by no less a figure than Albert Einstein, who compared the idea of firing subatomic particles at a target to be something akin to shooting birds in the dark, in a country where there aren’t many birds. His point was that the atom is virtually ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (568 words): "8 Did you really want to know what they are? A is fructose phosphate, a six- carbon sugar. B represents several different sugars, including xylulose phosphate (C5), erythrose phosphate (C4) and sedoheptulose phosphate (C7). Yes, it’s absurdly complicated. The numbers game works roughly like this. Th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (127 words): "11 NADP + is a phosphorylated form of NAD + (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), which we met in the previous chapter as the main carrier responsible for transferring 2H from Krebs-cycle intermediates to oxygen via the respiratory chain. As a rule of thumb, NADH transfers electrons in breakdown reac..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "chaos!’, recalled one researcher. This was an unimagined finding: a deep-sea food chain that apparently did not depend on sunlight or photosynthesis, but lived on the gas hydrogen sulfide emanating from the vents themselves. Such vibrant life so far from the sun swiftly inspired a new perspective on..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "catalyse the reaction between carbon dioxide and hydrogen, forming carboxylic acids, the carbon skeletons from which all other cellular building blocks are made. The only problem was that the reverse Krebs cycle requires an input of energy (ATP) to work, which in modern bacteria is normally obtained..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (449 words): "passionate and opinionated until the evidence forces a reluctant agreement, which has not happened yet. I should confess to a personal bias here: as a biochemist with a particular interest in biological energy flow, my own route into the thrilling question of the origin of life links to the first st..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (427 words): "overcome? That in turn boils down to genes first or metabolism first? The thrust of this book is that energy is primal – energy flow shapes genetic information. I will argue that the structure of metabolism was set in stone (perhaps literally in deep-sea rocky vents) from the beginning. In this chap..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "were vaporised and returned to the air and oceans as CO 2 , its primordial state, then that would give an atmospheric pressure of about 100 bars of CO 2 (a bar being roughly the modern atmospheric pressure at sea level). Much of this CO 2 would swiftly react with volcanic rocks such as basalt, and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "assertion, and it would not begin to compare quantitatively with H 2 and CO 2 . Of course, having plentiful H 2 and CO 2 is irrelevant if they don’t react with each other. This has long been the criticism of prebiotic chemists, who have successfully synthesised amino acids, nucleotides and fatty aci..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "(LUCA). Like the Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA pathway depends on H 2 and CO 2 , but in other respects it seems to be even more ancient – it is a short, linear pathway that does not require any additional input of energy (such as ATP) to fix CO 2 . Again, like the reverse Krebs cycle, the acetyl CoA p..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "I mentioned the second possibility in the previous chapter – it could be that the reverse Krebs cycle is conserved more widely than had been thought, in archaea as well as bacteria. That might be true because the enzyme normally used to identify the presence of the reverse Krebs cycle in a genome – ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and with a lifelong fascination with the origin of life, Morowitz testified against the pervasive idea that life breaks the second law of thermodynamics – the tendency for entropy (disorder) to increase in closed systems. The Earth is of course an open system, continu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (381 words): "of matter. There it is, at the centre of all biochemical charts, linked fundamentally to energy flow. Although the reverse cycle had been discovered several years before his 1968 book, Morowitz had not at that point integrated it into his thinking; but later on he came to see the reverse Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (237 words): "The reverse Krebs cycle repeats its succession of steps, highlighted in bold lettering. Starting with ferredoxin the repeated steps are: +CO 2 , +CO 2 , +2H, –H 2 O, +2H, +CoA. The only difference on the second rendition is that the final +2H becomes +H 2 O. Notice that the requirement for ATP at th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "universal not because it was better than any other code, but because mutational changes to any code, once established, would be catastrophic, hence could not occur. We now know that’s not correct. Even so, these ideas gave rise to the ‘RNA world’, pioneered by Orgel among others. This hypothesis arg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "There’s no question that Orgel had a powerful point. I think that it’s fatal to the idea of the reverse Krebs cycle – as a strict cycle – being truly prebiotic. On the other hand, there is clearly something favoured about the Krebs-cycle intermediates. They form spontaneously from CO 2 and H 2 , giv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "biochemistry, the carboxylic acids from which other cell components are made. Experimental work shows that some of those cell components (some amino acids, sugars and fatty acids) really can be made from Krebs line intermediates under equivalent conditions. In principle, this means that the sustaine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (342 words): "dashed lines. I’m saying ‘imagine it’, but let me be clear: experiments show that CO 2 adsorption and reduction, as I describe below, does indeed happen. Binding to a surface works a bit like an enzyme, feeding electrons continuously and positioning molecules ‘just so’ for the next steps to happen. ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (239 words): "perform the chemistry in ferredoxin. Both the minerals and clusters can also incorporate other metals that transfer pairs of electrons even more readily, especially nickel. So how far does this parallel between enzymes and mineral surfaces go? Might it even explain the repeating chemistry of the Kre..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "As before, the curly arrows depict the movement of a pair of electrons, initially from the surface of the mineral onto the carbon atom, allowing the oxygen atom to take back the electron pair it had previously donated to form the triple bond of carbon monoxide. As you might imagine, a negative charg..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (238 words): "The final step in this sequence is another repeat, but this time the oxygen takes its final bonding pair of electrons and detaches as a hydroxide ion (OH – ), leaving now a methyl group (-CH 3 ) bound to the surface. This is the same stout belly that we’ve seen in pyruvate or acetate. In other words..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (337 words): "life, but of course cells do it all the time, albeit using enzymes and ATP. A deep secret of life is that enzymes never pull water from a hat. Rather, the constituent parts of water are removed, OH – and H + , which can combine to form water, as in this case, or may simply attach themselves independ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "pulled it out of a hat by a simple trick. Rather than being bound through the sulfur to the handle that is coenzyme A, in this case the acetyl is bound directly to the surface. Critically, it shares the same relatively high reactivity of acetyl CoA. And it can be released as free acetate easily enou..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "favour the continuous transfer of electrons from the surface, forming not only Krebs-cycle intermediates, but also longer-chain carboxylic acids – fatty acids – capable of forming membranes. On the other hand, if the concentration of hydrogen is lower, then smaller carboxylic acids are more likely t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "to alkaline hydrothermal vents, is that the reactivity of both H 2 and CO 2 depends on the local concentration of H + ions, which is to say, pH. We’ve noted this already for CO 2 . Many of the steps needed to convert CO 2 into carboxylic acids work better at mildly acidic pH, as protons balance the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "the protons detach, Ech becomes more reactive, and can now force its electrons onto ferredoxin, which in turn pushes them onto CO 2 . Then incoming protons bind Ech again, and the cycle repeats itself. In other words, Ech acts as a switch that extracts electrons from H 2 when in ‘oxidising’ mode (wi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "How do we get from pores in hydrothermal vents to the first cell-like structures? You can be forgiven for thinking that these first few steps of prebiotic chemistry are still a long way from life, but in some respects they are closer than you might think. For example, fatty acids, the main constitue..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (288 words): "fundamental requirement is that H 2 is in alkaline conditions, while CO 2 is in acidic conditions. In principle, this arrangement could be achieved by protons crossing the inorganic barrier, rather than electrons. In fact, that is feasible. We have shown that protons cross iron-sulfide barriers two ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "iron and sulfide, generating more ferredoxin-like FeS clusters. The protocells with the most FeS clusters should make the most new organics, favouring more of the same physical interactions. That would generate more FeS clusters, so more organics, and so on. In other words, protocells with more FeS ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "code had no need to ‘invent’ information from nothing: information took its meaning from protocell growth from the beginning. From this point of view, genetic information simply enables a more exact form of growth: genes reproduce their own system more accurately and rapidly, which is to say they he..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "didn’t just pop into existence by accident in a prebiotic world. So if the first cells needed ATP to make genes and proteins, how did they manage without an ATP synthase? The answer turns out to be quite simple. ATP can be formed directly from acetyl phosphate, which in turn is formed from acetyl Co..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "Silvana Pinna, a PhD student in my lab, has shown that ATP synthesis is catalysed beautifully by ferric iron (Fe 3+ ), yet no other metal ions she tried could do the same job. This finding might explain why ATP is the universal energy currency. But the key point is that ATP can be formed directly th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "crannies and tap the local flow, growing, dividing, nestling, growing. Growing. Let’s leave this chapter with a pregnant thought. I have described an ‘autotrophic’ origin of life, in which gases react on mineral surfaces to form organic molecules – all in a single setting that drives growth over tim..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (553 words): "uses today, unless the chemistry seems logical to them (and it often doesn’t). Biologists tend to think backwards. Natural selection improves selectivity and yield, so the first pathways had to have lower selectivity and yield, or there would be nothing for selection to work on. But any research pro..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "physics, for the cosmological constants to be what they are – a theory of every- thing. In similar vein, it looks increasingly as if carbon chemistry is bound to give rise to the core metabolism of life as we know it. What that might say about the nature of the universe is another question, and befo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "Cambrian animals that survived to a mature age would suffer from cancer and other degenerative diseases we know today, the scleroses of old age itself. How can we possibly know anything about the biochemical workings of creatures that died half a billion years ago, leaving nothing but their hard she..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "Why oxygen is unique The path along which atmospheric oxygen rose to modern levels was long and tortuous. We will picture it from some of the more spectacular vantage points later in this chapter – the Snowball Earth, the Great Oxidation Event and the end-Permian extinction. For now, suffice to say ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "This is how we know from physiology that the Cambrian explosion was fuelled by nothing other than the complete oxidative Krebs cycle. It’s a numbers game. Aerobic respiration operates at about 40 per cent efficiency, so I convert about 40 per cent of the energy content of my lunch into usable energy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "itself. So why did the Krebs line turn into a cycle in the first place? And how did this cycle flip direction to link with aerobic respiration? How did organisms survive when that happened? Flipping the direction of the Krebs cycle did not obviate the need for Krebs-cycle precursors to make all the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "atmosphere and hydrosphere are relatively oxidised, being composed mainly of gases such as CO 2 that are comparatively electron-poor, giving them a relatively positive charge. From this point of view the Earth is a giant battery, where the inside is more negative than the outside. The reduced mantle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "transferred can pump two protons, just a fifth of the energy available from aerobic respiration. Even so, repeating this same process over and over again does generate a proton-motive force sufficient to drive CO 2 fixation to generate biomass. The cells that live this way, most notably methanogens,..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "The idea that the details of evolutionary history could be written in the slight differences in amino acid sequence between proteins goes back to Francis Crick in 1958, and was first applied in the early 1960s by Linus Pauling and Emil Zuckerkandl. They had considered the differences between the hae..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "photosynthesis (where oxygen is the waste), for these bacteria are still plugged into the planet, in that all their electrons derive from geological sources such as volcanoes and hydrothermal vents. Anoxygenic photosynthesis suffers from a more subtle problem too: it can either make ATP or reduce fe..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "of biochemistry, for they are surprisingly relevant to the emergence of animals in the Cambrian explosion. Structure of an energetically limited world Remember our pregnant thought from the end of the previous chapter: most biochemistry is close to equilibrium, which is to say that metabolic pathway..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "optimal conditions, where oxygen levels are close to zero, and so isn’t easily divorced from location. But you can’t always be lucky, punk. Sometimes you’ll get washed up in the wrong place. You’d better also learn to control your metabolic flux. Accordingly, selection has fashioned key regulatory e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (403 words): "much waste product was produced by one set of cells and consumed by the other, how far gases diffused (or electrons hopped) across the clumps, and no doubt other unknown subtleties. But whatever the subtleties, they must have been governed by simple and reproducible laws, as the same patterns always..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "Until now we have considered the Krebs line and posed the question: why did it first become a cycle? To sustain forwards flux down the Krebs line, we need to have high concentrations of early intermediates and lower concentrations of the later products. More specifically, we need to be rid of the fi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (431 words): "Zap. Repeat. It really can do this all day. Electrons flow. Chlorophyll transduces light into electricity. For the first time, life is freed from the churning bowels of our planet. No more must cells rely on volcanic gases, serpentinising seafloor or metal sulfides billowing from black smokers. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "photosystem, and then reduce ferredoxin in the second. By transferring electrons from water right through the two photosystems linked in series (through the Z scheme) oxygenic photosynthesis frees life from its hydrothermal roots. The tight energy constraints of the anaerobic world finally lift, and..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (402 words): "of atmospheric oxygen depend on exactly such a balance – the rate oxygen is produced by photosynthesis minus the rate it is consumed by respiration, rotting, oxidation of minerals and so on. Lumping them all together as ‘respiration’, these processes balance photosynthesis almost exactly (where ‘CH ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "(30/1,000). This difference can be measured in modern plants as well as in traces of organic matter trapped in ancient rocks. The bias leaves behind a little more 13 C in the oceans and atmosphere. That slight rise is in turn reflected in the composition of limestone, formed by the precipitation of ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "oxidised than was buried for millions of years. That in turn implies that oxygen was being consumed, stripped out of the air, producing a massive oxygen deficit. Yet at the end of this period, by the beginning of the Cambrian, the oxygen concentration in the oceans was approaching modern levels, rai..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "mountain ranges rose. Eroding from the uplifting mountains, a great flux of sulfate flooded back into the oceans. This flood reflected the power of plate tectonics, but also the hand of chance: the happenstance position of large gypsum evaporites in relation to water basins. In short, it could easil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "stifling conditions. The gentle filter feeders that had made it through to the Permian had low oxygen requirements but no circulatory systems. They died. Three hundred million years before the end-Permian extinction – 550 million years ago – it seems that the Ediacarans, too, were snuffed out in sul..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (310 words): "(as anticipated by Szent-Györgyi in the 1930s) that we have followed over the last few chapters. The oxidative prong corresponds to the first few steps of Krebs’s own vision, where acetyl CoA instead condenses with oxaloacetate to form the C6 citrate, running on through isocitrate to the C5 α-ketogl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "dehydrogenase. Although structurally very similar (clearly derived from a common ancestor) this does exactly the opposite, stripping electrons from succinate to generate fumarate, feeding the electrons directly into the respiratory chain and on to oxygen. In other words, succinate is a tipping point..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "efficient energy use, as tight as that in the ancient anaerobic world. And the same principles can help to guide us here too. The first principle is to maximise the driving force – increase the concentration of oxygen, and be rid of CO 2 waste. Ventilate your respiratory system. Store oxygen to be r..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (425 words): "their metabolic state, creating a metabolic homeostasis that shields them from the vicissitudes of the environment. The multiple tissues of animals could be seen this way too; to some extent, individual tissues maintain a stable metabolic balance by importing or exporting each other’s waste products..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (512 words): "1 Like many people of my generation, I first came across Pikaia in an inspiring, if flawed, book by Steven Jay Gould, Wonderful Life . Pikaia ’s standing on the evolutionary path to vertebrates has been queried – for example, it seems to have a cuticle (like invertebrates) – and defended. I am not a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "the synthesis of more oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. It therefore seems likely that the reverse Krebs cycle generally regenerates oxaloacetate, whereas the acetyl CoA is bled off to form fatty acids, sugars (via pyruvate) and ATP (via acetyl phosphate). This view could explain how sugar and fat metab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (460 words): "the context. Ostensibly random mutations began to make sense in much the same way that scattered dots, when joined up dot to dot, begin to depict a meaningful image. There is a scientific thrill as understanding emerges. What’s more, this new paradigm was grounded in the prevailing vision of biology..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "environment. The idea that ‘one rogue cell’ causes cancer is a scientific morality tale. The rogue cell is an unfortunate product of multiple blind hits to its genes, acts of arbitrary violence in an uncaring world. By chance (or hereditary misfortune) the miserable cell takes one hit too many and s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "age. People over the age of fifty have around ninety times the risk of people younger than twenty-four. I’m now in my mid-fifties. My risk of cancer will double by the time I’m in my early sixties, and double again by my seventies. Grim prospects. You might think this risk profile is explained by th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (413 words): "Otto Warburg was a genius. He could have won the Nobel prize three times and it would not have been undeserving. In some respects, he was half a century ahead of his time. From the 1930s, he advocated quitting smoking, avoiding pollution from vehicles, eating healthily (he shunned fertilisers), exer..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (455 words): "Towards the end of the First World War, Einstein wrote to Otto at the behest of his mother, urging him not to return to the Russian front after an injury (for which he was awarded the Iron Cross) but instead to go back to his lab in Berlin. Otto acquiesced. The war was the only break he took from re..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (334 words): "not play dice.’ The idea that life is nearly perfect is alien to evolutionary biologists, who see messy trade-offs everywhere. Yet Warburg saw nature through a prism that filtered out the tortuous complexity of life. Denouncing Emerson as wrong, Warburg’s own measurements nonetheless eventually yiel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "to pyruvate (‘glycolysis’) normally produces two molecules of ATP, plus two molecules of NADH (which is to say the ‘2H’, usually oxidised in respiration). The problem, when oxygen is unavailable, is that too much NAD + picks up 2H to become NADH: Why is this a problem? Because glycolysis cannot gene..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "he ever truly loved, died from breast cancer when Adolf was eighteen. Her Jewish doctor, Eduard Bloch, wrote that ‘outwardly, Hitler’s love for his mother was his most striking feature. I have never witnessed a closer attachment’ and ‘in all my career, I never saw anyone so prostrate with grief as A..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "swiftly over the last decade? Because Warburg was not entirely wrong either. He was onto something. Just not quite the right thing. Warburg’s tendency to assert truth in the face of conflicting data, while at the same time belittling the thinking of his opponents, climaxed in his famous Science pape..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "main point. For growth is the key, and growth needs more than ATP. Respiration undoubtedly declines as we age, but the underlying problem is not a shortfall in ATP, but rather a shift in metabolic flux and gene activity towards a state favouring growth. Cell replication requires the doubling of all ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "Here’s the problem. Let’s start with glucose, which I’m sure you’ll remember is a six-carbon sugar. A single molecule of glucose could produce between thirty and thirty-six molecules of ATP through aerobic respiration, but only two molecules of NADPH (by way of a pathway known as the pentose phospha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "‘differentiated’ cells, so called because they have plenty of recognisable cellular structures under the microscope. These structures are made largely of proteins, and protein synthesis has the highest ATP costs of all. Operating all this machinery makes eye-watering ATP demands too. For these reaso..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (325 words): "me. Since then, Frezza and a few of his colleagues around the world have reconceptualised the role of the Krebs cycle and metabolic flux in cancer. Recall that at the end of Chapter 4 we touched on the origins of animals in stagnant muds beneath the late Proterozoic oceans, right before the Cambrian..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (462 words): "The dotted line shows the transfer of two electrons from NADH to fumarate. The waste product, succinate, accumulates, and can readily escape from the mitochondria. Now, here’s the rub, which makes this ancient mechanism still relevant to cancer. Succinate is a powerful signal. That’s because it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "glycolysis, which we’ve seen promote ATP synthesis in the absence of oxygen. But the genes switched on by HIF 1α also encode proteins that drive growth and inflammation. When I talked about low oxygen, you might have imagined putting a plastic bag over your head, or drowning desperately, but those c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (360 words): "think for a moment about the common disorders where oxygen delivery to tissues becomes compromised. Stroke. Heart attacks. Dementia. Arthritis. Organ transplants. Succinate accumulation is central to them all. 5 You’ll appreciate that a mutation in the enzymes succinate dehydrogenase or fumarate hyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (305 words): "the Krebs cycle with Salvador Moncada in his directorial office at the Wolfson Institute a decade ago. Moncada had few equals in bestriding pharmaceutical and academic research. He arrived at the question of cancer after decades of working on the vascular system, culminating in the simultaneous disc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (451 words): "with defective mitochondria would habitually drive part of their Krebs cycle backwards, to make citrate (C6) by reacting α-ketoglutarate (C5) with CO 2 – a rare case of carbon fixation in animals, equivalent to photosynthesis without the sun. As I noted in Chapter 2, this reaction was discovered lon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "through the rotary motor of the ATP synthase and remain outside. That supercharges the electrical membrane potential. Respiration can’t pump protons against a supercharged electrical potential, so electron transfer to oxygen slows right down. And that means NADH can’t be oxidised, so the Krebs cycle..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "transfers 2H from NADPH onto NAD + , which raises NADH levels. Rather than drawing on the proton-motive force, the flipped transhydrogenase pumps protons across the membrane, recharging the electrical potential. For the coup de grâce , as NADPH levels fall, the NADPH-linked isocitrate dehydrogenase ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (247 words): "How glutamine sustains cancer growth: the ‘NH 3 ’ can be lost as ammonia or transferred to amino acids and used for nucleotide synthesis. The α-ketoglutarate can form both citrate (for biosynthesis) and succinate (which sustains the Warburg effect). The enzyme sitting in the membrane is the transhyd..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (306 words): "activity depends on the availability of NADH. The sirtuins normally close down growth and sexual development when times are lean, and there’s little NADH from food. Conversely, if NADH levels build up, which might happen if we eat too much and don’t exercise, the sirtuins close down. They no longer ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (249 words): "You’re not out of choices yet. You can be stripped of CO 2 , then strapped to a phosphate to form the C3 phosphoenol-pyruvate, the starting point for sugar synthesis via gluconeogenesis. This pathway is another ancient backbone of metabolism, more or less the opposite of glycolysis, which forms gluc..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "picking up 2H (from NADH in the cytosol) again and again. Overall, this unusual form of respiration oxidises NADH in the cytosol, passing its electrons onto oxygen, bolstering the power of aerobic glycolysis. Only six protons can be pumped this way (still enough to make a couple of ATPs) but there a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (279 words): "at once diverting more aspartate into the synthesis of nucleotides for RNA and DNA. If ever a cycle deserved to be called vicious, this is it. Formation of glutamine from α-ketoglutarate. Note that the first ‘NH 3 ’ used to form glutamate derives from amino acids, while the second, to form glutamine..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "I’ve implied that cancer is primarily a metabolic disease, yet if anything goes for metabolism, then what actually turns a cell cancerous? You’ve probably appreciated by now that the underlying problem is an environment that continuously and erroneously shouts ‘ grow! ’. This toxic environment can b..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (454 words): "down to oxygen, powering the extrusion of ten protons along the way. We saw in Chapter 1 that’s enough to make three (and a bit) ATPs. So the decline in complex I activity with age means that it’s no longer so easy to oxidise NADH. Think what happens when NADH begins to accumulate in the mitochondri..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (488 words): "imponderables there are. How much uncertainty about elementary questions. We have a long way to go before we can answer all these questions and face a diagnosis of cancer without fear. In the meantime, I hope I can muster Ian’s fortitude and good humour when my time comes. But why Ian? Why not other..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (510 words): "pushed away from its expected chemical equilibrium. If oxygen is present, both NADH and NADPH should be entirely oxidised to NAD + and NADP + , respectively. In cells, however, NADH accounts for 20–30 per cent of the total inside mitochondria, and just 1 in 1,000 in the cytosol (see footnote 5 in Ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (318 words): "algal endosymbiont, making them an interesting target for antimalarial drugs (as we don’t have genes derived from algae, limiting the possibility of side effects). 7 Books tend to take their own direction against the best-laid plans of the author. I wanted to write about the work of Lee Sweetlove in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (472 words): "age. Obviously, a gene that causes harm at the age of 150 cannot be rooted out by selection because none of us survive to that age. According to Medawar, much the same applies to variants of genes that cause harm at the age of seventy or eighty, as few, historically, lived to that ripe old age. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "task tantamount to Sisyphus rolling his boulder up the mountain: if not strictly impossible, at least formidable. So it came as a shock in the 1990s to discover that a handful of genes could double or treble the lifespan of simple creatures such as nematode worms or flies. Even mice. This is not the..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "multiple genetic variants. If the known heritability of a disease is 0.5 (from twin studies) and the known genetic risk factors account for that full hereditary risk, then together they should add up to an overall risk of 0.5. In fact, known genetic variants often account for less than 10 per cent o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "one species such as a mouse, while the genes in the mitochondria came from another species, such as a hamster. Wallace found that antibiotic resistance broke down with genetic distance between the two species crossed. If both the nuclear and mitochondrial genes came from the same species, then the a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "which cut in different places depending on the sequence) to demonstrate beyond doubt that children inherit their mitochondrial genes from their mother. He went on to show that mitochondrial genes can indeed mutate, causing diseases such as epilepsy, blindness and neuromuscular degeneration. We now k..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Eurasia and eventually to Australia and the Americas. While this gives a two-dimensional view, compared with the richness of whole genomes used today, the broad outlines of the story have been corroborated by genomic and anthropological evidence since then. More controversial is whether these mitoch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (435 words): "any hospital today. Go in, and you’ll be faced with signs pointing to Neurology, Nephrology, Cardiology, Ophthalmology, Rheumatology, Gastroenterology, Gynaecology, and more. Vesalius would be more at home than most of us, not even put out by the Latin language. Medicine is still grounded in anatomy..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "controlling the activity of thousands of genes, the epigenetic state of the cell. There is a subtle and continuous interplay between the singing membrane potential, flux through the Krebs cycle and the epigenetic state of the cell. To my mind, even slight differences in flux capacitance between indi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (442 words): "ideas and plans – and as excited about mitochondria as I am. Flo was particularly interested in a problem known as ‘mother’s curse’, and we began to work together on the question. The problem here is precisely that mitochondria are inherited from the mother only. My own mitochondria are an evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (444 words): "celebrate it. But we ought to know if hybrid vigour can be undermined by a higher risk of mitochondrial diseases. Spoiler alert: I don’t think so. But there’s plenty else to ponder on here. This was the starting point for Flo’s work. She had bred a number of different fly lines using the balancer ch..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "didn’t say ‘That’s funny’; it was anything but. It was quite shocking. Exactly the kind of unexpected finding that leads to places in science. Giving the flies an antioxidant had little effect on the males but killed females with one type of mitochondria while sparing the others. Remember that these..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (469 words): "are produced by respiration, so suppressing respiration should have some effect on ROS flux, yet there was no change. A much lower rate of respiration was producing the same overall rate of ROS flux. But could it actually be the other way round, we wondered? Was respiration being suppressed precisel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (424 words): "you any more details yet, but I can give you a sense of what we think might be going on. The normal (reduced) form of glutathione, GSH, contains a thiol group – a sulfur bound to a hydrogen. This thiol can pass on its H to other molecules including ROS such as hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ), giving wa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "structure and function of proteins, activating or deactivating them in ways that are still imperfectly understood. You could think of this as a simple on–off switch for a protein. But there might be hundreds or thousands of copies of the same protein in a cell, each of which can be in the ‘on’ or ‘o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "lines lay in their mitochondrial DNA, so the primary deficit had to be in respiration. We know that any deficit in respiration necessarily disturbs Krebs-cycle flux, because the Krebs cycle cannot spin if NADH is not being oxidised in respiration. Finally, we know that regeneration of reduced glutat..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "faster we burn through resources, the faster we burn out. Small animals typically have faster metabolic rates and shorter lifespans; large animals tend to have lower metabolic rates and live longer. 5 While there are plenty of exceptions to this rather loose rule, there are also simple explanations ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "metabolic rate altogether, as somehow old-fashioned and genetically nebulous, is to ignore perhaps the single most important determinant of longevity: how quickly the cellular machinery needs to be built, how heavily it must be used, and how soon it has to be replaced. The axiom ‘live fast, die youn..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "reproductive prime. Respiration is efficient, so we can drive both biosynthesis and ATP synthesis through the normal oxidative Krebs cycle. To do so, we need to extract carbon skeletons from the Krebs cycle for the synthesis of amino acids, fatty acids, sugars, nucleotides and more: the cycle is in ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "metabolism by forwards flux, so must make a choice. Their stunted tail or narrow eye-span or less vibrant colour betrays a Krebs-cycle flux compromised by deficient interactions between the proteins encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear genes. That makes the signal genuinely honest; nothing less than..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (423 words): "Our flies illuminate part of the answer. We all – even identical twins – have a unique combination of mitochondrial genes set against our nuclear genomes. The flies show us that seemingly trivial incompatibilities between these two genomes can produce devastatingly different outcomes, with the antio..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "demands of each tissue, and the ability of our weakening mitochondria to meet those needs. This in turn depends on how our mitochondrial genes interact with the unique set of nuclear genes that are expressed in each tissue. Remarkably, the protein content of mitochondria differs by about a quarter f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (436 words): "high blood glucose drives a vicious cycle, in which tissues eventually become resistant to insulin. And that gives the brain a particularly serious problem, as it relies so heavily on glucose. It can’t simply revert to other fuels or alternative Krebs-cycle fluxes, like a cancer cell. Instead it mus..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (430 words): "rescuing neuronal function. But excess Ca 2+ is itself damaging, and the MAMs become swollen and damaged over time. MAM dysfunction is linked to many other features of Alzheimer’s in an uncanny way. Just to give a single example, the amyloid protein that forms plaques in the brains of Alzheimer’s pa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (459 words): "so my wrinkles and aches and pains are the product of about 10 32 reactions to date, roughly a billion times the number of stars in the known universe. I won’t even wonder how many of them didn’t quite work out properly. It’s astonishing I’m still alive at all. This is the metabolic flux that we’ve ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "regulating a subunit containing the most reactive iron–sulfur cluster. 12 Far from suppressing complex I activity, restricting ROS flux enables bats and birds to maintain or increase their aerobic capacity without losing redox tone – their balance of electron sources and sinks. They can go on burnin..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (500 words): "our epigenetic state: we must sustain a new pattern of flux moment by moment, year after year. Changes that can’t be sustained are no use – we will slump back soon enough into the metabolic doldrums of senescence. Excess isn’t sustainable over a lifetime. You will damage yourself, along with your mi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (523 words): "effectively put in ‘cold storage’ for decades, and more. None of this happens in the male germline for the simple reason that males do not pass on their mitochondria. This is the deepest distinction between the sexes, and arguably the reason there are two sexes at all. 3 This is a fine example of ho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (492 words): "6 ‘Mutator mice’ have an error-prone mitochondrial DNA polymerase that introduces mutations into mitochondrial DNA. Double mutants (in which both copies of the gene are error prone) have very high numbers of mitochondrial mutations. They age rapidly and die young. But mice with a single copy of the ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "One paper by Paula Moreira captures the nub of the problem in her title: ‘Sweet mitochondria – a shortcut to Alzheimer’s disease’. 11 I take this number from Joana Xavier, one of the stars of a rising generation of scientists who are rethinking the origins of metabolism at the emergence of life, who..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (447 words): "were random strings of a few letters of RNA, polymerising inside protocells growing in those deep-sea vents. From the beginning, genes copied themselves inside protocells, spreading when they promoted cell growth, regenerating what had come before faster and better. Genes never supplanted the deep c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (438 words): "fruit flies are conscious, they are most definitely unconscious when exposed to chloroform or ether.’ The mechanism of general anaesthesia is one of the major unsolved problems in science, ranked as such by the journal Science alongside cancer, quantum gravity and high-temperature superconductivity...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (434 words): "membranes, and flits respiratory electrons straight to oxygen. The effect must be subtle, for too much would kill us, and overdose is always a risk with anaesthetics. But suppose it’s true. What next? Instead of electron transfer to oxygen being coupled to proton pumping and ATP synthesis, some prop..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (450 words): "a stronger field, operating over a longer distance. Parallel membranes, such as the cristae membranes of neuronal mitochondria, should generate stronger fields that amplify a signal and potentially interact with weaker fields on the cell membrane, modulating neural activity. Could this be what gener..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "graze, give chase or flee from predators, struggle for their lives, or regenerate themselves, whirring parts and all, after some disastrous encounter. This behaviour is marvellous and sophisticated, and takes place in real time as we watch. What coordinates all of this? Do you think it is coordinate..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (477 words): "itself. But the time window is short. If there are too many phages, then there’s only one way out for the bacterium: die, fast, for the good of its kin. How does it do this? It yanks open pores in its cell membrane, collapsing the electrical potential. It dies almost immediately, before the virus ha..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (203 words): "fleeting moment in the kaleidoscope of metabolism, shape-changing a billion times a second. There’s no sense in which information binds you. Yet you are still part of an entity, a self. Your flux through the Krebs cycle is linked, moment by moment, with the balance of metabolism, with how much there..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (126 words): "ENVOI ‘Like Most Revelations’ Richard Howard It is the movement that incites the form, discovered as a downward rapture – yes, it is the movement that delights the form, sustained by its own velocity. And yet it is the movement that delays the form while darkness slows and encumbers; in fact it is t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The forward Krebs cycle 220"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (5 words) [SHORT]: "The reverse Krebs cycle 221"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (257 words): "A PPENDIX 1 RED PROTEIN MECHANICS The red protein is ferredoxin, one of the most ancient and fundamental proteins across all of life. It seems to have many jobs, but the common denominator is that it has unparalleled power to transfer electrons onto other molecules, most notably CO 2 , to fix carbon..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (250 words): "The problem here is that the carboxylate group (-COO – ) is not very reactive. To react with CO 2 , it first needs to be activated. This is achieved initially with ATP, which adds on the phosphate group to form acetyl phosphate, as shown on the right-hand side. (ATP is adenosine triphosphate; the tr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (297 words): "You might still be wondering what the ferredoxin is doing here. It’s adding on two electrons, but where did they actually go? The easiest way to see this is to think about what happens when the CoA-S – comes off, and the CO 2 is added on in its place. The reason that CoA-S – can detach relatively ea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (240 words): "Each of the two oxygen atoms therefore has a δ − , whereas the carbon atom is δ + , as shown below. This mild electrical polarity can in principle give rise to a more extreme endpoint, where a pair of electrons is pulled wholly onto one of the oxygens, giving the more reactive, unstable structure de..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (145 words): "action in the various reaction steps I’ve depicted above. In fact, water is never produced as a separate entity. Look back at that first scheme – you’ll see that the oxygen in the water molecule comes from the carboxylate group – and ends up on the phosphate that detaches from acetyl phosphate. The ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (331 words): "A PPENDIX 2 THE KREBS LINE In Chapter 3, we followed the fate of CO 2 bound to the surface of a mineral, through to a C2 acetyl group bound to the surface. This acetyl group is equivalent to acetyl CoA, one of the most important molecules in all metabolism, and the end-product of the acetyl CoA path..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (189 words): "Just in case you don’t recognise this as pyruvate, let me draw in the final step again, showing it being released as pyruvate, which I hope you know and love by now: When bound to the mineral surface, the steps that we’ve just seen (acetate to pyruvate) are mechanistically equivalent to, but much si..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (241 words): "why that Mad-Eye Moody oxygen is so reactive, which brings its own inexorable chemistry. Let me explain. Pyruvate exists in two states, one being more reactive and shorter lived than the other. The reactive form is known as the ‘enol’. This is the activated state seen in phospho enol -pyruvate, that..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (236 words): "The curly arrows here depict a proton acquiring a pair of electrons from the surface; the two electrons that formerly bound the hydrogen to pyruvate now move to form the double bond in enol pyruvate, which is stabilised by the oxygen grabbing an electron, as it likes to do. The proton bound to the s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "Notice that I’m drawing the carboxylate group with its negative charge in the conventional way again here, to emphasise its electrical interactions with the charged surface. I’ll use these styles interchangeably in the next couple of pages. As we saw earlier with pyruvate, oxaloacetate can remain bo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (317 words): "electrons plus two protons equates to the addition of two hydrogen atoms, one onto the alpha carbon and the other onto the oxygen, giving the C4 malate (right-hand side). The final step we’ll consider involves the loss of the alcohol (OH) group as a hydroxide ion (OH – ). As noted before, this is fa..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (368 words): "ABBREVIATIONS 2H Two hydrogen atoms (two electrons plus two protons). Can be extracted from anywhere in a molecule and transferred onto another molecule. ATP Adenosine triphosphate. The ‘universal energy currency’. Has a tail of three phosphate groups linked in a chain. Chopping off one phosphate le..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (437 words): "GWAS Genome-wide association studies. Statistical studies that correlate single- letter differences in DNA across whole genomes with the risk of diseases. H + Proton; a positively charged particle found in the nuclei of all atoms. The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is composed of a single proton. H 2 ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (28 words) [SHORT]: "SNP Single-nucleotide polymorphism (pronounced ‘snip’). A single-letter change in DNA, which can differ between individuals. We have millions of SNPs, making us genetically different to each other. 235"

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "FURTHER READING This is not a textbook or research paper, so is not referenced in a comprehensive way. But if you’ve read this far, you will have become deeply embroiled in the wider literature. This literature can be overwhelming. It is hard to know where to start, or even how to access it. I’ve th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (421 words): "manifesto for reconceiving the role that information plays in life and its origin, by a leading physicist and thinker who has long considered the makeup of life. Not surprisingly, I don’t agree with all he writes, but I notice we are both searching for meaning in fields, whether they be electrical o..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (399 words): "The digital jungle Horace Freeland Judson, The Eighth Day of Creation. Makers of the Revolution in Biology , 25th Anniversary Edition (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 1996). A magisterial work, which through extensive conversations with the protagonists, deft storytelling, a vast canvas and shr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "Smith and Morowitz take the case for the unity of biochemistry right back to the origin of life. W. Martin and M. J. Russell, ‘On the origin of biochemistry at an alkaline hydrothermal vent’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362 (2007) 1887–1925. A monumental paper that has probably..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (416 words): "Society in 1932. H. H. Dale, ‘Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1861–1947’, Obituary Notices Fellows Royal Society 6 (1948) 115–145. An affectionate biography from Sir Henry Dale, another pioneering biochemist who was instrumental in defending the freedom of science in the post-war years. If you ever wonder..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (382 words): "H. Krebs, ‘Otto Heinrich Warburg. 1883–1970’, Biographical Memoirs Fellows of the Royal Society 18 (1972) 628–699. Krebs’s generous tribute to his scientific mentor; even Krebs was unable to present Warburg in a wholly positive light, though he tried hard. Szent-Györgyi story Albert Szent-Györgyi, ‘..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (419 words): "extraordinary scholarship, drawing on Krebs’s lab books in detail, with all their exclamation marks. This volume deals with Krebs’s earlier years, leading up to the urea cycle. Frederic L. Holmes, Hans Krebs: Architect of Intermediary Metabolism 1933– 1937 . Volume 2 (Oxford, Oxford University Press..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (392 words): "‘at the age of eighty-seven, not long after having learned that his latest grant application had been successful’. Here at least, times have changed. Peter Mitchell and chemiosmotic coupling Peter Mitchell, ‘David Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences’, Nobel Lecture, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (377 words): "P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Evidence discriminating between the chemical and the chemiosmotic mechanisms of electron transport phosphorylation’, Nature 208 (1965) 1205–1206. A shorter paper, again presenting experimental evidence for the chemiosmotic hypothesis. P. D. Mitchell and J. Moyle, ‘Chemi..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (388 words): "mentioning the reverse Krebs cycle – which had been proposed fifteen years earlier. How blind are even the finest scientists. H. A. Krebs and H. L. Kornberg, Energy Transformations in Living Matter: A Survey (Berlin, Springer, 1957). Rather surprisingly described by James Watson as the only classic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "physicists and chemists of the day, set in times of heightened politics and war. A unique record. Oliver Morton, Eating the Sun: How Plants Power the Planet (London, Fourth Estate, 2009). A delightful book, as gripping as a novel on the history of photosynthesis, before broadening the sweep to a pla..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (400 words): "A. A. Benson, ‘Last days in the old radiation laboratory (ORL), Berkeley, California, 1954’, Photosynthesis Research 105 (2010) 209–212. More fascinating reminiscences from Andrew Benson. T. D. Sharkey, ‘Discovery of the canonical Calvin–Benson cycle’, Photosynthesis Research 140 (2019) 235–252. An ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (380 words): "after it was first proposed – by which time it is at last undisputed, if not widely known. B. B. Buchanan, ‘Daniel I. Arnon. November 14, 1910–December 20, 1994’, Biographical Memoirs 80 (2001) 2–20. A brief biography of Daniel Arnon (in the US National Academy of Sciences collection) from his frien..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (406 words): "seminal discovery, that the canonical ATP citrate lyase is not necessary for the reverse Krebs cycle; the standard enzyme citrate synthase is reversible after all. So do dogmas fall. L. Steffens, E. Pettinato, T. M. Steiner, A. Mall, S. König, W. Eisenreich and I. A. Berg, ‘High CO 2 levels drive th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "each discovered new vent systems, alongside Bill Martin and Mike Russell, leading protagonists of how life might have started in such systems. N. H. Sleep, D. K. Bird and E. C. Pope, ‘Serpentinite and the dawn of life’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 366 (2011) 2857–2869. An excel..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "Transactions of the Royal Society B 358 (2003) 59–85. An all-time classic paper, the kind of paper that draws young minds not just into the field but into science. J. Whitfield, ‘Origin of life: nascence man’, Nature 459 (2009) 316–319. Rarely does Nature feature the work of a scientist so explicitl..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (491 words): "with some leading phylogeneticists including the brilliant and prolific Eugene Koonin. I am unpersuaded, but Mulkidjanian’s papers are always worth reading. J. D. Sutherland, ‘Studies on the origin of life: the end of the beginning’, Nature Reviews in Chemistry 1 (2017) 0012. John Sutherland is a pr..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (478 words): "of view, looking for similar chemistry to that still happening in cells. This is an exciting paper which links up with their own earlier work, showing that various intermediates in the acetyl CoA pathway as well as the reverse Krebs cycle are produced from CO 2 using raw iron as a source of electron..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (417 words): "R. Braakman and E. Smith, ‘The emergence and early evolution of biological carbon fixation’, PLoS Computational Biology 8 (2012) e1002455. An extremely neat idea, which attempts to unite phylogenetic analysis with metabolic flux analysis to constrain the deepest branches of the tree of life using th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "on the shelf of anyone seriously interested in the origin of life. Manages to present new ideas with admirable clarity, while being balanced and exhaustive. J. Trefil, H. J. Morowitz and E. Smith, ‘The origin of life. A case is made for the descent of electrons’, American Scientist 206 (2009) 96–213..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (463 words): "V. Sojo, B. Herschy, A. Whicher, E. Camprubi and N. Lane, ‘The origin of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents’, Astrobiology 16 (2016) 181–197. Our own attempt to reconcile the origins of life in alkaline hydrothermal vents with the divergence of bacteria and archaea, based on electron bifurcation an..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (441 words): "R. Hudson, R. de Graaf, M. S. Rodin, A. Ohno, N. Lane, S. E. McGlynn, Y. M. A. Yamada, R. Nakamura, L. M. Barge, D. Braun and V. Sojo, ‘CO 2 reduction driven by a pH gradient’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 117 (2020) 22873–22879. The first robust demonstration that proton grad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (418 words): "R. Nunes Palmeira, M. Colnaghi, S. Harrison, A. Pomiankowski and N. Lane, ‘The limits of metabolic heredity in protocells’, available on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.01.28.477904). More on positive feedbacks and autocatalysis in protocells. Only general forms of catalysis are helpful, as th..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (448 words): "Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York, Simon & Schuster, 1995). I never appreciated what a razor- sharp philosophical mind could do to scientific arguments until I read this book, where Dan Dennett skewers some of the biggest names in biology, inclu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (414 words): "energy revolutions transformed the potential of life on Earth, from the origins of life to photosynthesis, oxygen and fire. Electron bifurcation W. Buckel and R. K. Thauer, ‘Flavin-based electron bifurcation, ferredoxin, flavodoxin, and anaerobic respiration with protons (Ech) or NAD + (Rnf) as elec..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (415 words): "Bacterial metabolism and syntrophy P. Schönheit, W. Buckel and W. F. Martin, ‘On the origin of heterotrophy’, Trends in Microbiology 24 (2016) 12–25. An important paper, which is so clearly thought through that it is almost impossible to see how else heterotrophy (‘eating’ organic molecules) could h..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (433 words): "mentorship as academic lineage), Lenton and Watson know exactly whereof they speak. H. C. Betts, M. N. Puttick, J. W. Clark, T. A. Williams, P. C. J. Donoghue and D. Pisani, ‘Integrated genomic and fossil evidence illuminates life’s early evolution and eukaryote origin’, Nature Ecology and Evolution..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (428 words): "Active ventilation in animals A. H. Knoll, R. K. Bambach, D. E. Canfield and J. P. Grotzinger, ‘Comparative earth history and late Permian mass extinction’, Science 273: 452–457 (1996). A revelatory paper for me, which shows that the survivors of the end-Permian extinction were not random, but predo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (470 words): "L. J. Sweetlove, K. F. Beard, A. Nunes-Nesi, A. R. Fernie and R. G. Ratcliffe, ‘Not just a circle: flux modes in the plant TCA cycle’, Trends in Plant Sciences 15 (2010) 462–470. A lovely analysis of different types of flux through the Krebs cycle. This is one of a series of papers by Lee Sweetlove ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (411 words): "still bites: ‘Most serious of all the results of the somatic mutation hypothesis has been its effect on research workers. It acts as a tranquillizer on those who believe in it, and this at a time when every worker should feel goaded now and again by his ignorance of what cancer is.’ S. G. Baker, ‘A ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (429 words): "insightful piece that captures a lot of Warburg’s thinking that remains relevant for a modern audience interested in cancer. Martin D. Kamen, Radiant Science, Dark Politics. A Memoir of the Nuclear Age (Berkeley, University of California Press, 1985). I have already cited this in Chapter 2 but it’s ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (407 words): "at the original for the full context. Otto Heinrich Warburg, The Prime Cause and Prevention of Cancer (Würzburg, Konrad Triltsch, 1969). A famous manifesto, following on where his Science paper left off. The booklet was developed from a lecture at the Lindau Nobel laureate meeting in 1966, and trans..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (452 words): "P. W. Hochachka and K. B. Storey, ‘Metabolic consequences of diving in animals and man’, Science 187 (1975) 613–621. How diving animals survive long periods without oxygen – calling attention to the importance of fumarate and succinate in anaerobic metabolism. A visionary piece from the grand master..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (446 words): "to an important book by Rebecca Skloot, The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks (Pan, 2011), after whom HeLa cells were named, which calls attention to a historical wrong. S. L. Colombo, M. Palacios-Callender, N. Frakich, S. Carcamo, I. Kovacs, S. Tudzarova and S. Moncada, ‘Molecular basis for the diff..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (432 words): "M. Wagner, E. Bertero, A. Nickel, M. Kohlhaas, G. E. Gibson, W. Heggermont, S. Heymans and C. Maack, ‘Selective NADH communication from α- ketoglutarate dehydrogenase to mitochondrial transhydrogenase prevents reactive oxygen species formation under reducing conditions in the heart’, Basic Research ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (393 words): "2020). Available here: https://doi:10.26124/bec:2020-0002. The ‘bible’ of fluo- respirometry, privately published by Erich Gnaiger in the tradition of Peter Mitchell’s ‘little grey books’; this is the little blue book. Gives practical insights into how the Krebs cycle really works. Introduces the id..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (386 words): "pieces of evolutionary thinking of the twentieth century, and should be read by all. André Klarsfeld and Frédéric Revah, The Biology of Death: Origins of Mortality (Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2000). A delightful romp through the strangeness of ageing and death in nature. Rollicking natura..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (426 words): "R. E . Giles, H. Blanc, H. M. Cann and D. C. Wallace, ‘Maternal inheritance of human mitochondrial DNA’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 77 (1980) 6715–671. The first demonstration that mitochondrial DNA is inherited from the mother in humans, although this had already been estab..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (405 words): "Vesalius and Mendel. An important synthesis; should be required reading for medical students. Mitochondria in flies D. E. Miller, K. R. Cook and R. S. Hawley, ‘The joy of balancers’, PLoS Genet ics 15 (2019) e1008421. A good historical take on balancer chromosomes in Drosophila , along with a summar..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (412 words): "antioxidant NAC caused problems in some lines but not others, depending on the mitochondrial DNA. M. F. Camus, W. Kotiadis, H. Carter, E. Rodriguez and N. Lane, ‘Mitonuclear interactions produce extreme differences in response to redox stress’, available as a preprint on BioRxiv (https://doi.org/10...."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (453 words): "book length, drawing parallels with companies and cities that I haven’t seen anyone do since the great polymath J. B. S. Haldane. Antioxidants don’t work J. M. Gutteridge and B. Halliwell, ‘Free radicals and antioxidants in the year 2000. A historical look to the future’, Annals of the New York Acad..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (404 words): "D. Gems, ‘The aging–disease false dichotomy: understanding senescence as pathology’, Frontiers in Genetics 6 (2015) 12. David Gems rails against the idea that ageing is somehow normal and ‘healthy’, whereas disease is pathological. The best way to treat all age-related diseases is clearly to treat t..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (397 words): "urine). Paula Moreira discusses how diabetes-linked defects in mitochondria increase the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. D. A. Butterfield and B. Halliwell, ‘Oxidative stress, dysfunctional glucose metabolism and Alzheimer disease’, Nature Reviews Neuroscience 20 (2019) 148–160. If even the redoubtable..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (420 words): "Anaesthetics and mitochondria L. Turin, E. M. C. Skoulakis and A. P. Horsfield, ‘Electron spin changes during general anesthesia in Drosophila ’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 111 (2014) E3524–E3533. Luca Turin and colleagues on how general anaesthetics influence oxygen and res..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (464 words): "Michael Levin is currently doing some of the most exciting work in biology. Electrical fields determine development; genes are secondary. So far that mostly goes for flat-worms, but could it be more general? I think so. M. Levin and D. C. Dennett, ‘Cognition all the way down’, Aeon , 13 October 2020..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (361 words): "J. McFadden, ‘Integrating information in the brain’s EM field: the cemi field theory of consciousness’, Neuroscience of Consciousness 2020 (2020) niaa016. Johnjoe McFadden has been thinking about electrical fields in relation to consciousness for several decades, and this is a recent update on his c..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (440 words): "ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book opens with a description of an empty city, lacking the hurly burly of people and energy flow. Little did I realise when writing that passage that it would require such a trivial leap of the imagination – I had written it before Covid-19 sucked the life out of cities the wo..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "as the severely disturbed downstream consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities in ageing flies. Grappling with new results while writing this book, sometimes watching cherished ideas implode, is one of the more chastening and valuable experiences of research. We can’t afford to take our own idea..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (486 words): "care to admit, while celebrating the bigger picture and occasionally dredging up some details from her deeply buried degree in biochemistry. She racked her mind over possible titles. Titles are never easy, and Allyson has one of the most inventive minds I know. The fact that she didn’t better the cu..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (443 words): "lost ourselves in a six-hour discussion on why the cycle is a cycle and other abstruse questions. Rarely have science and pure pleasure aligned so closely. And I thank Prof. Christian Frezza, who some years ago made me understand viscerally how central mitochondria are to cancer, not for ATP synthes..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (479 words): "aside until Derek invited me to give the Derek Denton Oration in the Arts and Sciences in Melbourne in 2019 – on condition that I addressed consciousness, if only in brief. While wrestling with the question, I immersed myself in the revelatory work of Prof. Luca Turin (linking it in my own mind with..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (315 words): "other people felt the same until his funeral. We will all remember him with love and admiration. Heartfelt condolences to Mary Jane. Last but not least, I thank Caroline Dawnay of United Agents, and my publishers in London and New York, Profile Books and W. W. Norton respectively. I thank Caroline f..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "INDEX Note: The index covers the main text and appendices. The suffix ‘n’ plus a number indicates a relevant footnote on that page. Page numbers in italics indicate illustrations. Academic Assistance Council 30, 31n1 acetate from CO 2 and H 2 121, 139–40 conversion to pyruvate 289–93, 295 conversion..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (179 words): "‘alpha-keto’ groups 41, 286, 299 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) alternative oxidase 183, 228n7, 262n8 Alvin (submersible) 112–13, 115 Alzheimer’s disease 21, 28, 266–8, 280 amino acids biosynthesis 72, 101, 122, 208, 215 breakdown mechanisms 38–9, 40–41, 70, 226 chirality 277 prebiotic formation ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 302 in cellular respiration 56–7, 64 formation without ATP synthase 144, 151 synthesis 65–8, 98–105, 187–8 yields from respiration and fermentation 201–2, 207 ATP citrate lyase 110, 123, 173, 220n6 ATP synthase absent from first cells 151 effects of excess ATP 208, 218 a..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (170 words): "Krebs cycle and non-cycle 111, 184–6 symbiosis among 170, 188 ‘balancer chromosomes’ 245, 248 Baldwin, Ernest 59 Barja, Gustavo 271 Baross, John 113–14 Bassham, James 97 Benson, Andrew 91, 93–7, 100, 102–3 see also Calvin-Benson cycle Berkeley, California 87n5, 98–9 the Rad Lab 79, 82, 84, 89–90 bil..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "C4 carboxylic acids in photosynthesis 93, 100 in respiration 33, 46–8, 50–2 in reverse Krebs cycle 123, 184 C5 molecules 51–2, 94–5, 105 see also α-ketoglutarate (at ‘k’) C6 carboxylic acids, citrate as 51–2, 57, 105, 182, 185 , 217, 222–3 Calvin, Genevieve 94n7, 96 Calvin, Melvin 90–91, 93–100, 102..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (191 words): "carbon-12 ( 12 C) 178, 180–82 carbon-13 ( 13 C) 88, 178–80, 182n6 carbon-14 ( 14 C) 79, 86–92, 99, 102, 178 carbon capture and sequestration 34–5n2, 177 carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) activation by ATP or ferredoxin 289, 291 in ancient atmospheres 119 reaction with hydrogen 115, 121, 133 reduction on minera..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (185 words): "cell division 27, 192, 195, 283 cell-free extracts 62 cell nucleus, transplanting 195 cells as batteries 162 cellular level consciousness 276 city analogy 1–2, 14, 17–18 colour 35–6n3 emission of radiation 27–8 grouping stoichiometry 171, 188 membranes and cell walls 61–2 central dogma 192 Chandel, ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also acetyl CoA; succinyl CoA Cohen, Michael 278 Colnaghi, Marco 241n2 complexes I, II, III see respiratory chain consciousness 274–84 evidence from anaesthetics 276–8 and membrane potentials 278, 283 Corliss, Jack 112–14 cosmological constants 131n7 coupling, ATP synthesis and respiration 58, 6..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (162 words): "imposed on Calvin 94n6 ketogenic diets 228 and mitochondrial function 25, 242, 249, 251, 264 Wallace on 242 Warburg on 197 differentiation, tissues 189, 202, 208–9, 269 diseases chronic infections and cancer 195 genetic variation and 14, 235, 237 mitochondrial genome 240 of old age 233–5, 243, 263 s..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (169 words): "The Emergence of Everything , by Morowitz 127 Emerson, Robert 199–200 Enceladus 117, 120 endoplasmic reticulum 266n9 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 energetics of early life 168 of fixed carbon 160 of living cells as invisible 3 of respiration 32 energy and matter flows 4, 5–6, 12, 18–21, 275 Energy Flow in..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (175 words): "see also glycolysis, aerobic ferredoxin (Fd) amino acid sequence and antiquity 164–7 ancient metabolic pathways 121–2, 142 detailed mechanism of action 288–93 discovery and properties 105–10, 114 Ech interaction 143–4 mineral catalysts resembling 121–2, 135, 146–7, 163–4 reactivity with oxygen 106–8..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "origins in protocells 149–50, 275 (reverse) Krebs cycle signalling 20, 185, 195, 211–12, 215 whether preceded by metabolism 4–6, 17, 118, 129, 150 see also alleles; epigenetic changes genes, mitochondrial see mitochondrial genome genes, nuclear see nuclear genome genetic code 10–11, 12n2, 148, 149n9..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (158 words): "protocells 146–7 GWAS (genome-wide association studies) 235, 237, 244 2H/H 2 see hydrogen haem pigments 35–6 see also chlorophyll; cytochrome oxidase haemoglobin 35–6, 114, 165, 183, 187 Haldane, JBS 29–30, 59, 198n2 Haldane, JS 30 half-lives, proteins 212 half-lives, radioisotopes 81, 83. 86 Halper..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (202 words): "burned in respiration 49–51, 55–8, 63–4, 159, 206, 254–5, 261 2H and H 2 distinguished 47–8n6 2H carriers in respiration 49–51, 63–4, 108n11 in photosynthesis 99–100, 174 protons pumped by transferring 68n13, 164, 225, 262 hydrogen (H 2 ) from hydrothermal vents 113–15, 120, 141 reaction with CO 2 1..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "spontaneous formation of 4Fe4S 146 isocitrate 128 , 184, 185 , 218, 220–22, 286 , 287 isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 isotope studies 144 see also carbon-12; carbon-13; radioisotopes Jacob, François 191 Japanese lifespans 272 Jordan, Sean 145 Kamen, Martin 82–90, 92, 102 Keilin, David 59, 64, 198, 2..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (194 words): "in the brain 263, 266, 280–81 in cancer cells 222–3, 228 in fruit flies 255–6 mitonuclear mismatches and 262, 264–7 potential reversal 186, 214, 244, 262 Krebs cycle intermediates 51–2 autocatalysis and 127n5 biosynthesis and anaplerosis 72, 122, 260–61n7 conserved intermediates 123 diagnostic of ce..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (193 words): "tissue symbiosis 190 lifestyle choices 25, 235, 264, 268–9, 272–3 light energy infrared, and photosynthesis 115n2 powering ATP synthesis 105 synthesis of organics in plants 107 ‘Like most revelations’ (poem) 285 limestone 119, 178 Lipmann, Fritz 55–8, 65, 139, 151 Lost in the Twentieth Century , by ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (177 words): "metabolic flux complementarity 161, 189 numeric interpretation 8, 269–70 redirected in cancer 16, 26, 205, 210 as reversible 153, 168–9 signalling function 20–21, 244 and stream of consciousness 26, 274–5 traffic analogy 7–8, 14–15 metabolic pathways, evolution 72–3, 103, 275 metabolic rate and life..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (176 words): "mutations within 240–41, 247, 254n4, 257 offering improved lifespan 272 respiration efficiency 251, 254–5n4 uniparental inheritance 239–40, 246n2 mitochondrial membranes and anaesthesia 277–8 charge on 68, 179, 225, 265, 267, 278–9 cristae 279 see also MAMs mitonuclear mismatches 238–9, 247, 250, 26..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (197 words): "in biosynthesis 206–9, 224, 225 , 264 and glutathione regeneration 252–3, 255 and isocitrate dehydrogenase 218–21 Krebs reversal and cancer 217–21 in photosynthesis and photorespiration 107–9 programmed cell death and 207 and transhydrogenase 222 , 226 nanomotors, ATP synthase as 69, 150–51, 211 nan..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (188 words): "origin of life and hydrothermal vents 113, 117, 133, 152–3 inevitability 127, 131n7, 275 metabolism preceding genes 4–5, 118, 150 oxygen as inimical 157 processes summarised 275 ornithine 52–3 the Oroboros 171–3, 184, 186–7 Oroboros respirometers 171n3, 248 overeating 264 overheating in animals 262n..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (183 words): "phosphoenol-pyruvate 70–71, 73, 102, 122, 224–5, 287 , 296–7 phosphoglycerate 92, 94, 96, 174 photophosphorylation 99, 105 photorespiration 76, 109 photosynthesis anoxygenic and oxygenic 166–8, 175 hydrothermal vents and 114, 115n2 ‘invented’ by cyanobacteria 78, 283 mechanism 82–6, 103, 199 phospho..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (173 words): "proton gradients 64, 150, 152, 164 proton-motive force 61, 69, 143, 147 , 162–4, 220 powering ATP synthesis 65–7, 66 , 99, 163 protons in acidic environments 137–8 pumped by 2H transfers 68n13, 164, 225, 262 representation 41 protozoa, revealed by microscopy 3–4 pyrites, iron 115, 182 pyruvate/pyruv..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (181 words): "as a mitochondrial function 32, 67–8n13 photophosphorylation and 99 as preceding photosynthesis 36 role of NADH 108n11 role of succinate 211–14 suppression by antioxidants 250–52, 254 suppression with age 230, 259–60, 262, 264 respiratory chain complex I 66 , 230, 249–51, 254, 259, 262, 271 complex ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (163 words): "supercharged membrane potentials 219 in transplant organs 214n5 see also free radicals ROS flux 230, 244, 249–55, 257n5, 259, 261–2, 270–72 roundabout analogy 24, 54, 70–72, 188, 260, 270 the Royal Society 27, 29–30, 53 Ruben, Sam 82–6, 88–92, 102 rubisco (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (174 words): "serpentinisation 120, 174 sex differences and mitochondria 239–41, 247 sexual ornamentation 261 Shields, Graham 180–81, 182n6 Shuram excursion 180–81, 182n6, 183 Sir Hans Krebs Trust 31n1, 49–50n7 Sirevag, Reidun 102 sirtuins 223 small organic molecules on Enceladus 117 protein binding 85 see also K..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (156 words): "symbiosis among bacteria and archaea 170, 188 endosymbiosis 69, 221n6 between tissues 189–90, 265 Szent-Györgyi, Albert 44–52, 63, 71, 104, 184, 299 Thauer, Rolf 163n2 thermodynamics favouring organic synthesis and life 150, 275 and the Krebs cycle 22, 126 laws recast as information 4 and metabolic ..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (123 words): "vitalism/vital force 5, 8, 62 vitamins C and E 44–5, 48, 252 Wächtershäuser, Günter 115–16 Walker, Sara 130n6 Walker, Sir John 67–8n13 Wallace, Doug 238–44, 279 Warburg, Emil 197 Warburg, Otto on cancer 196, 200, 203 cytochrome oxidase and 35n2, 49 disputes with other scientists 62, 64n11, 197–200 e..."

=== NEW SECTION: 1 paragraphs ===
Paragraph 0 (93 words): "Table of Contents Praise for Transformer 1 Title Page 3 Copyright 4 Dedication 5 Contents 6 Introduction: Life itself 8 1. Discovering the nanocosm 27 2. The path of carbon 62 3. From gases to life 91 4. Revolutions 124 5. To the dark side 150 6. The flux capacitor 181 Epilogue: Self 211 Envoi: ‘Lik..."
