
--- PAGE 0 ---

--- END PAGE 0 ---

--- PAGE 1 ---

--- END PAGE 1 ---

--- PAGE 2 ---
Table of Contents 
Praise
ALSO BY JONATHAN HAIDT 
Title Page
Dedication
Introduction 
Chapter 1 - The Divided Self
FIRST DIVISION: MIND VS. BODY
SECOND DIVISION: LEFT VS. RIGHT
THIRD DIVISION: NEW VS. OLD
FOURTH DIVISION: CONTROLLED VS. AUTOMATIC
FAILURES OF SELF CONTROL
MENTAL INTRUSIONS
THE DIFFICULTY OF WINNING AN ARGUMENT 
Chapter 2 - Changing Your Mind
THE LIKE-O-METER
NEGATIVITY BIAS
THE CORTICAL LOTTERY
HOW TO CHANGE YOUR MIND 
Chapter 3 - Reciprocity with a Vengeance
ULTRASOCIALITY 
YOU SCRATCH MY BACK, I’LL SCRATCH YOURS 
YOU STAB HIS BACK, I’LL STAB YOURS 
USE THE FORCE, LUKE 
Chapter 4 - The Faults of Others
KEEPING UP APPEARANCES
FIND YOUR INNER LAWYER
THE ROSE-COLORED MIRROR 
I’M RIGHT; YOU’RE BIASED
SATAN SATISFIES
--- END PAGE 2 ---

--- PAGE 3 ---
THE MYTH OF PURE EVIL
FINDING THE GREAT WAY 
Chapter 5 - The Pursuit of Happiness
THE PROGRESS PRINCIPLE
THE ADAPTATION PRINCIPLE
AN EARLY HAPPINESS HYPOTHESIS
THE HAPPINESS FORMULA
FINDING FLOW
MISGUIDED PURSUITS
THE HAPPINESS HYPOTHESIS RECONSIDERED 
Chapter 6 - Love and Attachments
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD 
LOVE CONQUERS FEAR
THE PROOF IS IN THE PARTING
IT’S NOT JUST FOR CHILDREN
LOVE AND THE SWELLED HEAD 
TWO LOVES, TWO ERRORS
WHY DO PHILOSOPHERS HATE LOVE?
FREEDOM CAN BE HAZARDOUS TO YOUR HEALTH 
Chapter 7 - The Uses of Adversity
POSTTRAUMATIC GROWTH
MUST WE SUFFER?
BLESSED ARE THE SENSE MAKERS
FOR EVERYTHING THERE IS A SEASON
ERROR AND WISDOM 
Chapter 8 - The Felicity of Virtue
THE VIRTUES OF THE ANCIENTS
HOW THE WEST WAS LOST
THE VIRTUES OF POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 
HARD QUESTION, EASY ANSWERS 
HARD QUESTION, HARD ANSWERS
THE FUTURE OF VIRTUE 
Chapter 9 - Divinity With or Without God
--- END PAGE 3 ---

--- PAGE 4 ---
ARE WE NOT ANIMALS?
THE ETHIC OF DIVINITY
SACRED INTRUSIONS
ELEVATION AND AGAPE
A WE AND TRANSCENDENCE
THE SATANIC SELF
FLATLAND AND THE CULTURE WAR 
Chapter 10 - Happiness Comes from Between 
WHAT WAS THE QUESTION?
LOVE AND WORK
VITAL ENGAGEMENT
CROSS-LEVEL COHERENCE
GOD GIVES US HIVES
HARMONY AND PURPOSE
THE MEANING OF LIFE 
Chapter 11 - Conclusion: On Balance 
Acknowledgements
Notes 
References
Index 
Copyright Page
--- END PAGE 4 ---

--- PAGE 5 ---
Praise for The Happiness Hypothesis 
“A fresh, serious, elevating guide to living everyday life better.” 
—Library Journal 
“Haidt is a fine guide on this journey between past and present, discussing the current
complexities of psychological theory with clarity and humor. . . . Haidt’s is an open-
minded, robust look at philosophy, psychological fact and spiritual mystery, of scientific
rationalism and the unknowable ephemeral—an honest inquiry that concludes that the best
life is, perhaps, one lived in the balance of opposites.” 
—Bookpage 
“An erudite, fluently written, stimulating reassessment of age-old issues.” 
—Publishers Weekly, starred review 
“A sparkling investigation into the psychology of life and happiness.” 
—Daniel Wegner, author of The Illusion of Conscious Will 
“Every page of this book provides gems of insight about the good life and where to look
for it.” 
—William Damon, author of The Moral Child 
“In this beautifully written book, Jonathan Haidt shows us the deep connection that exists
between cutting-edge psychological research and the wisdom of the ancients. It is inspiring
to see how much modern psychology informs life’s most central and persistent questions.” 
—Barry Schwartz, Swarthmore College,
author of The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less 
“An intellectual tour de force that weaves into one fabric wisdom that is ancient and
modern, religious and scientific, Eastern and Western, liberal and conservative—all with
the aim of pointing us to a more meaningful, moral, and satisfying life.”
--- END PAGE 5 ---

--- PAGE 6 ---
—David G. Myers, Hope College,
author of Intuition: Its Powers and Its Perils
--- END PAGE 6 ---

--- PAGE 7 ---
ALSO BY JONATHAN HAIDT 
Flourishing: Positive Psychology and the Life Well-Lived (co-editor)
--- END PAGE 7 ---

--- PAGE 8 ---

--- END PAGE 8 ---

--- PAGE 9 ---

--- END PAGE 9 ---

--- PAGE 10 ---
--- END PAGE 10 ---

--- PAGE 11 ---
Introduction

Too Much Wisdom 
W HAT SHOULD I DO, how should I live, and whom should I become?
Many of us ask such questions, and, modern life being what it is, we
don’t have to go far to find answers. Wisdom is now so cheap and
abundant that it floods over us from calendar pages, tea bags, bottle caps,
and mass e-mail messages forwarded by well-meaning friends. We are in
a way like residents of Jorge Luis Borges’s Library of Babel —an infinite
library whose books contain every possible string of letters and,
therefore, somewhere an explanation of why the library exists and how
to use it. But Borges’s librarians suspect that they will never find that
book amid the miles of nonsense.
Our prospects are better. Few of our potential sources of wisdom are
nonsense, and many are entirely true. Yet, because our library is also
effectively infinite—no one person can ever read more than a tiny
fraction—we face the paradox of abundance: Quantity undermines the
quality of our engagement. With such a vast and wonderful library
spread out before us, we often skim books or read just the reviews. We
might already have encountered the Greatest Idea, the insight that would
have transformed us had we savored it, taken it to heart, and worked it
into our lives.
This is a book about ten Great Ideas. Each chapter is an attempt to
savor one idea that has been discovered by several of the world’s
civilizations—to question it in light of what we now know from
scientific research, and to extract from it the lessons that still apply to our
modern lives.
I am a social psychologist. I do experiments to try to figure out one
corner of human social life, and my corner is morality and the moral
emotions. I am also a teacher. I teach a large introductory psychology
--- END PAGE 11 ---

--- PAGE 12 ---
class at the University of Virginia in which I try to explain the entire
field of psychology in twenty-four lectures. I have to present a thousand
research findings on everything from the structure of the retina to the
workings of love, and then hope that my students will understand and
remember it all. As I struggled with this challenge in my first year of
teaching, I realized that several ideas kept recurring across lectures, and
that often these ideas had been stated eloquently by past thinkers. To
summarize the idea that our emotions, our reactions to events, and some
mental illnesses are caused by the mental filters through which we look
at the world, I could not say it any more concisely than Shakespeare:
“There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.”1 I began
to use such quotations to help my students remember the big ideas in
psychology, and I began to wonder just how many such ideas there were.
To find out, I read dozens of works of ancient wisdom, mostly from
the world’s three great zones of classical thought: India (for example, the
Upanishads, the Bhagavad Gita, the sayings of the Buddha), China (the
Analects of Confucius, the Tao te Ching, the writings of Meng Tzu and
other philosophers), and the cultures of the Mediterranean (the Old and
New Testaments, the Greek and Roman philosophers, the Koran). I also
read a variety of other works of philosophy and literature from the last
five hundred years. Every time I found a psychological claim—a
statement about human nature or the workings of the mind or heart—I
wrote it down. Whenever I found an idea expressed in several places and
times I considered it a possible Great Idea. But rather than mechanically
listing the top ten all-time most widespread psychological ideas of
humankind, I decided that coherence was more important than
frequency. I wanted to write about a set of ideas that would fit together,
build upon each other, and tell a story about how human beings can find
happiness and meaning in life.
Helping people find happiness and meaning is precisely the goal of the
new field of positive psychology,2 a field in which I have been active,3
so this book is in a way about the origins of positive psychology in
ancient wisdom and the applications of positive psychology today. Most
of the research I will cover was done by scientists who would not
consider themselves positive psychologists. Nonetheless, I have drawn
on ten ancient ideas and a great variety of modern research findings to
--- END PAGE 12 ---

--- PAGE 13 ---
tell the best story I can about the causes of human flourishing, and the
obstacles to well being that we place in our own paths.
The story begins with an account of how the human mind works. Not
a full account, of course, just two ancient truths that must be understood
before you can take advantage of modern psychology to improve your
life. The first truth is the foundational idea of this book: The mind is
divided into parts that sometimes conflict. Like a rider on the back of an
elephant, the conscious, reasoning part of the mind has only limited
control of what the elephant does. Nowadays, we know the causes of
these divisions, and a few ways to help the rider and the elephant work
better as a team. The second idea is Shakespeare’s, about how “thinking
makes it so.” (Or, as Buddha4 said, “Our life is the creation of our
mind.”) But we can improve this ancient idea today by explaining why
most people’s minds have a bias toward seeing threats and engaging in
useless worry. We can also do something to change this bias by using
three techniques that increase happiness, one ancient and two very new.
The second step in the story is to give an account of our social lives—
again, not a complete account, just two truths, widely known but not
sufficiently appreciated. One is the Golden Rule. Reciprocity is the most
important tool for getting along with people, and I’ll show you how you
can use it to solve problems in your own life and avoid being exploited
by those who use reciprocity against you. However, reciprocity is more
than just a tool. It is also a clue about who we humans are and what we
need, a clue that will be important for understanding the end of the larger
story. The second truth in this part of the story is that we are all, by
nature, hypocrites, and this is why it is so hard for us to follow the
Golden Rule faithfully. Recent psychological research has uncovered the
mental mechanisms that make us so good at seeing the slightest speck in
our neighbor’s eye, and so bad at seeing the log in our own. If you know
what your mind is up to, and why you so easily see the world through a
distorting lens of good and evil, you can take steps to reduce your self-
righteousness. You can thereby reduce the frequency of conflicts with
others who are equally convinced of their righteousness.
At this point in the story, we’ll be ready to ask: Where does happiness
come from? There are several different “happiness hypotheses.” One is
that happiness comes from getting what you want, but we all know (and
research confirms) that such happiness is short-lived. A more promising
--- END PAGE 13 ---

--- PAGE 14 ---
hypothesis is that happiness comes from within and cannot be obtained
by making the world conform to your desires. This idea was widespread
in the ancient world: Buddha in India and the Stoic philosophers in
ancient Greece and Rome all counseled people to break their emotional
attachments to people and events, which are always unpredictable and
uncontrollable, and to cultivate instead an attitude of acceptance. This
ancient idea deserves respect, and it is certainly true that changing your
mind is usually a more effective response to frustration than is changing
the world. However, I will present evidence that this second version of
the happiness hypothesis is wrong. Recent research shows that there are
some things worth striving for; there are external conditions of life that
can make you lastingly happier. One of these conditions is relatedness—
the bonds we form, and need to form, with others. I’ll present research
showing where love comes from, why passionate love always cools, and
what kind of love is “true” love. I’ll suggest that the happiness
hypothesis offered by Buddha and the Stoics should be amended:
Happiness comes from within, and happiness comes from without. We
need the guidance of both ancient wisdom and modern science to get the
balance right.
The next step in this story about flourishing is to look at the conditions
of human growth and development. We’ve all heard that what doesn’t
kill us makes us stronger, but that is a dangerous oversimplification.
Many of the things that don’t kill you can damage you for life. Recent
research on “posttraumatic growth” reveals when and why people grow
from adversity, and what you can do to prepare yourself for trauma, or to
cope with it after the fact. We have also all heard repeated urgings to
cultivate virtue in ourselves, because virtue is its own reward, but that,
too, is an oversimplification. I’ll show how concepts of virtue and
morality have changed and narrowed over the centuries, and how ancient
ideas about virtue and moral development may hold promise for our own
age. I’ll also show how positive psychology is beginning to deliver on
that promise by offering you a way to “diagnose” and develop your own
strengths and virtues.
The conclusion of the story is the question of meaning: Why do some
people find meaning, purpose, and fulfillment in life, but others do not? I
begin with the culturally widespread idea that there is a vertical, spiritual
dimension of human existence. Whether it is called nobility, virtue, or
--- END PAGE 14 ---

--- PAGE 15 ---
divinity, and whether or not God exists, people simply do perceive
sacredness, holiness, or some ineffable goodness in others, and in nature.
I’ll present my own research on the moral emotions of disgust, elevation,
and awe to explain how this vertical dimension works, and why the
dimension is so important for understanding religious fundamentalism,
the political culture war, and the human quest for meaning. I’ll also
consider what people mean when they ask, “What is the meaning of
life?” And I’ll give an answer to the question—an answer that draws on
ancient ideas about having a purpose but that uses very recent research to
go beyond these ancient ideas, or any ideas you are likely to have
encountered. In doing so, I’ll revise the happiness hypothesis one last
time. I could state that final version here in a few words, but I could not
explain it in this brief introduction without cheapening it. Words of
wisdom, the meaning of life, perhaps even the answer sought by
Borges’s librarians—all of these may wash over us every day, but they
can do little for us unless we savor them, engage with them, question
them, improve them, and connect them to our lives. That is my goal in
this book.
--- END PAGE 15 ---

--- PAGE 16 ---
1 
The Divided Self 
For what the flesh desires is opposed to the Spirit, and what the Spirit
desires is opposed to the flesh; for these are opposed to each other, to
prevent you from doing what you want.
—ST. PAUL, GALATIANS 5:171 
If Passion drives, let Reason hold the Reins.
—BENJAMIN FRANKLIN1,2 
I FIRST RODE A HORSE in 1991, in Great Smoky National Park,
North Carolina. I’d been on rides as a child where some teenager led the
horse by a short rope, but this was the first time it was just me and a
horse, no rope. I wasn’t alone—there were eight other people on eight
other horses, and one of the people was a park ranger—so the ride didn’t
ask much of me. There was, however, one difficult moment. We were
riding along a path on a steep hillside, two by two, and my horse was on
the outside, walking about three feet from the edge. Then the path turned
sharply to the left, and my horse was heading straight for the edge. I
froze. I knew I had to steer left, but there was another horse to my left
and I didn’t want to crash into it. I might have called out for help, or
screamed, “Look out!”; but some part of me preferred the risk of going
over the edge to the certainty of looking stupid. So I just froze. I did
nothing at all during the critical five seconds in which my horse and the
horse to my left calmly turned to the left by themselves.
As my panic subsided, I laughed at my ridiculous fear. The horse
knew exactly what she was doing. She’d walked this path a hundred
times, and she had no more interest in tumbling to her death than I had.
--- END PAGE 16 ---

--- PAGE 17 ---
She didn’t need me to tell her what to do, and, in fact, the few times I
tried to tell her what to do she didn’t much seem to care. I had gotten it
all so wrong because I had spent the previous ten years driving cars, not
horses. Cars go over edges unless you tell them not to.
Human thinking depends on metaphor. We understand new or
complex things in relation to things we already know.3 For example, it’s
hard to think about life in general, but once you apply the metaphor “life
is a journey,” the metaphor guides you to some conclusions: You should
learn the terrain, pick a direction, find some good traveling companions,
and enjoy the trip, because there may be nothing at the end of the road.
It’s also hard to think about the mind, but once you pick a metaphor it
will guide your thinking. Throughout recorded history, people have lived
with and tried to control animals, and these animals made their way into
ancient metaphors. Buddha, for example, compared the mind to a wild
elephant:
In days gone by this mind of mine used to stray wherever selfish
desire or lust or pleasure would lead it. Today this mind does not
stray and is under the harmony of control, even as a wild elephant
is controlled by the trainer.4
Plato used a similar metaphor in which the self (or soul) is a chariot,
and the calm, rational part of the mind holds the reins. Plato’s charioteer
had to control two horses:
The horse that is on the right, or nobler, side is upright in frame
and well jointed, with a high neck and a regal nose; . . . he is a
lover of honor with modesty and self-control; companion to true
glory, he needs no whip, and is guided by verbal commands
alone. The other horse is a crooked great jumble of limbs . . .
companion to wild boasts and indecency, he is shaggy around the
ears—deaf as a post—and just barely yields to horse-whip and
goad combined.5
For Plato, some of the emotions and passions are good (for example,
the love of honor), and they help pull the self in the right direction, but
others are bad (for example, the appetites and lusts). The goal of Platonic
education was to help the charioteer gain perfect control over the two
horses. Sigmund Freud offered us a related model 2,300 years later.6
--- END PAGE 17 ---

--- PAGE 18 ---
Freud said that the mind is divided into three parts: the ego (the
conscious, rational self); the superego (the conscience, a sometimes too
rigid commitment to the rules of society); and the id (the desire for
pleasure, lots of it, sooner rather than later). The metaphor I use when I
lecture on Freud is to think of the mind as a horse and buggy (a Victorian
chariot) in which the driver (the ego) struggles frantically to control a
hungry, lustful, and disobedient horse (the id) while the driver’s father
(the superego) sits in the back seat lecturing the driver on what he is
doing wrong. For Freud, the goal of psychoanalysis was to escape this
pitiful state by strengthening the ego, thus giving it more control over the
id and more independence from the superego.
Freud, Plato, and Buddha all lived in worlds full of domesticated
animals. They were familiar with the struggle to assert one’s will over a
creature much larger than the self. But as the twentieth century wore on,
cars replaced horses, and technology gave people ever more control over
their physical worlds. When people looked for metaphors, they saw the
mind as the driver of a car, or as a program running on a computer. It
became possible to forget all about Freud’s unconscious, and just study
the mechanisms of thinking and decision making. That’s what social
scientists did in the last third of the century: Social psychologists created
“information processing” theories to explain everything from prejudice
to friendship. Economists created “rational choice” models to explain
why people do what they do. The social sciences were uniting under the
idea that people are rational agents who set goals and pursue them
intelligently by using the information and resources at their disposal.
But then, why do people keep doing such stupid things? Why do they
fail to control themselves and continue to do what they know is not good
for them? I, for one, can easily muster the willpower to ignore all the
desserts on the menu. But if dessert is placed on the table, I can’t resist it.
I can resolve to focus on a task and not get up until it is done, yet
somehow I find myself walking into the kitchen, or procrastinating in
other ways. I can resolve to wake up at 6:00 A.M. to write; yet after I
have shut off the alarm, my repeated commands to myself to get out of
bed have no effect, and I understand what Plato meant when he
described the bad horse as “deaf as a post.” But it was during some
larger life decisions, about dating, that I really began to grasp the extent
of my powerlessness. I would know exactly what I should do, yet, even
--- END PAGE 18 ---

--- PAGE 19 ---
as I was telling my friends that I would do it, a part of me was dimly
aware that I was not going to. Feelings of guilt, lust, or fear were often
stronger than reasoning. (On the other hand, I was quite good at lecturing
friends in similar situations about what was right for them.) The Roman
poet Ovid captured my situation perfectly. In Metamorphoses, Medea is
torn between her love for Jason and her duty to her father. She laments:
I am dragged along by a strange new force. Desire and reason are
pulling in different directions. I see the right way and approve it,
but follow the wrong.7
Modern theories about rational choice and information processing
don’t adequately explain weakness of the will. The older metaphors
about controlling animals work beautifully. The image that I came up
with for myself, as I marveled at my weakness, was that I was a rider on
the back of an elephant. I’m holding the reins in my hands, and by
pulling one way or the other I can tell the elephant to turn, to stop, or to
go. I can direct things, but only when the elephant doesn’t have desires
of his own. When the elephant really wants to do something, I’m no
match for him.
I have used this metaphor to guide my own thinking for ten years, and
when I began to write this book I thought the image of a rider on an
elephant would be useful in this first chapter, on the divided self.
However, the metaphor has turned out to be useful in every chapter of
the book. To understand most important ideas in psychology, you need to
understand how the mind is divided into parts that sometimes conflict.
We assume that there is one person in each body, but in some ways we
are each more like a committee whose members have been thrown
together to do a job, but who often find themselves working at cross
purposes. Our minds are divided in four ways. The fourth is the most
important, for it corresponds most closely to the rider and the elephant;
but the first three also contribute to our experiences of temptation,
weakness, and internal conflict. 
FIRST DIVISION: MIND VS. BODY
--- END PAGE 19 ---

--- PAGE 20 ---
We sometimes say that the body has a mind of its own, but the French
philosopher Michel de Montaigne went a step further and suggested that
each part of the body has its own emotions and its own agenda.
Montaigne was most fascinated by the independence of the penis:
We are right to note the license and disobedience of this member
which thrusts itself forward so inopportunely when we do not
want it to, and which so inopportunely lets us down when we
most need it. It imperiously contests for authority with our will.8
Montaigne also noted the ways in which our facial expressions betray
our secret thoughts; our hair stands on end; our hearts race; our tongues
fail to speak; and our bowels and anal sphincters undergo “dilations and
contractions proper to [themselves], independent of our wishes or even
opposed to them.” Some of these effects, we now know, are caused by
the autonomic nervous system—the network of nerves that controls the
organs and glands of our bodies, a network that is completely
independent of voluntary or intentional control. But the last item on
Montaigne’s list—the bowels—reflects the operation of a second brain.
Our intestines are lined by a vast network of more than 100 million
neurons; these handle all the computations needed to run the chemical
refinery that processes and extracts nutrients from food.9 This gut brain
is like a regional administrative center that handles stuff the head brain
does not need to bother with. You might expect, then, that this gut brain
takes its orders from the head brain and does as it is told. But the gut
brain possesses a high degree of autonomy, and it continues to function
well even if the vagus nerve, which connects the two brains together, is
severed.
The gut brain makes its independence known in many ways: It causes
irritable bowel syndrome when it “decides” to flush out the intestines. It
triggers anxiety in the head brain when it detects infections in the gut,
leading you to act in more cautious ways that are appropriate when you
are sick.10 And it reacts in unexpected ways to anything that affects its
main neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine and serotonin. Hence,
many of the initial side effects of Prozac and other selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors involve nausea and changes in bowel function.
Trying to improve the workings of the head brain can directly interfere
with those of the gut brain. The independence of the gut brain, combined
--- END PAGE 20 ---

--- PAGE 21 ---
with the autonomic nature of changes to the genitals, probably
contributed to ancient Indian theories in which the abdomen contains the
three lower chakras—energy centers corresponding to the colon/anus,
sexual organs, and gut. The gut chakra is even said to be the source of
gut feelings and intuitions, that is, ideas that appear to come from
somewhere outside one’s own mind. When St. Paul lamented the battle
of flesh versus Spirit, he was surely referring to some of the same
divisions and frustrations that Montaigne experienced. 
SECOND DIVISION: LEFT VS. RIGHT 
A second division was discovered by accident in the 1960s when a
surgeon began cutting people’s brains in half. The surgeon, Joe Bogen,
had a good reason for doing this: He was trying to help people whose
lives were destroyed by frequent and massive epileptic seizures. The
human brain has two separate hemispheres joined by a large bundle of
nerves, the corpus callosum. Seizures always begin at one spot in the
brain and spread to the surrounding brain tissue. If a seizure crosses over
the corpus callosum, it can spread to the entire brain, causing the person
to lose consciousness, fall down, and writhe uncontrollably. Just as a
military leader might blow up a bridge to prevent an enemy from
crossing it, Bogen wanted to sever the corpus callosum to prevent the
seizures from spreading.
At first glance this was an insane tactic. The corpus callosum is the
largest single bundle of nerves in the entire body, so it must be doing
something important. Indeed it is: It allows the two halves of the brain to
communicate and coordinate their activity. Yet research on animals
found that, within a few weeks of surgery, the animals were pretty much
back to normal. So Bogen took a chance with human patients, and it
worked. The intensity of the seizures was greatly reduced.
But was there really no loss of ability? To find out, the surgical team
brought in a young psychologist, Michael Gazzaniga, whose job was to
look for the after-effects of this “split-brain” surgery. Gazzaniga took
advantage of the fact that the brain divides its processing of the world
into its two hemispheres—left and right. The left hemisphere takes in
information from the right half of the world (that is, it receives nerve
--- END PAGE 21 ---

--- PAGE 22 ---
transmissions from the right arm and leg, the right ear, and the left half of
each retina, which receives light from the right half of the visual field)
and sends out commands to move the limbs on the right side of the body.
The right hemisphere is in this respect the left’s mirror image, taking in
information from the left half of the world and controlling movement on
the left side of the body. Nobody knows why the signals cross over in
this way in all vertebrates; they just do. But in other respects, the two
hemispheres are specialized for different tasks. The left hemisphere is
specialized for language processing and analytical tasks. In visual tasks,
it is better at noticing details. The right hemisphere is better at processing
patterns in space, including that all-important pattern, the face. (This is
the origin of popular and oversimplified ideas about artists being “right-
brained” and scientists being “left-brained”).
Gazzaniga used the brain’s division of labor to present information to
each half of the brain separately. He asked patients to stare at a spot on a
screen, and then flashed a word or a picture of an object just to the right
of the spot, or just to the left, so quickly that there was not enough time
for the patient to move her gaze. If a picture of a hat was flashed just to
the right of the spot, the image would register on the left half of each
retina (after the image had passed through the cornea and been inverted),
which then sent its neural information back to the visual processing areas
in the left hemisphere. Gazzaniga would then ask, “What did you see?”
Because the left hemisphere has full language capabilities, the patient
would quickly and easily say, “A hat.” If the image of the hat was
flashed to the left of the spot, however, the image was sent back only to
the right hemisphere, which does not control speech. When Gazzaniga
asked, “What did you see?”, the patient, responding from the left
hemisphere, said, “Nothing.” But when Gazzaniga asked the patient to
use her left hand to point to the correct image on a card showing several
images, she would point to the hat. Although the right hemisphere had
indeed seen the hat, it did not report verbally on what it had seen because
it did not have access to the language centers in the left hemisphere. It
was as if a separate intelligence was trapped in the right hemisphere, its
only output device the left hand.11
When Gazzaniga flashed different pictures to the two hemispheres,
things grew weirder. On one occasion he flashed a picture of a chicken
claw on the right, and a picture of a house and a car covered in snow on
--- END PAGE 22 ---

--- PAGE 23 ---
the left. The patient was then shown an array of pictures and asked to
point to the one that “goes with” what he had seen. The patient’s right
hand pointed to a picture of a chicken (which went with the chicken claw
the left hemisphere had seen), but the left hand pointed to a picture of a
shovel (which went with the snow scene presented to the right
hemisphere). When the patient was asked to explain his two responses,
he did not say, “I have no idea why my left hand is pointing to a shovel;
it must be something you showed my right brain.” Instead, the left
hemisphere instantly made up a plausible story. The patient said, without
any hesitation, “Oh, that’s easy. The chicken claw goes with the chicken,
and you need a shovel to clean out the chicken shed.”12
This finding, that people will readily fabricate reasons to explain their
own behavior, is called “confabulation.” Confabulation is so frequent in
work with split-brain patients and other people suffering brain damage
that Gazzaniga refers to the language centers on the left side of the brain
as the interpreter module, whose job is to give a running commentary on
whatever the self is doing, even though the interpreter module has no
access to the real causes or motives of the self’s behavior. For example,
if the word “walk” is flashed to the right hemisphere, the patient might
stand up and walk away. When asked why he is getting up, he might say,
“I’m going to get a Coke.” The interpreter module is good at making up
explanations, but not at knowing that it has done so.
Science has made even stranger discoveries. In some split-brain
patients, or in others who have suffered damage to the corpus callosum,
the right hemisphere seems to be actively fighting with the left
hemisphere in a condition known as alien hand syndrome. In these cases,
one hand, usually the left, acts of its own accord and seems to have its
own agenda. The alien hand may pick up a ringing phone, but then
refuse to pass the phone to the other hand or bring it up to an ear. The
hand rejects choices the person has just made, for example, by putting
back on the rack a shirt that the other hand has just picked out. It grabs
the wrist of the other hand and tries to stop it from executing the person’s
conscious plans. Sometimes, the alien hand actually reaches for the
person’s own neck and tries to strangle him.13
These dramatic splits of the mind are caused by rare splits of the brain.
Normal people are not split-brained. Yet the split-brain studies were
--- END PAGE 23 ---

--- PAGE 24 ---
important in psychology because they showed in such an eerie way that
the mind is a confederation of modules capable of working
independently and even, sometimes, at cross-purposes. Split-brain
studies are important for this book because they show in such a dramatic
way that one of these modules is good at inventing convincing
explanations for your behavior, even when it has no knowledge of the
causes of your behavior. Gazzaniga’s “interpreter module” is, essentially,
the rider. You’ll catch the rider confabulating in several later chapters. 
THIRD DIVISION: NEW VS. OLD 
If you live in a relatively new suburban house, your home was probably
built in less than a year, and its rooms were laid out by an architect who
tried to make them fulfill people’s needs. The houses on my street,
however, were all built around 1900, and since then they have expanded
out into their backyards. Porches were extended, then enclosed, then
turned into kitchens. Extra bedrooms were built above these extensions,
then bathrooms were tacked on to these new rooms. The brain in
vertebrates has similarly expanded, but in a forward direction. The brain
started off with just three rooms, or clumps of neurons: a hindbrain
(connected to the spinal column), a midbrain, and a forebrain (connected
to the sensory organs at the front of the animal). Over time, as more
complex bodies and behaviors evolved, the brain kept building out the
front, away from the spinal column, expanding the forebrain more than
any other part. The forebrain of the earliest mammals developed a new
outer shell, which included the hypothalamus (specialized to coordinate
basic drives and motivations), the hippocampus (specialized for
memory), and the amygdala (specialized for emotional learning and
responding). These structures are sometimes referred to as the limbic
system (from Latin limbus, “border” or “margin”) because they wrap
around the rest of the brain, forming a border.
As mammals grew in size and diversified in behavior (after the
dinosaurs became extinct), the remodeling continued. In the more social
mammals, particularly among primates, a new layer of neural tissue
developed and spread to surround the old limbic system. This neocortex
(Latin for “new covering”) is the gray matter characteristic of human
--- END PAGE 24 ---

--- PAGE 25 ---
brains. The front portion of the neocortex is particularly interesting, for
parts of it do not appear to be dedicated to specific tasks (such as moving
a finger or processing sound). Instead, it is available to make new
associations and to engage in thinking, planning, and decision making—
mental processes that can free an organism from responding only to an
immediate situation.
This growth of the frontal cortex seems like a promising explanation
for the divisions we experience in our minds. Perhaps the frontal cortex
is the seat of reason: It is Plato’s charioteer; it is St. Paul’s Spirit. And it
has taken over control, though not perfectly, from the more primitive
limbic system—Plato’s bad horse, St. Paul’s flesh. We can call this
explanation the Promethean script of human evolution, after the
character in Greek mythology who stole fire from the gods and gave it to
humans. In this script, our ancestors were mere animals governed by the
primitive emotions and drives of the limbic system until they received
the divine gift of reason, installed in the newly expanded neocortex.
The Promethean script is pleasing in that it neatly raises us above all
other animals, justifying our superiority by our rationality. At the same
time, it captures our sense that we are not yet gods—that the fire of
rationality is somehow new to us, and we have not yet fully mastered it.
The Promethean script also fits well with some important early findings
about the roles of the limbic system and the frontal cortex. For example,
when some regions of the hypothalamus are stimulated directly with a
small electric current, rats, cats, and other mammals can be made
gluttonous, ferocious, or hypersexual, suggesting that the limbic system
underlies many of our basic animal instincts.14 Conversely, when people
suffer damage to the frontal cortex, they sometimes show an increase in
sexual and aggressive behavior because the frontal cortex plays an
important role in suppressing or inhibiting behavioral impulses.
There was recently such a case at the University of Virginia’s
hospital.15 A schoolteacher in his forties had, fairly suddenly, begun to
visit prostitutes, surf child pornography Web sites, and proposition
young girls. He was soon arrested and convicted of child molestation.
The day before his sentencing, he went to the hospital emergency room
because he had a pounding headache and was experiencing a constant
urge to rape his land-lady. (His wife had thrown him out of the house
--- END PAGE 25 ---

--- PAGE 26 ---
months earlier.) Even while he was talking to the doctor, he asked
passing nurses to sleep with him. A brain scan found that an enormous
tumor in his frontal cortex was squeezing everything else, preventing the
frontal cortex from doing its job of inhibiting inappropriate behavior and
thinking about consequences. (Who in his right mind would put on such
a show the day before his sentencing?) When the tumor was removed,
the hypersexuality vanished. Moreover, when the tumor grew back the
following year, the symptoms returned; and when the tumor was
removed again, the symptoms disappeared again.
There is, however, a flaw in the Promethean script: It assumes that
reason was installed in the frontal cortex but that emotion stayed behind
in the limbic system. In fact, the frontal cortex enabled a great expansion
of emotionality in humans. The lower third of the prefrontal cortex is
called the orbitofrontal cortex because it is the part of the brain just
above the eyes ( orbit is the Latin term for the eye socket). This region of
the cortex has grown especially large in humans and other primates and
is one of the most consistently active areas of the brain during emotional
reactions.16 The orbitofrontal cortex plays a central role when you size
up the reward and punishment possibilities of a situation; the neurons in
this part of the cortex fire wildly when there is an immediate possibility
of pleasure or pain, loss or gain.17 When you feel yourself drawn to a
meal, a landscape, or an attractive person, or repelled by a dead animal, a
bad song, or a blind date, your orbitofrontal cortex is working hard to
give you an emotional feeling of wanting to approach or to get away.18
The orbitofrontal cortex therefore appears to be a better candidate for the
id, or for St. Paul’s flesh, than for the superego or the Spirit.
The importance of the orbitofrontal cortex for emotion has been
further demonstrated by research on brain damage. The neurologist
Antonio Damasio has studied people who, because of a stroke, tumor, or
blow to the head, have lost various parts of their frontal cortex. In the
1990s, Damasio found that when certain parts of the orbitofrontal cortex
are damaged, patients lose most of their emotional lives. They report that
when they ought to feel emotion, they feel nothing, and studies of their
autonomic reactions (such as those used in lie detector tests) confirm that
they lack the normal flashes of bodily reaction that the rest of us
experience when observing scenes of horror or beauty. Yet their
--- END PAGE 26 ---

--- PAGE 27 ---
reasoning and logical abilities are intact. They perform normally on tests
of intelligence and knowledge of social rules and moral principles.19
So what happens when these people go out into the world? Now that
they are free of the distractions of emotion, do they become hyperlogical,
able to see through the haze of feelings that blinds the rest of us to the
path of perfect rationality? Just the opposite. They find themselves
unable to make simple decisions or to set goals, and their lives fall apart.
When they look out at the world and think, “What should I do now?”
they see dozens of choices but lack immediate internal feelings of like or
dislike. They must examine the pros and cons of every choice with their
reasoning, but in the absence of feeling they see little reason to pick one
or the other. When the rest of us look out at the world, our emotional
brains have instantly and automatically appraised the possibilities. One
possibility usually jumps out at us as the obvious best one. We need only
use reason to weigh the pros and cons when two or three possibilities
seem equally good.
Human rationality depends critically on sophisticated emotionality. It
is only because our emotional brains works so well that our reasoning
can work at all. Plato’s image of reason as charioteer controlling the
dumb beasts of passion may overstate not only the wisdom but also the
power of the charioteer. The metaphor of a rider on an elephant fits
Damasio’s findings more closely: Reason and emotion must both work
together to create intelligent behavior, but emotion (a major part of the
elephant) does most of the work. When the neocortex came along, it
made the rider possible, but it made the elephant much smarter, too. 
FOURTH DIVISION: CONTROLLED VS. AUTOMATIC 
In the 1990s, while I was developing the elephant/rider metaphor for
myself, the field of social psychology was coming to a similar view of
the mind. After its long infatuation with information processing models
and computer metaphors, psychologists began to realize that there are
really two processing systems at work in the mind at all times: controlled
processes and automatic processes.
--- END PAGE 27 ---

--- PAGE 28 ---
Suppose you volunteered to be a subject in the following
experiment.20 First, the experimenter hands you some word problems
and tells you to come and get her when you are finished. The word
problems are easy: Just unscramble sets of five words and make
sentences using four of them. For example, “they her bother see usually”
becomes either “they usually see her” or “they usually bother her.” A
few minutes later, when you have finished the test, you go out to the
hallway as instructed. The experimenter is there, but she’s engaged in a
conversation with someone and isn’t making eye contact with you. What
do you suppose you’ll do? Well, if half the sentences you unscrambled
contained words related to rudeness (such as bother, brazen,
aggressively), you will probably interrupt the experimenter within a
minute or two to say, “Hey, I’m finished. What should I do now?” But if
you unscrambled sentences in which the rude words were swapped with
words related to politeness (“they her respect see usually”), the odds are
you’ll just sit there meekly and wait until the experimenter acknowledges
you—ten minutes from now.
Likewise, exposure to words related to the elderly makes people walk
more slowly; words related to professors make people smarter at the
game of Trivial Pursuit; and words related to soccer hooligans make
people dumber.21 And these effects don’t even depend on your
consciously reading the words; the same effects can occur when the
words are presented subliminally, that is, flashed on a screen for just a
few hundredths of a second, too fast for your conscious mind to register
them. But some part of the mind does see the words, and it sets in motion
behaviors that psychologists can measure.
According to John Bargh, the pioneer in this research, these
experiments show that most mental processes happen automatically,
without the need for conscious attention or control. Most automatic
processes are completely unconscious, although some of them show a
part of themselves to consciousness; for example, we are aware of the
“stream of consciousness” 22 that seems to flow on by, following its own
rules of association, without any feeling of effort or direction from the
self. Bargh contrasts automatic processes with controlled processes, the
kind of thinking that takes some effort, that proceeds in steps and that
always plays out on the center stage of consciousness. For example, at
what time would you need to leave your house to catch a 6:26 flight to
--- END PAGE 28 ---

--- PAGE 29 ---
London? That’s something you have to think about consciously, first
choosing a means of transport to the airport and then considering rush-
hour traffic, weather, and the strictness of the shoe police at the airport.
You can’t depart on a hunch. But if you drive to the airport, almost
everything you do on the way will be automatic: breathing, blinking,
shifting in your seat, daydreaming, keeping enough distance between
you and the car in front of you, even scowling and cursing slower
drivers.
Controlled processing is limited—we can think consciously about one
thing at a time only—but automatic processes run in parallel and can
handle many tasks at once. If the mind performs hundreds of operations
each second, all but one of them must be handled automatically. So what
is the relationship between controlled and automatic processing? Is
controlled processing the wise boss, king, or CEO handling the most
important questions and setting policy with foresight for the dumber
automatic processes to carry out? No, that would bring us right back to
the Promethean script and divine reason. To dispel the Promethean script
once and for all, it will help to go back in time and look at why we have
these two processes, why we have a small rider and a large elephant.
When the first clumps of neurons were forming the first brains more
than 600 million years ago, these clumps must have conferred some
advantage on the organisms that had them because brains have
proliferated ever since. Brains are adaptive because they integrate
information from various parts of the animal’s body to respond quickly
and automatically to threats and opportunities in the environment. By the
time we reach 3 million years ago, the Earth was full of animals with
extraordinarily sophisticated automatic abilities, among them birds that
could navigate by star positions, ants that could cooperate to fight wars
and run fungus farms, and several species of hominids that had begun to
make tools. Many of these creatures possessed systems of
communication, but none of them had developed language.
Controlled processing requires language. You can have bits and pieces
of thought through images, but to plan something complex, to weigh the
pros and cons of different paths, or to analyze the causes of past
successes and failures, you need words. Nobody knows how long ago
human beings developed language, but most estimates range from
around 2 million years ago, when hominid brains became much bigger,
--- END PAGE 29 ---

--- PAGE 30 ---
to as recently as 40,000 years ago, the time of cave paintings and other
artifacts that reveal unmistakably modern human minds.23 Whichever
end of that range you favor, language, reasoning, and conscious planning
arrived in the most recent eye-blink of evolution. They are like new
software, Rider version 1.0. The language parts work well, but there are
still a lot of bugs in the reasoning and planning programs.24 Automatic
processes, on the other hand, have been through thousands of product
cycles and are nearly perfect. This difference in maturity between
automatic and controlled processes helps explain why we have
inexpensive computers that can solve logic, math, and chess problems
better than any human beings can (most of us struggle with these tasks),
but none of our robots, no matter how costly, can walk through the
woods as well as the average six-year-old child (our perceptual and
motor systems are superb).
Evolution never looks ahead. It can’t plan the best way to travel from
point A to point B. Instead, small changes to existing forms arise (by
genetic mutation), and spread within a population to the extent that they
help organisms respond more effectively to current conditions. When
language evolved, the human brain was not reengineered to hand over
the reins of power to the rider (conscious verbal thinking). Things were
already working pretty well, and linguistic ability spread to the extent
that it helped the elephant do something important in a better way. The
rider evolved to serve to the elephant. But whatever its origin, once we
had it, language was a powerful tool that could be used in new ways, and
evolution then selected those individuals who got the best use out of it.
One use of language is that it partially freed humans from “stimulus
control.” Behaviorists such as B. F. Skinner were able to explain much of
the behavior of animals as a set of connections between stimuli and
responses. Some of these connections are innate, such as when the sight
or smell of an animal’s natural food triggers hunger and eating. Other
connections are learned, as demonstrated by Ivan Pavlov’s dogs, who
salivated at the sound of a bell that had earlier announced the arrival of
food. The behaviorists saw animals as slaves to their environments and
learning histories who blindly respond to the reward properties of
whatever they encounter. The behaviorists thought that people were no
different from other animals. In this view, St. Paul’s lament could be
restated as: “My flesh is under stimulus control.” It is no accident that we
--- END PAGE 30 ---

--- PAGE 31 ---
find the carnal pleasures so rewarding. Our brains, like rat brains, are
wired so that food and sex give us little bursts of dopamine, the
neurotransmitter that is the brain’s way of making us enjoy the activities
that are good for the survival of our genes.25 Plato’s “bad” horse plays
an important role in pulling us toward these things, which helped our
ancestors survive and succeed in becoming our ancestors.
But the behaviorists were not exactly right about people. The
controlled system allows people to think about long-term goals and
thereby escape the tyranny of the here-and-now, the automatic triggering
of temptation by the sight of tempting objects. People can imagine
alternatives that are not visually present; they can weigh long-term health
risks against present pleasures, and they can learn in conversation about
which choices will bring success and prestige. Unfortunately, the
behaviorists were not entirely wrong about people, either. For although
the controlled system does not conform to behaviorist principles, it also
has relatively little power to cause behavior. The automatic system was
shaped by natural selection to trigger quick and reliable action, and it
includes parts of the brain that make us feel pleasure and pain (such as
the orbitofrontal cortex) and that trigger survival-related motivations
(such as the hypothalamus). The automatic system has its finger on the
dopamine release button. The controlled system, in contrast, is better
seen as an advisor. It’s a rider placed on the elephant’s back to help the
elephant make better choices. The rider can see farther into the future,
and the rider can learn valuable information by talking to other riders or
by reading maps, but the rider cannot order the elephant around against
its will. I believe the Scottish philosopher David Hume was closer to the
truth than was Plato when he said, “Reason is, and ought only to be the
slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to
serve and obey them.”26
In sum, the rider is an advisor or servant; not a king, president, or
charioteer with a firm grip on the reins. The rider is Gazzaniga’s
interpreter module; it is conscious, controlled thought. The elephant, in
contrast, is everything else. The elephant includes the gut feelings,
visceral reactions, emotions, and intuitions that comprise much of the
automatic system. The elephant and the rider each have their own
intelligence, and when they work together well they enable the unique
brilliance of human beings. But they don’t always work together well.
--- END PAGE 31 ---

--- PAGE 32 ---
Here are three quirks of daily life that illustrate the sometimes complex
relationship between the rider and the elephant. 
FAILURES OF SELF CONTROL 
Imagine that it is 1970 and you are a four-year-old child in an experiment
being conducted by Walter Mischel at Stanford University. You are
brought into a room at your preschool where a nice man gives you toys
and plays with you for a while. Then the man asks you, first, whether
you like marshmallows (you do), and, then, whether you’d rather have
this plate here with one marshmallow or that plate there with two
marshmallows (that one, of course). Then the man tells you that he has to
go out of the room for a little while, and if you can wait until he comes
back, you can have the two marshmallows. If you don’t want to wait,
you can ring this bell here, and he’ll come right back and give you the
plate with one; but if you do that, you can’t have the two. The man
leaves. You stare at the marshmallows. You salivate. You want. You fight
your wanting. If you are like most four-year-olds, you can hold out for
only a few minutes. Then you ring the bell.
Now let’s jump ahead to 1985. Mischel has mailed your parents a
questionnaire asking them to report on your personality, your ability to
delay gratification and deal with frustration, and your performance on
your college entrance exams (the Scholastic Aptitude Test). Your parents
return the questionnaire. Mischel discovers that the number of seconds
you waited to ring the bell in 1970 predicts not only what your parents
say about you as a teenager but also the likelihood that you were
admitted to a top university. Children who were able to overcome
stimulus control and delay gratification for a few extra minutes in 1970
were better able to resist temptation as teenagers, to focus on their
studies, and to control themselves when things didn’t go the way they
wanted.27
What was their secret? A large part of it was strategy—the ways that
children used their limited mental control to shift attention. In later
studies, Mischel discovered that the successful children were those who
looked away from the temptation or were able to think about other
--- END PAGE 32 ---

--- PAGE 33 ---
enjoyable activities. 28 These thinking skills are an aspect of emotional
intelligence—an ability to understand and regulate one’s own feelings
and desires.29 An emotionally intelligent person has a skilled rider who
knows how to distract and coax the elephant without having to engage in
a direct contest of wills.
It’s hard for the controlled system to beat the automatic system by
willpower alone; like a tired muscle,30 the former soon wears down and
caves in, but the latter runs automatically, effortlessly, and endlessly.
Once you understand the power of stimulus control, you can use it to
your advantage by changing the stimuli in your environment and
avoiding undesirable ones; or, if that’s not possible, by filling your
consciousness with thoughts about their less tempting aspects.
Buddhism, for example, in an effort to break people’s carnal attachment
to their own (and others’) flesh, developed methods of meditating on
decaying corpses.31 By choosing to stare at something that revolts the
automatic system, the rider can begin to change what the elephant will
want in the future. 
MENTAL INTRUSIONS 
Edgar Allan Poe understood the divided mind. In The Imp of the
Perverse, Poe’s protagonist carries out the perfect murder, inherits the
dead man’s estate, and lives for years in healthy enjoyment of his ill-
gotten gains. Whenever thoughts of the murder appear on the fringes of
his consciousness, he murmurs to himself, “I am safe.” All is well until
the day he remodels his mantra to “I am safe—yes—if I be not fool
enough to make open confession.” With that thought, he comes undone.
He tries to suppress the thought of confessing, but the harder he tries, the
more insistent the thought becomes. He panics, he starts running, people
start chasing him, he blacks out, and, when he returns to his senses, he is
told that he has made a full confession.
I love this story, for its title above all else. Whenever I am on a cliff, a
rooftop, or a high balcony, the imp of the perverse whispers in my ear,
“Jump.” It’s not a command, it’s just a word that pops into my
consciousness. When I’m at a dinner party sitting next to someone I
--- END PAGE 33 ---

--- PAGE 34 ---
respect, the imp works hard to suggest the most inappropriate things I
could possibly say. Who or what is the imp? Dan Wegner, one of the
most perverse and creative social psychologists, has dragged the imp into
the lab and made it confess to being an aspect of automatic processing.
In Wegner’s studies, participants are asked to try hard not to think
about something, such as a white bear, or food, or a stereotype. This is
hard to do. More important, the moment one stops trying to suppress a
thought, the thought comes flooding in and becomes even harder to
banish. In other words, Wegner creates minor obsessions in his lab by
instructing people not to obsess. Wegner explains this effect as an “ironic
process” of mental control. 32 When controlled processing tries to
influence thought (“Don’t think about a white bear!”), it sets up an
explicit goal. And whenever one pursues a goal, a part of the mind
automatically monitors progress, so that it can order corrections or know
when success has been achieved. When that goal is an action in the
world (such as arriving at the airport on time), this feedback system
works well. But when the goal is mental, it backfires. Automatic
processes continually check: “Am I not thinking about a white bear?” As
the act of monitoring for the absence of the thought introduces the
thought, the person must try even harder to divert consciousness.
Automatic and controlled processes end up working at cross purposes,
firing each other up to ever greater exertions. But because controlled
processes tire quickly, eventually the inexhaustible automatic processes
run unopposed, conjuring up herds of white bears. Thus, the attempt to
remove an unpleasant thought can guarantee it a place on your frequent-
play list of mental ruminations.
Now, back to me at that dinner party. My simple thought “don’t make
a fool of yourself” triggers automatic processes looking for signs of
foolishness. I know that it would be stupid to comment on that mole on
his forehead, or to say “I love you,” or to scream obscenities. And up in
consciousness, I become aware of three thoughts: comment on the mole,
say “I love you,” or scream obscenities. These are not commands, just
ideas that pop into my head. Freud based much of his theory of
psychoanalysis on such mental intrusions and free associations, and he
found they often have sexual or aggressive content. But Wegner’s
research offers a simpler and more innocent explanation: Automatic
processes generate thousands of thoughts and images every day, often
--- END PAGE 34 ---

--- PAGE 35 ---
through random association. The ones that get stuck are the ones that
particularly shock us, the ones we try to suppress or deny. The reason we
suppress them is not that we know, deep down, that they’re true
(although some may be), but that they are scary or shameful. Yet once
we have tried and failed to suppress them, they can become the sorts of
obsessive thoughts that make us believe in Freudian notions of a dark
and evil unconscious mind. 
THE DIFFICULTY OF WINNING AN ARGUMENT 
Consider the following story:
Julie and Mark are sister and brother. They are traveling together
in France on summer vacation from college. One night they are
staying alone in a cabin near the beach. They decide that it would
be interesting and fun if they tried making love. At the very least,
it would be a new experience for each of them. Julie is already
taking birth control pills, but Mark uses a condom, too, just to be
safe. They both enjoy making love, but decide not to do it again.
They keep that night as a special secret, which makes them feel
even closer to each other.
Do you think it is acceptable for two consenting adults, who happen to
be siblings, to make love? If you are like most people in my studies,33
you immediately answered no. But how would you justify that
judgment? People often reach first for the argument that incestuous sex
leads to offspring that suffer genetic abnormalities. When I point out that
the siblings used two forms of birth control, however, no one says, “Oh,
well, in that case it’s okay.” Instead, people begin searching for other
arguments, for example, “It’s going to harm their relationship.” When I
respond that in this case the sex has made the relationship stronger,
people just scratch their heads, frown, and say, “I know it’s wrong, I’m
just having a hard time explaining why.”
The point of these studies is that moral judgment is like aesthetic
judgment. When you see a painting, you usually know instantly and
automatically whether you like it. If someone asks you to explain your
judgment, you confabulate. You don’t really know why you think
--- END PAGE 35 ---

--- PAGE 36 ---
something is beautiful, but your interpreter module (the rider) is skilled
at making up reasons, as Gazzaniga found in his split-brain studies. You
search for a plausible reason for liking the painting, and you latch on to
the first reason that makes sense (maybe something vague about color, or
light, or the reflection of the painter in the clown’s shiny nose). Moral
arguments are much the same: Two people feel strongly about an issue,
their feelings come first, and their reasons are invented on the fly, to
throw at each other. When you refute a person’s argument, does she
generally change her mind and agree with you? Of course not, because
the argument you defeated was not the cause of her position; it was made
up after the judgment was already made.
If you listen closely to moral arguments, you can sometimes hear
something surprising: that it is really the elephant holding the reins,
guiding the rider. It is the elephant who decides what is good or bad,
beautiful or ugly. Gut feelings, intuitions, and snap judgments happen
constantly and automatically (as Malcolm Gladwell described in 
Blink ),34 but only the rider can string sentences together and create
arguments to give to other people. In moral arguments, the rider goes
beyond being just an advisor to the elephant; he becomes a lawyer,
fighting in the court of public opinion to persuade others of the
elephant’s point of view. 
This, then, is our situation, lamented by St. Paul, Buddha, Ovid, and so
many others. Our minds are loose confederations of parts, but we
identify with and pay too much attention to one part: conscious verbal
thinking. We are like the proverbial drunken man looking for his car keys
under the street light. (“Did you drop them here?” asks the cop. “No”
says the man, “I dropped them back there in the alley, but the light is
better over here.”) Because we can see only one little corner of the
mind’s vast operation, we are surprised when urges, wishes, and
temptations emerge, seemingly from nowhere. We make
pronouncements, vows, and resolutions, and then are surprised by our
own powerlessness to carry them out. We sometimes fall into the view
that we are fighting with our unconscious, our id, or our animal self. But
really we are the whole thing. We are the rider, and we are the elephant.
Both have their strengths and special skills. The rest of this book is about
how complex and partly clueless creatures such as ourselves can get
--- END PAGE 36 ---

--- PAGE 37 ---
along with each other (chapters 3 and 4), find happiness (chapters 5 and
6), grow psychologically and morally (chapters 7 and 8), and find
purpose and meaning in our lives (chapters 9 and 10). But first we have
to figure out why the elephant is such a pessimist.
--- END PAGE 37 ---

--- PAGE 38 ---
2 
Changing Your Mind 
The whole universe is change and life itself is but what you deem it.
—MARCUS AURELIUS1 
What we are today comes from our thoughts of yesterday, and our
present thoughts build our life of tomorrow: our life is the creation of
our mind.
—BUDDHA2 
T HE MOST IMPORTANT IDEA in pop psychology is contained in the
two quotations above: Events in the world affect us only through our
interpretations of them, so if we can control our interpretations, we can
control our world. The best-selling self-help advisor of all time, Dale
Carnegie, writing in 1944, called the last eight words of the Aurelius
quote “eight words that can transform your life.”3 More recently, on
television and the Internet, “Dr. Phil” (Phil McGraw) stated as one of his
ten “laws of life”: “There is no reality, only perception.”4 Self-help
books and seminars sometimes seem to consist of little more than
lecturing and hectoring people until they understand this idea and its
implications for their lives. It can be inspiring to watch: Often a moment
comes when a person consumed by years of resentment, pain, and anger
realizes that her father (for example) didn’t directly hurt her when he
abandoned the family; all he did was move out of the house. His action
was morally wrong, but the pain came from her reactions to the event,
and if she can change those reactions, she can leave behind twenty years
of pain and perhaps even get to know her father. The art of pop
--- END PAGE 38 ---

--- PAGE 39 ---
psychology is to develop a method (beyond lecturing and hectoring) that
guides people to that realization.
This art is old. Consider Anicius Boethius, born to one of the most
distinguished Roman families in 480 CE, four years after Rome fell to
the Goths. Boethius received the best education available in his day and
successfully pursued careers in philosophy and public service. He wrote
or translated dozens of works on math, science, logic, and theology, at
the same time rising to become consul of Rome (the highest elected
office) in 510. He was wealthy, he married well, and his sons went on to
become consuls themselves. But in 523, at the peak of his power and
fortune, Boethius was accused of treason toward the Ostrogoth King
Theodoric for remaining loyal to Rome and its Senate. Condemned by
the cowardly Senate he had tried to defend, Boethius was stripped of his
wealth and honor, thrown into prison on a remote island, and executed in
524.
To take something “philosophically” means to accept a great
misfortune without weeping or even suffering. We use this term in part
because of the calmness, self-control, and courage that three ancient
philosophers—Socrates, Seneca, and Boethius—showed while they
awaited their executions. But in The Consolation of Philosophy, which
Boethius wrote while in prison, he confessed that at first he was anything
but philosophical. He wept and wrote poems about weeping. He cursed
injustice, and old age, and the Goddess of Fortune, who had blessed him
and then abandoned him.
Then one night, while Boethius is wallowing in his wretchedness, the
majestic apparition of Lady Philosophy visits him and proceeds to chide
him for his unphilosophical behavior. Lady Philosophy then guides
Boethius through reinterpretations that foreshadow modern cognitive
therapy (described below). She begins by asking Boethius to think about
his relationship with the Goddess of Fortune. Philosophy reminds
Boethius that Fortune is fickle, coming and going as she pleases.
Boethius took Fortune as his mistress, fully aware of her ways, and she
stayed with him for a long time. What right has he now to demand that
she be chained to his side? Lady Philosophy presents Fortune’s defense:
Why should I alone be deprived of my rights? The heavens are
permitted to grant bright days, then blot them out with dark
nights; the year may decorate the face of the earth with flowers
--- END PAGE 39 ---

--- PAGE 40 ---
and fruits, then make it barren again with clouds and frost; the
sea is allowed to invite the sailor with fair weather, then terrify
him with storms. Shall I, then, permit man’s insatiable cupidity to
tie me down to a sameness that is alien to my habits?5
Lady Philosophy reframes change as normal and as the right of
Fortune. (“The whole universe is change,” Aurelius had said.) Boethius
was fortunate; now he is not. That is no cause for anger. Rather, he
should be grateful that he enjoyed Fortune for so long, and he should be
calm now that she has left him: “No man can ever be secure until he has
been forsaken by Fortune.”6
Lady Philosophy tries several other reframing tactics. She points out
that his wife, sons, and father are each dearer to him than his own life,
and all four still live. She helps him see that adverse fortune is more
beneficial than good fortune; the latter only makes men greedy for more,
but adversity makes them strong. And she draws Boethius’s imagination
far up into the heavens so that he can look down on the Earth and see it
as a tiny speck on which even tinier people play out their comical and
ultimately insignificant ambitions. She gets him to admit that riches and
fame bring anxiety and avarice, not peace and happiness. After being
shown these new perspectives and having his old assumptions
challenged, Boethius is finally prepared to absorb the greatest lesson of
all, the lesson Buddha and Aurelius had taught centuries earlier:
“Nothing is miserable unless you think it so; and on the other hand,
nothing brings happiness unless you are content with it.”7 When he takes
this lesson to heart, Boethius frees himself from his mental prison. He
regains his composure, writes a book that has comforted people for
centuries, and faces his death with dignity.
I don’t mean to imply that The Consolation of Philosophy is just
Roman pop psychology, but it does tell a story of freedom through
insight that I would like to question. In the previous chapter, I suggested
that our divided self is like a rider on the back of an elephant, and I said
that we give far too much importance to the rider—conscious thought.
Lady Philosophy, like the pop psychology gurus of today, was working
with the rider, guiding him to a moment of cognitive insight and
reframing. Yet, if you have ever achieved such dramatic insights into
your own life and resolved to change your ways or your outlook, you
--- END PAGE 40 ---

--- PAGE 41 ---
probably found that, three months later, you were right back where you
started. Epiphanies can be life-altering,8 but most fade in days or weeks.
The rider can’t just decide to change and then order the elephant to go
along with the program. Lasting change can come only by retraining the
elephant, and that’s hard to do. When pop psychology programs are
successful in helping people, which they sometimes are, they succeed not
because of the initial moment of insight but because they find ways to
alter people’s behavior over the following months. They keep people
involved with the program long enough to retrain the elephant. This
chapter is about why the elephant tends toward worry and pessimism in
so many people, and about three tools that the rider can use to retrain it. 
THE LIKE-O-METER 
The most important words in the elephant’s language are “like” and
“dislike,” or “approach” and “withdraw.” Even the simplest animal must
make decisions at every moment: Left or right? Go or stop? Eat or don’t
eat? Animals with brains complex enough to have emotions make these
decisions effortlessly and automatically by having what is sometimes
called a “like-o-meter” running in their heads at all times. If a monkey
tasting a new fruit feels a sweet sensation, its like-o-meter registers “I
like it”; the monkey feels pleasure and bites right in. If the taste is bitter,
a flash of displeasure discourages further eating. There’s no need for a
weighing of pros and cons, or for a reasoning system. Just flashes of
pleasure and displeasure.
We humans have a like-o-meter too, and it’s always running. Its
influence is subtle, but careful experiments show that you have a like-
dislike reaction to everything you are experiencing, even if you’re not
aware of the experience. For example, suppose you are a participant in
an experiment on what is known as “affective priming.” You sit in front
of a computer screen and stare at a dot in the center. Every few seconds,
a word is flashed over the dot. All you have to do is tap a key with your
left hand if the word means something good or likable (such as garden,
hope, fun), or tap a key with your right hand if the word means
something bad or dislikable (death, tyranny, boredom). It seems easy, but
for some reason you find yourself hesitating for a split second on some
--- END PAGE 41 ---

--- PAGE 42 ---
of the words. Unbeknownst to you, the computer is also flashing up
another word, right on the dot, just for a few hundredths of a second
before putting up the target word you’re rating. Though these words are
presented subliminally (below the level of your awareness), your
intuitive system is so fast that it reads and reacts to them with a like-o-
meter rating. If the subliminal word is fear, it would register negative on
your like-o-meter, making you feel a tiny flash of displeasure; and then,
a split second later, when you see the word boredom, you would more
quickly say that boredom is bad. Your negative evaluation of boredom
has been facilitated, or “primed,” by your tiny flash of negativity toward
fear. If, however, the word following fear is garden, you would take
longer to say that garden is good, because of the time it takes for your
like-o-meter to shift from bad to good.9
The discovery of affective priming in the 1980s opened up a world of
indirect measurement in psychology. It became possible to bypass the
rider and talk directly to the elephant, and what the elephant has to say is
sometimes disturbing. For example, what if, instead of flashing
subliminal words, we use photographs of black and white faces?
Researchers have found that Americans of all ages, classes, and political
affiliations react with a flash of negativity to black faces or to other
images and words associated with African-American culture.10 People
who report being unprejudiced against blacks show, on average, a
slightly smaller automatic prejudice, but apparently the rider and the
elephant each have an opinion. (You can test your own elephant at: 
www.projectimplicit.com.) Even many African Americans show this
implicit prejudice, although others show an implicit preference for black
faces and names. On balance, African Americans come out with no
implicit bias either way.
One of the most bizarre demonstrations of the like-o-meter in action
comes from the work of Brett Pelham,11 who has discovered that one’s
like-o-meter is triggered by one’s own name. Whenever you see or hear a
word that resembles your name, a little flash of pleasure biases you
toward thinking the thing is good. So when a man named Dennis is
considering a career, he ponders the possibilities: “Lawyer, doctor,
banker, dentist . . . dentist . . . something about dentist just feels right.”
And, in fact, people named Dennis or Denise are slightly more likely
than people with other names to become dentists. Men named Lawrence
--- END PAGE 42 ---

--- PAGE 43 ---
and women named Laurie are more likely to become lawyers. Louis and
Louise are more likely to move to Louisiana or St. Louis, and George
and Georgina are more likely to move to Georgia. The own-name
preference even shows up in marriage records: People are slightly more
likely to marry people whose names sound like their own, even if the
similarity is just sharing a first initial. When Pelham presented his
findings to my academic department, I was shocked to realize that most
of the married people in the room illustrated his claim: Jerry and Judy,
Brian and Bethany, and the winners were me, Jon, and my wife, Jayne.
The unsettling implication of Pelham’s work is that the three biggest
decisions most of us make—what to do with our lives, where to live, and
whom to marry—can all be influenced (even if only slightly) by
something as trivial as the sound of a name. Life is indeed what we deem
it, but the deeming happens quickly and unconsciously. The elephant
reacts instinctively and steers the rider toward a new destination. 
NEGATIVITY BIAS 
Clinical psychologists sometimes say that two kinds of people seek
therapy: those who need tightening, and those who need loosening. But
for every patient seeking help in becoming more organized, self-
controlled, and responsible about her future, there is a waiting room full
of people hoping to loosen up, lighten up, and worry less about the
stupid things they said at yesterday’s staff meeting or about the rejection
they are sure will follow tomorrow’s lunch date. For most people, the
elephant sees too many things as bad and not enough as good.
It makes sense. If you were designing the mind of a fish, would you
have it respond as strongly to opportunities as to threats? No way. The
cost of missing a cue that signals food is low; odds are that there are
other fish in the sea, and one mistake won’t lead to starvation. The cost
of missing the sign of a nearby predator, however, can be catastrophic.
Game over, end of the line for those genes. Of course, evolution has no
designer, but minds created by natural selection end up looking (to us) as
though they were designed because they generally produce behavior that
is flexibly adaptive in their ecological niches. (See Steven Pinker12 on
how natural selection designs without a designer.) Some commonalities
--- END PAGE 43 ---

--- PAGE 44 ---
of animal life even create similarities across species that we might call
design principles. One such principle is that bad is stronger than good. 
Responses to threats and unpleasantness are faster, stronger, and harder
to inhibit than responses to opportunities and pleasures.
This principle, called “negativity bias,”13 shows up all over
psychology. In marital interactions, it takes at least five good or
constructive actions to make up for the damage done by one critical or
destructive act.14 In financial transactions and gambles, the pleasure of
gaining a certain amount of money is smaller than the pain of losing the
same amount.15 In evaluating a person’s character, people estimate that
it would take twenty-five acts of life-saving heroism to make up for one
act of murder. 16 When preparing a meal, food is easily contaminated
(by a single cockroach antenna), but difficult to purify. Over and over
again, psychologists find that the human mind reacts to bad things more
quickly, strongly, and persistently than to equivalent good things. We
can’t just will ourselves to see everything as good because our minds are
wired to find and react to threats, violations, and setbacks. As Ben
Franklin said: “We are not so sensible of the greatest Health as of the
least Sickness.”17
Here’s another candidate for a design principle of animal life:
Opposing systems push against each other to reach a balance point, but
the balance point is adjustable. When you move your arm, one set of
muscles extends it and another contracts it. Both are always slightly
tensed, ready for action. Your heart rate and breathing are regulated by
an autonomic nervous system composed of two subsystems that push
your organs in opposite directions: The sympathetic system prepares
your body for “fight or flight” and the parasympathetic system calms you
down. Both are active all the time, in different ratios. Your behavior is
governed by opposing motivational systems: an approach system, which
triggers positive emotions and makes you want to move toward certain
things; and a withdrawal system, which triggers negative emotions and
makes you want to pull back or avoid other things. Both systems are
always active, monitoring the environment, and the two systems can
produce opposing motives at the same time18 (as when you feel
ambivalence), but their relative balance determines which way you
move. (The “like-o-meter” is a metaphor for this balancing process and
--- END PAGE 44 ---

--- PAGE 45 ---
its subtle moment-by-moment fluctuations.) The balance can shift in an
instant: You are drawn by curiosity to an accident scene, but then recoil
in horror when you see the blood that you could not have been surprised
to see. You want to talk to a stranger, but you find yourself suddenly
paralyzed when you approach that person. The withdrawal system can
quickly shoot up to full power,19 overtaking the slower (and generally
weaker) approach system.
One reason the withdrawal system is so quick and compelling is that it
gets first crack at all incoming information. All neural impulses from the
eyes and ears go first to the thalamus, a kind of central switching station
in the brain. From the thalamus, neural impulses are sent out to special
sensory processing areas in the cortex; and from those areas, information
is relayed to the frontal cortex, where it is integrated with other higher
mental processes and your ongoing stream of consciousness. If at the end
of this process you become aware of a hissing snake in front of you, you
could decide to run away and then order your legs to start moving. But
because neural impulses move only at about thirty meters per second,
this fairly long path, including decision time, could easily take a second
or two. It’s easy to see why a neural shortcut would be advantageous,
and the amygdala is that shortcut. The amygdala, sitting just under the
thalamus, dips into the river of unprocessed information flowing through
the thalamus, and it responds to patterns that in the past were associated
with danger. The amygdala has a direct connection to the part of the
brainstem that activates the fight-or-flight response, and if the amygdala
finds a pattern that was part of a previous fear episode (such as the sound
of a hiss), it orders the body to red alert.20
You have felt this happen. If you have ever thought you were alone in
a room and then heard a voice behind you, or if you have ever seen a
horror movie in which a knife-wielding maniac jumps into the frame
without a musical forewarning, you probably flinched, and your heart
rate shot up. Your body reacted with fear (via the quick amygdala path)
in the first tenth of a second before you could make sense of the event
(via the slower cortical path) in the next nine-tenths of a second. Though
the amygdala does process some positive information, the brain has no
equivalent “green alert” system to notify you instantly of a delicious
meal or a likely mate. Such appraisals can take a second or two. Once
again, bad is stronger and faster than good. The elephant reacts before
--- END PAGE 45 ---

--- PAGE 46 ---
the rider even sees the snake on the path. Although you can tell yourself
that you are not afraid of snakes, if your elephant fears them and rears
up, you’ll still be thrown.
One final point about the amygdala: Not only does it reach down to
the brainstem to trigger a response to danger but it reaches up to the
frontal cortex to change your thinking. It shifts the entire brain over to a
withdrawal orientation. There is a two-way street between emotions and
conscious thoughts: Thoughts can cause emotions (as when you reflect
on a foolish thing you said), but emotions can also cause thoughts,
primarily by raising mental filters that bias subsequent information
processing. A flash of fear makes you extra vigilant for additional
threats; you look at the world through a filter that interprets ambiguous
events as possible dangers. A flash of anger toward someone raises a
filter through which you see everything the offending person says or
does as a further insult or transgression. Feelings of sadness blind you to
all pleasures and opportunities. As one famous depressive put it: “How
weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable seem to me all the uses of this
world!”21 So when Shakespeare’s Hamlet later offers his own
paraphrase of Marcus Aurelius—“There is nothing either good or bad
but thinking makes it so”22—he is right, but he might have added that
his negative emotions are making his thinking make everything bad. 
THE CORTICAL LOTTERY 
Hamlet was unlucky. His uncle and his mother conspired to murder his
father, the king. But his long and deep depressive reaction to this setback
suggests that he was unlucky in another way too: He was by nature a
pessimist.
When it comes to explaining personality, it’s always true that nature
and nurture work together. But it’s also true that nature plays a bigger
role than most people realize. Consider the identical twin sisters Daphne
and Barbara. Raised outside London, they both left school at the age of
fourteen, went to work in local government, met their future husbands at
the age of sixteen at local town hall dances, suffered miscarriages at the
same time, and then each gave birth to two boys and a girl. They feared
--- END PAGE 46 ---

--- PAGE 47 ---
many of the same things (blood and heights) and exhibited unusual
habits (each drank her coffee cold; each developed the habit of pushing
up her nose with the palm of the hand, a gesture they both called
“squidging”). None of this may surprise you until you learn that separate
families had adopted Daphne and Barbara as infants; neither even knew
of the other’s existence until they were reunited at the age of forty. When
they finally did meet, they were wearing almost identical clothing.23
Such strings of coincidences are common among identical twins who
were separated at birth, but they do not happen among fraternal twins
who were similarly separated.24 On just about every trait that has been
studied, identical twins (who share all their genes and spend the same
nine months in the same womb) are more similar than same-sex fraternal
twins (who share only half their genes and spend the same nine months
in the same womb). This finding means that genes make at least some
contribution to nearly every trait. Whether the trait is intelligence,
extroversion, fearfulness, religiosity, political leaning, liking for jazz, or
dislike of spicy foods, identical twins are more similar than fraternal
twins, and they are usually almost as similar if they were separated at
birth.25 Genes are not blueprints specifying the structure of a person;
they are better thought of as recipes for producing a person over many
years.26 Because identical twins are created from the same recipe, their
brains end up being fairly similar (though not identical), and these
similar brains produce many of the same idiosyncratic behaviors.
Fraternal twins, on the other hand, are made from two different recipes
that happen to share half their instructions. Fraternal twins don’t end up
being 50 percent similar to each other; they end up with radically
different brains, and therefore radically different personalities—almost
as different as people from unrelated families.27
Daphne and Barbara came to be known as the “giggle twins.” Both
have sunny personalities and a habit of bursting into laughter in mid-
sentence. They won the cortical lottery—their brains were preconfigured
to see good in the world. Other pairs of twins, however, were born to
look on the dark side. In fact, happiness is one of the most highly
heritable aspects of personality. Twin studies generally show that from
50 percent to 80 percent of all the variance among people in their 
average levels of happiness can be explained by differences in their
--- END PAGE 47 ---

--- PAGE 48 ---
genes rather than in their life experiences. 28 (Particular episodes of joy
or depression, however, must usually be understood by looking at how
life events interact with a person’s emotional predisposition.)
A person’s average or typical level of happiness is that person’s
“affective style.” (“Affect” refers to the felt or experienced part of
emotion.) Your affective style reflects the everyday balance of power
between your approach system and your withdrawal system, and this
balance can be read right from your forehead. It has long been known
from studies of brainwaves that most people show an asymmetry: more
activity either in the right frontal cortex or in the left frontal cortex. In
the late 1980s, Richard Davidson at the University of Wisconsin
discovered that these asymmetries correlated with a person’s general
tendencies to experience positive and negative emotions. People showing
more of a certain kind of brainwave coming through the left side of the
forehead reported feeling more happiness in their daily lives and less
fear, anxiety, and shame than people exhibiting higher activity on the
right side. Later research showed that these cortical “lefties” are less
subject to depression and recover more quickly from negative
experiences.29 The difference between cortical righties and lefties can be
seen even in infants: Ten-month-old babies showing more activity on the
right side are more likely to cry when separated briefly from their
mothers.30 And this difference in infancy appears to reflect an aspect of
personality that is stable, for most people, all the way through adulthood.
31 Babies who show a lot more activity on the right side of the forehead
become toddlers who are more anxious about novel situations; as
teenagers, they are more likely to be fearful about dating and social
activities; and, finally, as adults, they are more likely to need
psychotherapy to loosen up. Having lost out in the cortical lottery, they
will struggle all their lives to weaken the grip of an overactive
withdrawal system. Once when a friend of mine with a negative affective
style was bemoaning her life situation, someone suggested that a move to
a different city would suit her well. “No,” she said, “I can be unhappy
anywhere.” She might as well have quoted John Milton’s paraphrase of
Aurelius: “The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a heaven of
hell, a hell of heaven.”32
--- END PAGE 48 ---

--- PAGE 49 ---
SCAN YOUR BRAIN 
Which set of statements is more true of you? 
Set A: 
• I’m always willing to try something new if I think it will be fun.
• If I see a chance to get something I want I move on it right away.
• When good things happen to me, it affects me strongly.
• I often act on the spur of the moment.
Set B:
• I worry about making mistakes.
• Criticism or scolding hurts me quite a bit.
• I feel worried when I think I have done poorly at
something important.
• I have many fears compared to my friends.
People who endorse Set A over Set B have a more approach-
oriented style and, on average, show greater cortical activity
on the left side of the forehead. People who endorse Set B
have a more withdrawal-oriented style and, on average, show
greater cortical activity on the right side. (Scale adapted from
Carver & White, 1994. Copyright © 1994 by the American
Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.) 
HOW TO CHANGE YOUR MIND 
If I had an identical twin brother, he would probably dress badly. I have
always hated shopping, and I can recognize only six colors by name.
Several times I have resolved to improve my style, and have even
acceded to women’s requests to take me shopping, but it was no use.
Each time I quickly returned to my familiar ways, which were stuck in
the early 1980s. I couldn’t just decide to change, to become something
I’m not, by sheer force of will. Instead, I found a more roundabout way
--- END PAGE 49 ---

--- PAGE 50 ---
to change: I got married. Now I have a closet full of nice clothes, a few
pairings that I have memorized as appropriate choices, and a style
consultant who recommends variations.
You can change your affective style too—but again, you can’t do it by
sheer force of will. You have to do something that will change your
repertoire of available thoughts. Here are three of the best methods for
doing so: meditation, cognitive therapy, and Prozac. All three are
effective because they work on the elephant. 
Meditation 
Suppose you read about a pill that you could take once a day to reduce
anxiety and increase your contentment. Would you take it? Suppose
further that the pill has a great variety of side effects, all of them good:
increased self-esteem, empathy, and trust; it even improves memory.
Suppose, finally, that the pill is all natural and costs nothing. Now would
you take it?
The pill exists. It is meditation.33 It has been discovered by many
religious traditions and was in use in India long before Buddha, but
Buddhism brought it into mainstream Western culture. There are many
kinds of meditation, but they all have in common a conscious attempt to
focus attention in a nonanalytical way.34 It sounds easy: Sit still (in most
forms) and focus awareness only on your breathing, or on a word, or on
an image, and let no other words, ideas, or images arise in consciousness.
Meditation is, however, extraordinarily difficult at first, and confronting
your repeated failures in the first weeks teaches the rider lessons in
humility and patience. The goal of meditation is to change automatic
thought processes, thereby taming the elephant. And the proof of taming
is the breaking of attachments.
My dog Andy has two main attachments, through which he interprets
everything that happens in my house: eating meat and not being left
alone. If my wife and I stand near the front door, he becomes anxious. If
we pick up our keys, open the door, and say, “Be a good boy,” his tail,
head, and somehow even his hips droop pathetically toward the floor.
But if we then say, “Andy, come,” he’s electrified with joy and shoots
past us through the doorway. Andy’s fear of being left alone gives him
--- END PAGE 50 ---

--- PAGE 51 ---
many moments of anxiety throughout the day, a few hours of despair
(when he is left alone), and a few minutes of joy (each time his solitude
is relieved). Andy’s pleasures and pains are determined by the choices
my wife and I make. If bad is stronger than good, then Andy suffers
more from separation than he benefits from reunion.
Most people have many more attachments than Andy; but, according
to Buddhism, human psychology is similar to Andy’s in many ways.
Because Rachel wants to be respected, she lives in constant vigilance for
signs of disrespect, and she aches for days after a possible violation. She
may enjoy being treated with respect, but disrespect hurts more on
average than respect feels good. Charles wants money and lives in a
constant state of vigilance for chances to make it: He loses sleep over
fines, losses, or transactions that he thinks did not get him the best
possible deal. Once again, losses loom larger than gains, so even if
Charles grows steadily wealthier, thoughts about money may on average
give him more unhappiness than happiness.
For Buddha, attachments are like a game of roulette in which someone
else spins the wheel and the game is rigged: The more you play, the more
you lose. The only way to win is to step away from the table. And the
only way to step away, to make yourself not react to the ups and downs
of life, is to meditate and tame the mind. Although you give up the
pleasures of winning, you also give up the larger pains of losing.
In chapter 5 I’ll question whether this is really a good tradeoff for
most people. For now the important point is that Buddha made a
psychological discovery that he and his followers embedded in a
philosophy and a religion. They have been generous with it, teaching it
to people of all faiths and of no faith. The discovery is that meditation
tames and calms the elephant. Meditation done every day for several
months can help you reduce substantially the frequency of fearful,
negative, and grasping thoughts, thereby improving your affective style.
As Buddha said: “When a man knows the solitude of silence, and feels
the joy of quietness, he is then free from fear and sin.”35 
Cognitive Therapy
--- END PAGE 51 ---

--- PAGE 52 ---
Meditation is a characteristically Eastern solution to the problems of life.
Even before Buddha, the Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu had said that the
road to wisdom runs through calm inaction, desireless waiting. Western
approaches to problems more typically involve pulling out a tool box and
trying to fix what’s broken. That was Lady Philosophy’s approach with
her many arguments and reframing techniques. The toolbox was
thoroughly modernized in the 1960s by Aaron Beck.
Beck, a psychiatrist at the University of Pennsylvania, had been
trained in the Freudian approach in which “the child is father to the
man.” Whatever ails you is caused by events in your childhood, and the
only way to change yourself now is to dig through repressed memories,
come up with a diagnosis, and work through your unresolved conflicts.
For depressed patients, however, Beck found little evidence in the
scientific literature or in his own clinical practice that this approach was
working. The more space he gave them to run through their self-critical
thoughts and memories of injustice, the worse they felt. But in the late
1960s, when Beck broke with standard practice and, like Lady
Philosophy, questioned the legitimacy of his patients’ irrational and self-
critical thoughts, the patients often seemed to feel better.
Beck took a chance. He mapped out the distorted thought processes
characteristic of depressed people and trained his patients to catch and
challenge these thoughts. Beck was scorned by his Freudian colleagues,
who thought he was treating the symptoms of depression with Band-Aids
while letting the disease rage underneath, but his courage and persistence
paid off. He created cognitive therapy,36 one of the most effective
treatments available for depression, anxiety, and many other problems.
As I suggested in the last chapter, we often use reasoning not to find
the truth but to invent arguments to support our deep and intuitive beliefs
(residing in the elephant). Depressed people are convinced in their hearts
of three related beliefs, known as Beck’s “cognitive triad” of depression.
These are: “I’m no good,” “My world is bleak,” and “My future is
hopeless.” A depressed person’s mind is filled with automatic thoughts
supporting these dysfunctional beliefs, particularly when things goes
wrong. The thought distortions were so similar across patients that Beck
gave them names. Consider the depressed father whose daughter falls
down and bangs her head while he is watching her. He instantly
flagellates himself with these thoughts: “I’m a terrible father” (this is
--- END PAGE 52 ---

--- PAGE 53 ---
called “personalization,” or seeing the event as a referendum on the self
rather than as a minor medical issue); “Why do I always do such terrible
things to my children?” (“overgeneralization” combined with
dichotomous “always/never” thinking); “Now she’s going to have brain
damage” (“magnification”); “Everyone will hate me” (“arbitrary
inference,” or jumping to a conclusion without evidence).
Depressed people are caught in a feedback loop in which distorted
thoughts cause negative feelings, which then distort thinking further.
Beck’s discovery is that you can break the cycle by changing the
thoughts. A big part of cognitive therapy is training clients to catch their
thoughts, write them down, name the distortions, and then find
alternative and more accurate ways of thinking. Over many weeks, the
client’s thoughts become more realistic, the feedback loop is broken, and
the client’s anxiety or depression abates. Cognitive therapy works
because it teaches the rider how to train the elephant rather than how to
defeat it directly in an argument. On the first day of therapy, the rider
doesn’t realize that the elephant is controlling him, that the elephant’s
fears are driving his conscious thoughts. Over time, the client learns to
use a set of tools; these include challenging automatic thoughts and
engaging in simple tasks, such as going out to buy a newspaper rather
than staying in bed all day ruminating. These tasks are often assigned as
homework, to be done daily. (The elephant learns best from daily
practice; a weekly meeting with a therapist is not enough.) With each
reframing, and with each simple task accomplished, the client receives a
little reward, a little flash of relief or pleasure. And each flash of pleasure
is like a peanut given to an elephant as reinforcement for a new behavior.
You can’t win a tug of war with an angry or fearful elephant, but you can
—by gradual shaping of the sort the behaviorists talked about—change
your automatic thoughts and, in the process, your affective style. In fact,
many therapists combine cognitive therapy with techniques borrowed
directly from behaviorism to create what is now called “cognitive
behavioral therapy.”
Unlike Freud, Beck tested his theories in controlled experiments.
People who underwent cognitive therapy for depression got measurably
better; they got better faster than people who were put on a waiting list
for therapy; and, at least in some studies, they got better faster than those
who received other therapies.37 When cognitive therapy is done very
--- END PAGE 53 ---

--- PAGE 54 ---
well it is as effective as drugs such as Prozac for the treatment of
depression,38 and its enormous advantage over Prozac is that when
cognitive therapy stops, the benefits usually continue because the
elephant has been retrained. Prozac, in contrast, works only for as long
as you take it.
I don’t mean to suggest that cognitive behavioral therapy is the only
psychotherapy that works. Most forms of psychotherapy work to some
degree, and in some studies they all seem to work equally well.39 It
comes down to a question of fit: Some people respond better to one
therapy than another, and some psychological disorders are more
effectively treated by one therapy than another. If you have frequent
automatic negative thoughts about yourself, your world, or your future,
and if these thoughts contribute to chronic feelings of anxiety or despair,
then you might find a good fit with cognitive behavioral therapy.40 
Prozac 
Marcel Proust wrote that “the only true voyage . . . would be not to visit
strange lands but to possess other eyes.”41 In the summer of 1996, I tried
on a pair of new eyes when I took Paxil, a cousin of Prozac, for eight
weeks. For the first few weeks I had only side effects: some nausea,
difficulty sleeping through the night, and a variety of physical sensations
that I did not know my body could produce, including a feeling I can
describe only by saying that my brain felt dry. But then one day in week
five, the world changed color. I woke up one morning and no longer felt
anxious about the heavy work load and uncertain prospects of an
untenured professor. It was like magic. A set of changes I had wanted to
make in myself for years—loosening up, lightening up, accepting my
mistakes without dwelling on them—happened overnight. However,
Paxil had one devastating side effect for me: It made it hard for me to
recall facts and names, even those I knew well. I would greet my
students and colleagues, reach for a name to put after “Hi,” and be left
with “Hi . . . there.” I decided that as a professor I needed my memory
more than I needed peace of mind, so I stopped taking Paxil. Five weeks
later, my memory came back, along with my worries. What remained
--- END PAGE 54 ---

--- PAGE 55 ---
was a firsthand experience of wearing rose-colored glasses, of seeing the
world with new eyes.
Prozac was the first member of a class of drugs known as selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs. In what follows, I use Prozac to
stand for the whole group, the psychological effects of which are nearly
identical, and which includes Paxil, Zoloft, Celexa, Lexapro, and others.
Many things are not known about Prozac and its cousins—above all,
how they work. The name of the drug class tells part of the story: Prozac
gets into the synapses (the gaps between neurons), but it is selective in
affecting only synapses that use serotonin as their neurotransmitter. Once
in the synapses, Prozac inhibits the reuptake process—the normal
process in which a neuron that has just released serotonin into the
synapse then sucks it back up into itself, to be released again at the next
neural pulse. The net result is that a brain on Prozac has more serotonin
in certain synapses, so those neurons fire more often.
So far Prozac sounds like cocaine, heroin, or any other drug that you
might have learned is associated with a specific neurotransmitter. But the
increase in serotonin happens within a day of taking Prozac, while the
benefits don’t appear for four to six weeks. Somehow, the neuron on the
other side of the synapse is adapting to the new level of serotonin, and it
is from that adaptation process that the benefits probably emerge. Or
maybe neural adaptation has nothing to do with it. The other leading
theory about Prozac is that it raises the level of a neural growth hormone
in the hippocampus, a part of the brain crucial for learning and memory.
People who have a negative affective style generally have higher levels
of stress hormones in their blood; these hormones, in turn, tend to kill off
or prune back some critical cells in the hippocampus, whose job, in part,
is to shut off the very stress response that is killing them. So people who
have a negative affective style may often suffer minor neural damage to
the hippocampus, but this can be repaired in four or five weeks after
Prozac triggers the release of the neural growth hormone.42 Although
we don’t know how Prozac works, we do know that it works: It produces
benefits above placebo or no-treatment control groups on an astonishing
variety of mental maladies, including depression, generalized anxiety
disorder, panic attacks, social phobia, premenstrual dysphoric disorder,
some eating disorders, and obsessive compulsive disorder.43
--- END PAGE 55 ---

--- PAGE 56 ---
Prozac is controversial for at least two reasons. First, it is a shortcut. In
most studies, Prozac turns out to be just about as effective as cognitive
therapy—sometimes a little more, sometimes a little less—but it’s so
much easier than therapy. No daily homework or difficult new skills; no
weekly therapy appointment. If you believe in the Protestant work ethic
and the maxim “No pain, no gain,” then you might be disturbed by
Prozac. Second, Prozac does more than just relieve symptoms; it
sometimes changes personality. In Listening to Prozac, 44 Peter Kramer
presents case studies of his patients whose long-standing depression or
anxiety was cured by Prozac, and whose personalities then bloomed—
greater self-confidence, greater resilience in the face of setbacks, and
more joy, all of which sometimes led to big changes in careers and
relationships. These cases conform to an idealized medical narrative:
person suffers from lifelong disease; medical breakthrough cures disease;
person released from shackles, celebrates new freedom; closing shot of
person playing joyously with children; fade to black. But Kramer also
tells fascinating stories about people who were not ill, who met no
diagnostic category for a mental disorder, and who just had the sorts of
neuroses and personality quirks that most people have to some degree—
fear of criticism, inability to be happy when not in a relationship,
tendency to be too critical and overcontrolling of spouse and children.
Like all personality traits, these are hard to change, but they are what talk
therapy is designed to address. Therapy can’t usually change personality,
but it can teach you ways of working around your problematic traits. Yet
when Kramer prescribed Prozac, the offending traits went away. Lifelong
habits, gone overnight (five weeks after starting Prozac), whereas years
of psychotherapy often had done nothing. This is why Kramer coined the
term “cosmetic psychopharmacology,” for Prozac seemed to promise
that psychiatrists could shape and perfect minds just as plastic surgeons
shape and perfect bodies.
Does that sound like progress, or like Pandora’s box? Before you
answer that, answer this: Which of these two phrases rings truest to you:
“Be all that you can be” or “This above all, to thine own self be true.”
Our culture endorses both—relentless self-improvement as well as
authenticity—but we often escape the contradiction by framing self-
improvement as authenticity. Just as gaining an education means
struggling for twelve to twenty years to develop one’s intellectual
potential, character development ought to involve a lifelong struggle to
--- END PAGE 56 ---

--- PAGE 57 ---
develop one’s moral potential. A nine-year-old child does not stay true to
herself by keeping the mind and character of a nine-year-old; she works
hard to reach her ideal self, pushed and chauffeured by her parents to
endless after-school and weekend classes in piano, religion, art, and
athletics. As long as change is gradual and a result of the child’s hard
work, the child is given the moral credit for the change, and that change
is in the service of authenticity. But what if there were a pill that
enhanced tennis skills? Or a minor surgical technique for implanting
piano virtuosity directly and permanently into the brain? Such a
separation of self-improvement from authenticity would make many
people recoil in horror.
Horror fascinates me, particularly when there is no victim. I study
moral reactions to harmless taboo violations such as consensual incest
and private flag desecration. These things just feel wrong to most people,
even when they can’t explain why. (I’ll explain why in chapter 9.) My
research indicates that a small set of innate moral intuitions guide and
constrain the world’s many moralities, and one of these intuitions is that
the body is a temple housing a soul within.45 Even people who do not
consciously believe in God or the soul are offended by or feel
uncomfortable about someone who treats her body like a playground, its
sole purpose to provide pleasure. A shy woman who gets a nose job,
breast augmentation, twelve body piercings, and a prescription for
elective Prozac would be as shocking to many people as a minister who
remodels his church to look like an Ottoman harem.
The transformation of the church might hurt others by causing several
parishioners to die from apoplexy. It is hard, however, to find harm in the
self-transformer beyond some vague notion that she is “not being true to
herself.” But if this woman had previously been unhappy with her
hypersensitive and overly inhibited personality, and if she had made little
progress with psychotherapy, why exactly should she be true to a self she
doesn’t want? Why not change herself for the better? When I took Paxil,
it changed my affective style for the better. It made me into something I
was not, but had long wanted to be: a person who worries less, and who
sees the world as being full of possibilities, not threats. Paxil improved
the balance between my approach and withdrawal systems, and had there
been no side effects, I would still be taking it today.
--- END PAGE 57 ---

--- PAGE 58 ---
I therefore question the widespread view that Prozac and other drugs
in its class are overprescribed. It’s easy for those who did well in the
cortical lottery to preach about the importance of hard work and the
unnaturalness of chemical shortcuts. But for those who, through no fault
of their own, ended up on the negative half of the affective style
spectrum, Prozac is a way to compensate for the unfairness of the
cortical lottery. Furthermore, it’s easy for those who believe that the
body is a temple to say that cosmetic psychopharmacology is a kind of
sacrilege. Something is indeed lost when psychiatrists no longer listen to
their patients as people, but rather as a car mechanic would listen to an
engine, looking only for clues about which knob to adjust next. But if the
hippocampal theory of Prozac is correct, many people really do need a
mechanical adjustment. It’s as though they had been driving for years
with the emergency brake halfway engaged, and it might be worth a five-
week experiment to see what happens to their lives when the brake is
released. Framed in this way, Prozac for the “worried well” is no longer
just cosmetic. It is more like giving contact lenses to a person with poor
but functional eyesight who has learned ways of coping with her
limitations. Far from being a betrayal of that person’s “true self,” contact
lenses can be a reasonable shortcut to proper functioning. 
The epigraphs that opened this chapter are true. Life is what we deem it,
and our lives are the creations of our minds. But these claims are not
helpful until augmented by a theory of the divided self (such as the rider
and the elephant) and an understanding of negativity bias and affective
style. Once you know why change is so hard, you can drop the brute
force method and take a more psychologically sophisticated approach to
self-improvement. Buddha got it exactly right: You need a method for
taming the elephant, for changing your mind gradually. Meditation,
cognitive therapy, and Prozac are three effective means of doing so.
Because each will be effective for some people and not for others, I
believe that all three should be readily available and widely publicized.
Life itself is but what you deem it, and you can—through meditation,
cognitive therapy, and Prozac—redeem yourself.
--- END PAGE 58 ---

--- PAGE 59 ---
3 
Reciprocity with a Vengeance 
Zigong asked: “Is there any single word that could guide one’s entire
life?” The master said: “Should it not be reciprocity? What you do not
wish for yourself, do not do to others.”
—ANALECTS OF CONFUCIUS1 
That which is hateful to you, do not do to your fellow; this, in a few
words, is the entire Torah; all the rest is but an elaboration of this one,
central point.
—RABBI HILLEL, 1ST CENT. BCE2 
W HEN THE SAGES PICK a single word or principle to elevate above
all others, the winner is almost always either “love” or “reciprocity.”
Chapter 6 will cover love; this chapter is about reciprocity. Both are,
ultimately, about the same thing: the bonds that tie us to one another.
The opening scene of the movie The Godfather is an exquisite
portrayal of reciprocity in action. It is the wedding day of the daughter of
the Godfather, Don Corleone. The Italian immigrant Bonasera, an
undertaker, has come to ask for a favor: He wants to avenge an assault
upon the honor and body of his own daughter, who was beaten by her
boyfriend and another young man. Bonasera describes the assault, the
arrest, and the trial of the two boys. The judge gave them a suspended
sentence and let them go free that very day. Bonasera is furious and feels
humiliated; he has come to Don Corleone to ask that justice be done.
Corleone asks what exactly he wants. Bonasera whispers something into
his ear, which we can safely assume is “Kill them.” Corleone refuses,
and points out that Bonasera has not been much of a friend until now.
--- END PAGE 59 ---

--- PAGE 60 ---
Bonasera admits he was afraid of getting into “trouble.” The dialogue
continues:3
CORLEONE: I understand. You found paradise in America, you
had a good trade, made a good living. The police protected you
and there were courts of law. And you didn’t need a friend like
me. But now you come to me and you say, “Don Corleone give
me justice.” But you don’t ask with respect. You don’t offer
friendship. You don’t even think to call me “Godfather.” Instead,
you come into my house on the day my daughter is to be married,
and you ask me to do murder, for money.
BONASERA: I ask you for justice.
CORLEONE: That is not justice; your daughter is still alive.
BONASERA: Let them suffer then, as she suffers. [Pause]. How
much shall I pay you?
CORLEONE: Bonasera . . . Bonasera . . . What have I ever done
to make you treat me so disrespectfully? If you’d come to me in
friendship, then this scum that ruined your daughter would be
suffering this very day. And if by chance an honest man like
yourself should make enemies, then they would become my 
enemies. And then they would fear you.
BONASERA: Be my friend—[He bows to Corleone]—
Godfather? [He kisses Corleone’s hand].
CORLEONE: Good. [Pause.] Some day, and that day may never
come, I’ll call upon you to do a service for me. But until that day
—accept this justice as a gift on my daughter’s wedding day.
The scene is extraordinary, a kind of overture that introduces the
themes of violence, kinship, and morality that drive the rest of the movie.
But just as extraordinary to me is how easy it is for us to understand this
complex interaction in an alien subculture. We intuitively understand
why Bonasera wants the boys killed, and why Corleone refuses to do it.
We wince at Bonasera’s clumsy attempt to offer money when what is
lacking is the right relationship, and we understand why Bonasera had
been wary, before, of cultivating the right relationship. We understand
that in accepting a “gift” from a mafia don, a chain, not just a string, is
attached. We understand all of this effortlessly because we see the world
--- END PAGE 60 ---

--- PAGE 61 ---
through the lens of reciprocity. Reciprocity is a deep instinct; it is the
basic currency of social life. Bonasera uses it to buy revenge, which is
itself a form of reciprocity. Corleone uses it to manipulate Bonasera into
joining Corleone’s extended family. In the rest of this chapter I’ll explain
how we came to adopt reciprocity as our social currency, and how you
can spend it wisely. 
ULTRASOCIALITY 
Animals that fly seem to violate the laws of physics, but only until you
learn a bit more about physics. Flight evolved independently at least
three times in the animal kingdom: in insects, dinosaurs (including
modern birds), and mammals (bats). In each case, a physical feature that
had potentially aerodynamic properties was already present (for
example, scales that lengthened into feathers, which later made gliding
possible).
Animals that live in large peaceful societies seem to violate the laws
of evolution (such as competition and survival of the fittest), but only
until you learn a bit more about evolution. Ultrasociality4—living in
large cooperative societies in which hundreds or thousands of individuals
reap the benefits of an extensive division of labor—evolved
independently at least four times in the animal kingdom: among
hymenoptera (ants, bees, and wasps); termites; naked mole rats; and
humans. In each case, a feature possessing potentially cooperation-
enhancing properties already existed. For all the nonhuman ultrasocial
species, that feature was the genetics of kin altruism. It’s obvious that
animals will risk their lives for the safety of their own children: The only
way to “win” at the game of evolution is to leave surviving copies of
your genes. Yet not just your children carry copies of your genes. Your
siblings are just as closely related to you (50 percent shared genes) as
your children; your nephews and nieces share a quarter of your genes,
and your cousins one eighth. In a strictly Darwinian calculation,
whatever cost you would bear to save one of your children you should be
willing to pay to save two nieces or four cousins.5
--- END PAGE 61 ---

--- PAGE 62 ---
Because nearly all animals that live in cooperative groups live in
groups of close relatives, most altruism in the animal kingdom reflects
the simple axiom that shared genes equals shared interests. But because
the sharing drops off so quickly with each fork in the family tree (second
cousins share only one thirty-second of their genes), kin altruism
explains only how groups of a few dozen, or perhaps a hundred, animals
can work together. Out of a flock of thousands, only a small percentage
would be close enough to be worth taking risks for. The rest would be
competitors, in the Darwinian sense. Here’s where the ancestors of bees,
termites, and mole rats took the common mechanism of kin altruism,
which makes many species sociable, and parlayed it6 into the foundation
of their uncommon ultrasociality: They are all siblings. Those species
each evolved a reproduction system in which a single queen produces all
the children, and nearly all the children are either sterile (ants) or else
their reproductive abilities are suppressed (bees, mole rats); therefore, a
hive, nest, or colony of these animals is one big family. If everyone
around you is your sibling, and if the survival of your genes depends on
the survival of your queen, selfishness becomes genetic suicide. These
ultrasocial species display levels of cooperation and self-sacrifice that
still astonish and inspire those who study them. Some ants, for example,
spend their lives hanging from the top of a tunnel, offering their
abdomens for use as food storage bags by the rest of the nest.7
The ultrasocial animals evolved into a state of ultrakinship, which led
automatically to ultracooperation (as in building and defending a large
nest or hive), which allowed the massive division of labor (ants have
castes such as soldier, forager, nursery worker, and food storage bag),
which created hives overflowing with milk and honey, or whatever other
substance they use to store their surplus food. We humans also try to
extend the reach of kin altruism by using fictitious kinship names for
nonrelatives, as when children are encouraged to call their parents’
friends Uncle Bob and Aunt Sarah. Indeed, the mafia is known as “the
family,” and the very idea of a godfather is an attempt to forge a kin-like
link with a man who is not true kin. The human mind finds kinship
deeply appealing, and kin altruism surely underlies the cultural ubiquity
of nepotism. But even in the mafia, kin altruism can take you only so far.
At some point you have to work with people who are at best distant
relations, and to do so you’d better have another trick up your sleeve.
--- END PAGE 62 ---

--- PAGE 63 ---
YOU SCRATCH MY BACK, I’LL SCRATCH YOURS 
What would you do if you received a Christmas card from a complete
stranger? This actually happened in a study in which a psychologist sent
Christmas cards to people at random. The great majority sent him a card
in return.8 In his insightful book Influence, 9 Robert Cialdini of Arizona
State University cites this and other studies as evidence that people have
a mindless, automatic reciprocity reflex. Like other animals, we will
perform certain behaviors when the world presents us with certain
patterns of input. A baby herring gull, seeing a red spot on its mother’s
beak, pecks at it automatically, and out comes regurgitated food. The
baby gull will peck just as vigorously at a red spot painted on the end of
a pencil. A cat stalks a mouse using the same low-down, wiggle-close-
then-pounce technique used by cats around the world. The cat uses the
same technique to attack a string trailing a ball of yarn because the string
accidentally activates the cat’s mouse-tail-detector module. Cialdini sees
human reciprocity as a similar ethological reflex: a person receives a
favor from an acquaintance and wants to repay the favor. The person will
even repay an empty favor from a stranger, such as the receipt of a
worthless Christmas card.
The animal and human examples are not exactly parallel, however.
The gulls and cats are responding to visual stimuli with specific bodily
movements, executed immediately. The person is responding to the 
meaning of a situation with a motivation that can be satisfied by a variety
of bodily movements executed days later. So what is really built into the
person is a strategy: Play tit for tat. Do to others what they do unto you.
Specifically, the tit-for-tat strategy is to be nice on the first round of
interaction; but after that, do to your partner whatever your partner did to
you on the previous round.10 Tit for tat takes us way beyond kin
altruism. It opens the possibility of forming cooperative relationships
with strangers.
Most interactions among animals (other than close kin) are zero-sum
games: One animal’s gain is the other’s loss. But life is full of situations
in which cooperation would expand the pie to be shared if only a way
could be found to cooperate without being exploited. Animals that hunt
are particularly vulnerable to the variability of success: They may find
--- END PAGE 63 ---

--- PAGE 64 ---
far more food than they can eat in one day, and then find no food at all
for three weeks. Animals that can trade their surplus on a day of plenty
for a loan on a day of need are much more likely to survive the vagaries
of chance. Vampire bats, for example, will regurgitate blood from a
successful night of bloodsucking into the mouth of an unsuccessful and
genetically unrelated peer. Such behavior seems to violate the spirit of
Darwinian competition, except that the bats keep track of who has helped
them in the past, and in return they share primarily with those bats.11
Like the Godfather, bats play tit for tat, and so do other social animals,
particularly those that live in relatively small, stable groups where
individuals can recognize each other as individuals.12
But if the response to noncooperation is just noncooperation on the
next round, then tit for tat can unite groups of only a few hundred. In a
large enough group, a cheating vampire bat can beg a meal from a
different successful bat each night and, when they come to him pleading
for a return favor, just wrap his wings around his head and pretend to be
asleep. What are they going to do to him? Well, if these were people
rather than bats, we know what they’d do: They’d beat the hell out of
him. Vengeance and gratitude are moral sentiments that amplify and
enforce tit for tat. Vengeful and grateful feelings appear to have evolved
precisely because they are such useful tools for helping individuals
create cooperative relationships, thereby reaping the gains from non-
zero-sum games.13 A species equipped with vengeance and gratitude
responses can support larger and more cooperative social groups because
the payoff to cheaters is reduced by the costs they bear in making
enemies.14 Conversely, the benefits of generosity are increased because
one gains friends.
Tit for tat appears to be built into human nature as a set of moral
emotions that make us want to return favor for favor, insult for insult,
tooth for tooth, and eye for eye. Several recent theorists15 even talk
about an “exchange organ” in the human brain, as though a part of the
brain were devoted to keeping track of fairness, debts owed, and social
accounts-receivable. The “organ” is a metaphor—nobody expects to find
an isolated blob of brain tissue the only function of which is to enforce
reciprocity. However, recent evidence suggests that there really could be
an exchange organ in the brain if we loosen the meaning of “organ” and
--- END PAGE 64 ---

--- PAGE 65 ---
allow that functional systems in the brain are often composed of widely
separated bits of neural tissue that work together to do a specific job.
Suppose you were invited to play the “ultimatum” game, which
economists invented16 to study the tension between fairness and greed.
It goes like this: Two people come to the lab but never meet. The
experimenter gives one of them—let’s suppose it’s not you—twenty one-
dollar bills and asks her to divide them between the two of you in any
way she likes. She then gives you an ultimatum: Take it or leave it. The
catch is that if you leave it, if you say no, you both get nothing. If you
were both perfectly rational, as most economists would predict, your
partner would offer you one dollar, knowing that you’d prefer one dollar
to no dollars, and you’d accept her offer, because she was right about
you. But the economists were wrong about you both. In real life, nobody
offers one dollar, and around half of all people offer ten dollars. But what
would you do if your partner offered you seven dollars? Or five? Or
three? Most people would accept the seven dollars, but not the three.
Most people are willing to pay a few dollars, but not seven, to punish the
selfish partner.
Now suppose you played this game while inside an fMRI scanner.
Alan Sanfey17 and his colleagues at Princeton had people do just that;
the researchers then looked at what parts of the brain were more active
when people were given unfair offers. One of the three areas that differed
most (when comparing responses to unfair vs. fair offers) was the frontal
insula, an area of the cortex on the frontal underside of the brain. The
frontal insula is known to be active during most negative or unpleasant
emotional states, particularly anger and disgust. Another area was the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, just behind the sides of the forehead,
known to be active during reasoning and calculation. Perhaps the most
impressive finding from Sanfey’s study is that people’s ultimate response
—accept or reject—could be predicted by looking at the state of their
brains moments before they pressed a button to make a choice. Those
subjects who showed more activation in the insula than in the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex generally went on to reject the unfair offer;
those with the reverse pattern generally accepted it. (It’s no wonder that
marketers, political consultants, and the CIA are so interested in neural
imaging and “neuromarketing.”)
--- END PAGE 65 ---

--- PAGE 66 ---
Gratitude and vengefulness are big steps on the road that led to human
ultrasociality, and it’s important to realize that they are two sides of one
coin. It would be hard to evolve one without the other. An individual
who had gratitude without vengefulness would be an easy mark for
exploitation, and a vengeful and ungrateful individual would quickly
alienate all potential cooperative partners. Gratitude and revenge are
also, not coincidentally, major forces holding together the mafia. The
Godfather sits at the center of a vast web of reciprocal obligations and
favors. He accumulates power with each favor he does, secure in the
knowledge that nobody who values his own life will fail to repay at a
time of the Godfather’s choosing. Revenge for most of us is much less
drastic, but if you have worked long enough in an office, restaurant, or
store, you know there are many subtle ways to retaliate against those
who have crossed you, and many ways to help those who have helped
you. 
YOU STAB HIS BACK, I’LL STAB YOURS 
When I said that people would beat the hell out of an ingrate who failed
to repay an important favor, I left out a qualification. For a first offense,
they’d probably just gossip. They’d ruin his reputation. Gossip is another
key piece in the puzzle of how humans became ultrasocial. It might also
be the reason we have such large heads.
Woody Allen once described his brain as his “second favorite organ,”
but for all of us it’s by far the most expensive one to run. It accounts for
2 percent of our body weight but consumes 20 percent of our energy.
Human brains grow so large that human beings must be born
prematurely18 (at least, compared to other mammals, who are born when
their brains are more or less ready to control their bodies), and even then
they can barely make it through the birth canal. Once out of the womb,
these giant brains attached to helpless baby bodies require somebody to
carry them around for a year or two. The tripling of human brain size
from the time of our last common ancestor with chimpanzees to today
imposed tremendous costs on parents, so there must have been a very
good reason to do it. Some have argued that the reason was hunting and
tool making, others suggest that the extra gray matter helped our
--- END PAGE 66 ---

--- PAGE 67 ---
ancestors locate fruit. But the only theory that explains why animals in
general have particular brain sizes is the one that maps brain size onto
social group size. Robin Dunbar19 has demonstrated that within a given
group of vertebrate species—primates, carnivores, ungulates, birds,
reptiles, or fish—the logarithm of the brain size is almost perfectly
proportional to the logarithm of the social group size. In other words, all
over the animal kingdom, brains grow to manage larger and larger
groups. Social animals are smart animals.
Dunbar points out that chimpanzees live in groups of around thirty,
and like all social primates, they spend enormous amounts of time
grooming each other. Human beings ought to live in groups of around
150 people, judging from the logarithm of our brain size; and sure
enough, studies of hunter-gatherer groups, military units, and city
dwellers’ address books suggest that 100 to 150 is the “natural” group
size within which people can know just about everyone directly, by name
and face, and know how each person is related to everybody else. But if
grooming is so central to primate sociality, and if our ancestors began
living in larger and larger groups (for some other reason, such as to take
advantage of a new ecological niche with high predation risks), at some
point grooming became an inadequate means of keeping up one’s
relationships.
Dunbar suggests that language evolved as a replacement for physical
grooming.20 Language allows small groups of people to bond quickly
and to learn from each other about the bonds of others. Dunbar notes that
people do in fact use language primarily to talk about other people—to
find out who is doing what to whom, who is coupling with whom, who is
fighting with whom. And Dunbar points out that in our ultrasocial
species, success is largely a matter of playing the social game well. It’s
not what you know, it’s who you know. In short, Dunbar proposes that
language evolved because it enabled gossip. Individuals who could share
social information, using any primitive means of communication, had an
advantage over those who could not. And once people began gossiping,
there was a runaway competition to master the arts of social
manipulation, relationship aggression, and reputation management, all of
which require yet more brain power.
--- END PAGE 67 ---

--- PAGE 68 ---
Nobody knows how language evolved, but I find Dunbar’s speculation
so fascinating that I love to tell people about it. It’s not good gossip—
after all, you don’t know Dunbar—but if you are like me you have an
urge to tell your friends about anything you learn that amazes or
fascinates you, and this urge itself illustrates Dunbar’s point: We are 
motivated to pass on information to our friends; we even sometimes say,
“I can’t keep it in, I have to tell somebody.” And when you do pass on a
piece of juicy gossip, what happens? Your friend’s reciprocity reflex
kicks in and she feels a slight pressure to return the favor. If she knows
something about the person or event in question, she is likely to speak
up: “Oh really? Well, I heard that he . . .” Gossip elicits gossip, and it
enables us to keep track of everyone’s reputation without having to
witness their good and bad deeds personally. Gossip creates a non-zero-
sum game because it costs us nothing to give each other information, yet
we both benefit by receiving information.
Because I’m particularly interested in the role of gossip in our moral
lives, I was pleased when a graduate student in my department, Holly
Hom, told me that she wanted to study gossip. In one of Holly’s
studies,21 we asked fifty-one people to fill out a short questionnaire each
time over the course of a week that they took part in a conversation that
went on for at least ten minutes. We then took only the records in which
the topic of conversation was another person, which gave us about one
episode of potential gossip per day per person. Among our main
findings: Gossip is overwhelmingly critical, and it is primarily about the
moral and social violations of others. (For college students, this meant a
lot of talk about the sexuality, cleanliness, and drinking habits of their
friends and roommates.) People do occasionally tell stories about the
good deeds of others, but such stories are only one tenth as common as
stories about transgressions. When people pass along high-quality
(“juicy”) gossip, they feel more powerful, they have a better shared sense
of what is right and what’s wrong, and they feel more closely connected
to their gossip partners.
A second study revealed that most people hold negative views of
gossip and gossipers, even though almost everyone gossips. When we
compared people’s attitudes about gossip to the social functions that
gossip serves, Holly and I came to believe that gossip is
underappreciated. In a world with no gossip, people would not get away
--- END PAGE 68 ---

--- PAGE 69 ---
with murder but they would get away with a trail of rude, selfish, and
antisocial acts, often oblivious to their own violations. Gossip extends
our moral-emotional toolkit. In a gossipy world, we don’t just feel
vengeance and gratitude toward those who hurt or help us; we feel pale
but still instructive flashes of contempt and anger toward people whom
we might not even know. We feel vicarious shame and embarrassment
when we hear about people whose schemes, lusts, and private failings
are exposed. Gossip is a policeman and a teacher. Without it, there would
be chaos and ignorance.22
Many species reciprocate, but only humans gossip, and much of what
we gossip about is the value of other people as partners for reciprocal
relationships. Using these tools, we create an ultrasocial world, a world
in which we refrain from nearly all the ways we could take advantage of
those weaker than us, a world in which we often help those who are
unlikely ever to be able to return the favor. We want to play tit for tat,
which means starting out nice without being a pushover, and we want to
cultivate a reputation for being a good player. Gossip and reputation
make sure that what goes around comes around—a person who is cruel
will find that others are cruel back to him, and a person who is kind will
find that other others are kind in return. Gossip paired with reciprocity
allow karma to work here on earth, not in the next life. As long as
everyone plays tit-for-tat augmented by gratitude, vengeance, and gossip,
the whole system should work beautifully. (It rarely does, however,
because of our self-serving biases and massive hypocrisy. See chapter 4.) 
USE THE FORCE, LUKE 
In offering reciprocity as the best word to guide one’s life, Confucius
was wise. Reciprocity is like a magic wand that can clear your way
through the jungle of social life. But as anyone who has read a Harry
Potter book knows, magic wands can be used against you. Robert
Cialdini spent years studying the dark arts of social influence: He
routinely answered ads recruiting people to work as door-to-door
salesmen and telemarketers, and went through their training programs to
learn their techniques. He then wrote a manual23 for those of us who
want to resist the tricks of “compliance professionals.”
--- END PAGE 69 ---

--- PAGE 70 ---
Cialdini describes six principles that salespeople use against us, but
the most basic of all is reciprocity. People who want something from us
try to give us something first, and we all have piles of address stickers
and free postcards from charities that gave them to us out of the
goodness of their marketing consultants’ hearts. The Hare Krishnas
perfected the technique: They pressed flowers or cheap copies of the 
Bhagavad Gita into the hands of unsuspecting pedestrians, and only then
asked for a donation. When Cialdini studied the Krishnas at O’Hare
Airport in Chicago, he noticed that they routinely went around the
garbage pails to collect and recycle the flowers that they knew would be
thrown away. Few people wanted the flowers, but in the early days of the
technique, most were unable just to accept them and walk on without
giving something in return. The Krishnas grew wealthy by exploiting
people’s reciprocity reflexes—until everyone learned about the Krishnas
and found ways to avoid taking the “gift” in the first place.
But legions of others are still after you. Supermarkets and Amway
dealers give out free samples to boost sales. Waiters and waitresses put a
mint on the check tray, a technique that has been shown to boost tips.24
Including a five-dollar “gift check” along with a survey sent in the mail
increases people’s willingness to complete the survey, even more than
does promising to send them fifty dollars for completing the survey.25 If
you get something for nothing, part of you may be pleased, but part of
you (part of the elephant—automatic processes) moves your hand to
your wallet to give something back.
Reciprocity works just as well for bargaining. Cialdini was once asked
by a boy scout to buy tickets to a movie he didn’t want to see. When
Cialdini said no, the scout asked him to buy some less expensive
chocolate bars instead. Cialdini found himself walking away with three
chocolate bars that he didn’t want. The scout had made a concession, and
Cialdini automatically reciprocated by making a concession of his own.
But rather than getting mad, Cialdini got data. He conducted his own
version of the encounter, asking college students walking on campus
whether they would volunteer to chaperone a group of juvenile
delinquents to the zoo for a day. Only 17 percent agreed. But in another
condition of the study, students were first asked whether they would
volunteer to work for two hours a week for two years with juvenile
delinquents. All said no, but when the experimenter then asked about the
--- END PAGE 70 ---

--- PAGE 71 ---
day trip to the zoo, 50 percent said yes.26 Concession leads to
concession. In financial bargaining, too, people who stake out an
extreme first position and then move toward the middle end up doing
better than those who state a more reasonable first position and then hold
fast.27 And the extreme offer followed by concession doesn’t just get
you a better price, it gets you a happier partner (or victim): She is more
likely to honor the agreement because she feels that she had more
influence on the outcome. The very process of give and take creates a
feeling of partnership, even in the person being taken.
So the next time a salesman gives you a free gift or consultation, or
makes a concession of any sort, duck. Don’t let him press your
reciprocity button. The best way out, Cialdini advises, is to fight
reciprocity with reciprocity. If you can reappraise the salesman’s move
for what it is—an effort to exploit you—you’ll feel entitled to exploit
him right back. Accept the gift or concession with a feeling of victory—
you are exploiting an exploiter—not mindless obligation.
Reciprocity is not just a way of dealing with boy scouts and obnoxious
salespeople; it’s for friends and lovers, too. Relationships are exquisitely
sensitive to balance in their early stages, and a great way to ruin things is
either to give too much (you seem perhaps a bit desperate) or too little
(you seem cold and rejecting). Rather, relationships grow best by
balanced give and take, especially of gifts, favors, attention, and self-
disclosure. The first three are somewhat obvious, but people often don’t
realize the degree to which the disclosure of personal information is a
gambit in the dating game. When someone tells you about past romantic
relationships, there is conversational pressure for you to do the same. If
this disclosure card is played too early, you might feel ambivalence—
your reciprocity reflex makes you prepare your own matching disclosure,
but some other part of you resists sharing intimate details with a near-
stranger. But when it’s played at the right time, the past-relationships-
mutual-disclosure conversation can be a memorable turning point on the
road to love.
Reciprocity is an all-purpose relationship tonic. Used properly, it
strengthens, lengthens, and rejuvenates social ties. It works so well in
part because the elephant is a natural mimic. For example, when we
interact with someone we like, we have a slight tendency to copy their
--- END PAGE 71 ---

--- PAGE 72 ---
every move, automatically and unconsciously.28 If the other person taps
her foot, you are more likely to tap yours. If she touches her face, you are
more likely to touch yours. But it’s not just that we mimic those we like;
we like those who mimic us. People who are subtly mimicked are then
more helpful and agreeable toward their mimicker, and even toward
others.29 Waitresses who mimic their customers get larger tips.30
Mimicry is a kind of social glue, a way of saying “We are one.” The
unifying pleasures of mimicry are particularly clear in synchronized
activities, such as line dances, group cheers, and some religious rituals,
in which people try to do the same thing at the same time. A theme of the
rest of this book is that humans are partially hive creatures, like bees, yet
in the modern world we spend nearly all our time outside of the hive.
Reciprocity, like love, reconnects us with others.
--- END PAGE 72 ---

--- PAGE 73 ---
4 
The Faults of Others 
Why do you see the speck in your neighbor’s eye, but do not notice the
log in your own eye? . . . You hypocrite, first take the log out of your
own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your
neighbor’s eye.
—MATTHEW 7:3-5 
It is easy to see the faults of others, but difficult to see one’s own faults.
One shows the faults of others like chaff winnowed in the wind, but one
conceals one’s own faults as a cunning gambler conceals his dice.
—BUDDHA1 
I T’S FUN TO LAUGH at a hypocrite, and recent years have given
Americans a great deal to laugh at. Take the conservative radio show
host Rush Limbaugh, who once said, in response to the criticism that the
United States prosecutes a disproportionate number of black men for
drug crimes, that white drug users should be seized and “sent up the
river,” too. In 2003, he was forced to eat his words when Florida officials
discovered his illegal purchase of massive quantities of Oxycontin, a
painkiller also known as “hillbilly heroin.” Another case occurred in my
home state of Virginia. Congressman Ed Schrock was an outspoken
opponent of gay rights, gay marriage, and of gays serving in the military.
Speaking of the horrors of such coservice, he said, “I mean, they are in
the showers with you, they are in the dining hall with you.”2 In August
2004, audio tapes were made public of the messages that Schrock, a
married man, had left on Megamates, an interactive phone sex line.
Schrock described the anatomical features of the kind of man he was
seeking, along with the acts he was interested in performing.
--- END PAGE 73 ---

--- PAGE 74 ---
There is a special pleasure in the irony of a moralist brought down for
the very moral failings he has condemned. It’s the pleasure of a well-told
joke. Some jokes are funny as one-liners, but most require three verses:
three guys, say, who walk into a bar one at a time, or a priest, a minister,
and a rabbi in a lifeboat. The first two set the pattern, and the third
violates it. With hypocrisy, the hypocrite’s preaching is the setup, the
hypocritical action is the punch line. Scandal is great entertainment
because it allows people to feel contempt, a moral emotion that gives
feelings of moral superiority while asking nothing in return. With
contempt you don’t need to right the wrong (as with anger) or flee the
scene (as with fear or disgust). And best of all, contempt is made to
share. Stories about the moral failings of others are among the most
common kinds of gossip,3 they are a staple of talk radio, and they offer a
ready way for people to show that they share a common moral
orientation. Tell an acquaintance a cynical story that ends with both of
you smirking and shaking your heads and voila, you’ve got a bond.
Well, stop smirking. One of the most universal pieces of advice from
across cultures and eras is that we are all hypocrites, and in our
condemnation of others’ hypocrisy we only compound our own. Social
psychologists have recently isolated the mechanisms that make us blind
to the logs in our own eyes. The moral implications of these findings are
disturbing; indeed, they challenge our greatest moral certainties. But the
implications can be liberating, too, freeing you from destructive
moralism and divisive self-righteousness. 
KEEPING UP APPEARANCES 
Research on the evolution of altruism and cooperation has relied heavily
on studies in which several people (or people simulated on a computer)
play a game. On each round of play, one person interacts with one other
player and can choose to be cooperative (thereby expanding the pie they
then share) or greedy (each grabbing as much as possible for himself).
After many rounds of play, you count up the number of points each
player accumulated and see which strategy was most profitable in the
long run. In these games, which are intended to be simple models of the
game of life, no strategy ever beats tit for tat.4 In the long run and across
--- END PAGE 74 ---

--- PAGE 75 ---
a variety of environments, it pays to cooperate while remaining vigilant
to the danger of being cheated. But those simple games are in some ways
simple minded. Players face a binary choice at each point: They can
cooperate or defect. Each player then reacts to what the other player did
in the previous round. In real life, however, you don’t react to what
someone did; you react only to what you think she did, and the gap
between action and perception is bridged by the art of impression
management. If life itself is but what you deem it, then why not focus
your efforts on persuading others to believe that you are a virtuous and
trustworthy cooperator? Thus Niccolo Machiavelli, whose name has
become synonymous with the cunning and amoral use of power, wrote
five hundred years ago that “the great majority of mankind are satisfied
with appearances, as though they were realities, and are often more
influenced by the things that seem than by those that are.”5 Natural
selection, like politics, works by the principle of survival of the fittest,
and several researchers have argued that human beings evolved to play
the game of life in a Machiavellian way.6 The Machiavellian version of
tit for tat, for example, is to do all you can to cultivate the reputation of a
trustworthy yet vigilant partner, whatever the reality may be.
The simplest way to cultivate a reputation for being fair is to really be
fair, but life and psychology experiments sometimes force us to choose
between appearance and reality. Dan Batson at the University of Kansas
devised a clever way to make people choose, and his findings are not
pretty. He brought students into his lab one at a time to take part in what
they thought was a study of how unequal rewards affect teamwork.7 The
procedure was explained: One member of each team of two will be
rewarded for correct responses to questions with a raffle ticket that could
win a valuable prize. The other member will receive nothing. Subjects
were also told that an additional part of the experiment concerned the
effects of control: You, the subject, will decide which of you is rewarded,
which of you is not. Your partner is already here, in another room, and
the two of you will not meet. Your partner will be told that the decision
was made by chance. You can make the decision in any way you like.
Oh, and here is a coin: Most people in this study seem to think that
flipping the coin is the fairest way to make the decision.
Subjects were then left alone to choose. About half of them used the
coin. Batson knows this because the coin was wrapped in a plastic bag,
--- END PAGE 75 ---

--- PAGE 76 ---
and half the bags were ripped open. Of those who did not flip the coin,
90 percent chose the positive task for themselves. For those who did flip
the coin, the laws of probability were suspended and 90 percent of them
chose the positive task for themselves. Batson had given all the subjects
a variety of questionnaires about morality weeks earlier (the subjects
were students in psychology classes), so he was able to check how
various measures of moral personality predicted behavior. His finding:
People who reported being most concerned about caring for others and
about issues of social responsibility were more likely to open the bag,
but they were not more likely to give the other person the positive task.
In other words, people who think they are particularly moral are in fact
more likely to “do the right thing” and flip the coin, but when the coin
flip comes out against them, they find a way to ignore it and follow their
own self-interest. Batson called this tendency to value the appearance of
morality over the reality “moral hypocrisy.”
Batson’s subjects who flipped the coin reported (on a questionnaire)
that they had made the decision in an ethical way. After his first study,
Batson wondered whether perhaps people tricked themselves by not
stating clearly what heads or tails would mean (“Let’s see, heads, that
means, um, oh yeah, I get the good one.”). But when he labeled the two
sides of the coin to erase ambiguity, it made no difference. Placing a
large mirror in the room, right in front of the subject, and at the same
time stressing the importance of fairness in the instructions, was the only
manipulation that had an effect. When people were forced to think about
fairness and could see themselves cheating, they stopped doing it. As
Jesus and Buddha said in the opening epigraphs of this chapter, it is easy
to spot a cheater when our eyes are looking outward, but hard when
looking inward. Folk wisdom from around the world concurs:
Though you see the seven defects of others, we do not see our
own ten defects. (Japanese proverb)8
A he-goat doesn’t realize that he smells. (Nigerian proverb)9
Proving that people are selfish, or that they’ll sometimes cheat when
they know they won’t be caught, seems like a good way to get an article
into the Journal of Incredibly Obvious Results. What’s not so obvious is
that, in nearly all these studies, people don’t think they are doing
--- END PAGE 76 ---

--- PAGE 77 ---
anything wrong. It’s the same in real life. From the person who cuts you
off on the highway all the way to the Nazis who ran the concentration
camps, most people think they are good people and that their actions are
motivated by good reasons. Machiavellian tit for tat requires devotion to
appearances, including protestations of one’s virtue even when one
chooses vice. And such protestations are most effective when the person
making them really believes them. As Robert Wright put it in his
masterful book The Moral Animal, “Human beings are a species splendid
in their array of moral equipment, tragic in their propensity to misuse it,
and pathetic in their constitutional ignorance of the misuse.”10
If Wright is correct about our “constitutional ignorance” of our
hypocrisy, then the sages’ admonition to stop smirking may be no more
effective than telling a depressed person to snap out of it. You can’t
change your mental filters by willpower alone; you have to engage in
activities such as meditation or cognitive therapy that train the elephant.
But at least a depressed person will usually admit she’s depressed.
Curing hypocrisy is much harder because part of the problem is that we
don’t believe there’s a problem. We are well-armed for battle in a
Machiavellian world of reputation manipulation, and one of our most
important weapons is the delusion that we are non-combatants. How do
we get away with it? 
FIND YOUR INNER LAWYER 
Remember Julie and Mark, the sister and brother who had sex back in
chapter 1? Most people condemned their actions even in the absence of
harm, and then made up reasons, sometimes bad ones, to justify their
condemnation. In my studies of moral judgment, I have found that
people are skilled at finding reasons to support their gut feelings: The
rider acts like a lawyer whom the elephant has hired to represent it in the
court of public opinion.
One of the reasons people are often contemptuous of lawyers is that
they fight for a client’s interests, not for the truth. To be a good lawyer, it
often helps to be a good liar. Although many lawyers won’t tell a direct
lie, most will do what they can to hide inconvenient facts while weaving
a plausible alternative story for the judge and jury, a story that they
--- END PAGE 77 ---

--- PAGE 78 ---
sometimes know is not true. Our inner lawyer works in the same way,
but, somehow, we actually believe the stories he makes up. To
understand his ways we must catch him in action; we must observe him
carrying out low-pressure as well as high-pressure assignments.
People sometimes call their lawyers to ask whether a particular course
of action is permissible. No pressure, just tell me whether I can do this.
The lawyer looks into the relevant laws and procedures and calls back
with a verdict: Yes, there is a legal or regulatory precedent for that; or
perhaps no, as your lawyer I would advise against such a course. A good
lawyer might look at all sides of a question, think about all possible
ramifications, and recommend alternative courses of action, but such
thoroughness depends in part on his client—does she really want advice
or does she just want to be given a red or a green light for her plan?
Studies of everyday reasoning show that the elephant is not an
inquisitive client. When people are given difficult questions to think
about—for example, whether the minimum wage should be raised—they
generally lean one way or the other right away, and then put a call in to
reasoning to see whether support for that position is forthcoming. For
example, a person whose first instinct is that the minimum wage should
be raised looks around for supporting evidence. If she thinks of her Aunt
Flo who is working for the minimum wage and can’t support her family
on it then yes, that means the minimum wage should be raised. All done.
Deanna Kuhn,11 a cognitive psychologist who has studied such
everyday reasoning, found that most people readily offered
“pseudoevidence” like the anecdote about Aunt Flo. Most people gave
no real evidence for their positions, and most made no effort to look for
evidence opposing their initial positions. David Perkins,12 a Harvard
psychologist who has devoted his career to improving reasoning, found
the same thing. He says that thinking generally uses the “makessense”
stopping rule. We take a position, look for evidence that supports it, and
if we find some evidence—enough so that our position “makes sense”—
we stop thinking. But at least in a low-pressure situation such as this, if
someone else brings up reasons and evidence on the other side, people
can be induced to change their minds; they just don’t make an effort to
do such thinking for themselves.
--- END PAGE 78 ---

--- PAGE 79 ---
Now let’s crank up the pressure. The client has been caught cheating
on her taxes. She calls her lawyer. She doesn’t confess and ask, “Was
that OK?” She says, “Do something.” The lawyer bolts into action,
assesses the damaging evidence, researches precedents and loopholes,
and figures out how some personal expenses might be plausibly justified
as business expenses. The lawyer has been given an order: Use all your
powers to defend me. Studies of “motivated reasoning”13 show that
people who are motivated to reach a particular conclusion are even
worse reasoners than those in Kuhn’s and Perkins’s studies, but the
mechanism is basically the same: a one-sided search for supporting
evidence only. People who are told that they have performed poorly on a
test of social intelligence think extra hard to find reasons to discount the
test; people who are asked to read a study showing that one of their
habits—such as drinking coffee—is unhealthy think extra hard to find
flaws in the study, flaws that people who don’t drink coffee don’t notice.
Over and over again, studies show that people set out on a cognitive
mission to bring back reasons to support their preferred belief or action.
And because we are usually successful in this mission, we end up with
the illusion of objectivity. We really believe that our position is rationally
and objectively justified.
Ben Franklin, as usual, was wise to our tricks. But he showed unusual
insight in catching himself in the act. Though he had been a vegetarian
on principle, on one long sea crossing the men were grilling fish, and his
mouth started watering:
I balanc’d some time between principle and inclination, till I
recollectd that, when the fish were opened, I saw smaller fish
taken out of their stomachs; then thought I, “if you eat one
another, I don’t see why we mayn’t eat you.” So I din’d upon cod
very heartily, and continued to eat with other people, returning
only now and then occasionally to a vegetable diet.14
Franklin concluded: “So convenient a thing is it to be a reasonable
creature, since it enables one to find or make a reason for every thing one
has a mind to do.” 
THE ROSE-COLORED MIRROR
--- END PAGE 79 ---

--- PAGE 80 ---
I don’t want to blame everything on the lawyer. The lawyer is, after all,
the rider—your conscious, reasoning self; and he is taking orders from
the elephant—your automatic and unconscious self. The two are in
cahoots to win at the game of life by playing Machiavellian tit for tat,
and both are in denial about it.
To win at this game you must present your best possible self to others.
You must appear virtuous, whether or not you are, and you must gain the
benefits of cooperation whether or not you deserve them. But everyone
else is playing the same game, so you must also play defense—you must
be wary of others’ self-presentations, and of their efforts to claim more
for themselves than they deserve. Social life is therefore always a game
of social comparison. We must compare ourselves to other people, and
our actions to their actions, and we must somehow spin those
comparisons in our favor. (In depression, part of the illness is that spin
goes the other way, as described by Aaron Beck’s cognitive triad: I’m
bad, the world is terrible, and my future is bleak.) You can spin a
comparison either by inflating your own claims or by disparaging the
claims of others. You might expect, given what I’ve said so far, that we
do both, but the consistent finding of psychological research is that we
are fairly accurate in our perceptions of others. It’s our self-perceptions
that are distorted because we look at ourselves in a rose-colored mirror.
In Garrison Keillor’s mythical town of Lake Wobegon, all the women
are strong, all the men good looking, and all the children above average.
But if the Wobegonians were real people, they would go further: Most of
them would believe they were stronger, better looking, or smarter than
the average Wobegonian. When Americans and Europeans are asked to
rate themselves on virtues, skills, or other desirable traits (including
intelligence, driving ability, sexual skills, and ethics), a large majority
say they are above average.15 (This effect is weaker in East Asian
countries, and may not exist in Japan.)16
In a brilliant series of experiments,17 Nick Epley and David Dunning
figured out how we do it. They asked students at Cornell University to
predict how many flowers they would buy in an upcoming charity event
and how many the average Cornell student would buy. Then they looked
at actual behavior. People had greatly overestimated their own virtue, but
were pretty close on their guesses about others. In a second study, Epley
--- END PAGE 80 ---

--- PAGE 81 ---
and Dunning asked people to predict what they would do in a game that
could be played for money either selfishly or cooperatively. Same
findings: Eighty-four percent predicted that they’d cooperate, but the
subjects expected (on average) that only 64 percent of others would
cooperate. When they ran the real game, 61 percent cooperated. In a
third study, Epley and Dunning paid people five dollars for participating
in an experiment and then asked them to predict how much of the money
they and others would donate, hypothetically, had they been given a
particular charitable appeal after the study. People said (on average)
they’d donate $2.44, and others would donate only $1.83. But when the
study was rerun with a real request to give money, the average gift was
$1.53.
In their cleverest study, the researchers described the details of the
third study to a new group of subjects and asked them to predict how
much money they would donate if they had been in the “real” condition,
and how much money other Cornell students would donate. Once again,
subjects predicted they’d be much more generous than others. But then
subjects saw the actual amounts of money donated by real subjects from
the third study, revealed to them one at a time (and averaging $1.53).
After being given this new information, subjects were given a chance to
revise their estimates, and they did. They lowered their estimates of what
others would give, but they did not change their estimates of what they
themselves would give. In other words, subjects used base rate
information properly to revise their predictions of others, but they
refused to apply it to their rosy self-assessments. We judge others by
their behavior, but we think we have special information about ourselves
—we know what we are “really like” inside, so we can easily find ways
to explain away our selfish acts and cling to the illusion that we are
better than others.
Ambiguity abets the illusion. For many traits, such as leadership, there
are so many ways to define it that one is free to pick the criterion that
will most flatter oneself. If I’m confident, I can define leadership as
confidence. If I think I’m high on people skills, I can define leadership as
the ability to understand and influence people. When comparing
ourselves to others, the general process is this: Frame the question
(unconsciously, automatically) so that the trait in question is related to a
self-perceived strength, then go out and look for evidence that you have
--- END PAGE 81 ---

--- PAGE 82 ---
the strength. Once you find a piece of evidence, once you have a
“makes-sense” story, you are done. You can stop thinking, and revel in
your self-esteem. It’s no wonder, then, that in a study of 1 million
American high school students, 70 percent thought they were above
average on leadership ability, but only 2 percent thought they were below
average. Everyone can find some skill that might be construed as related
to leadership, and then find some piece of evidence that one has that
skill.18 (College professors are less wise than high school students in
this respect—94 percent of us think we do above-average work.)19 But
when there is little room for ambiguity—how tall are you? how good are
you at juggling?—people tend to be much more modest.
If the only effect of these rampant esteem-inflating biases was to make
people feel good about themselves, they would not be a problem. In fact,
evidence shows that people who hold pervasive positive illusions about
themselves, their abilities, and their future prospects are mentally
healthier, happier, and better liked than people who lack such illusions.20
But such biases can make people feel that they deserve more than they
do, thereby setting the stage for endless disputes with other people who
feel equally over-entitled.
I fought endlessly with my first-year college roommates. I had
provided much of our furniture, including the highly valued refrigerator,
and I did most of the work keeping our common space clean. After a
while, I got tired of doing more than my share; I stopped working so
hard and let the space become messy so that someone else would pick up
the slack. Nobody did. But they did pick up my resentment, and it united
them in their dislike of me. The next year, when we no longer lived
together, we became close friends.
When my father drove me and my refrigerator up to college that first
year, he told me that the most important things I was going to learn I
would not learn in the classroom, and he was right. It took many more
years of living with roommates, but I finally realized what a fool I had
made of myself that first year. Of course I thought I did more than my
share. Although I was aware of every little thing I did for the group, I
was aware of only a portion of everyone else’s contributions. And even if
I had been correct in my accounting, I was self-righteous in setting up
the accounting categories. I picked the things I cared about—such as
--- END PAGE 82 ---

--- PAGE 83 ---
keeping the refrigerator clean—and then gave myself an A-plus in that
category. As with other kinds of social comparison, ambiguity allows us
to set up the comparison in ways that favor ourselves, and then to seek
evidence that shows we are excellent co-operators. Studies of such
“unconscious overclaiming” show that when husbands and wives
estimate the percentage of housework each does, their estimates total
more than 120 percent.21 When MBA students in a work group make
estimates of their contributions to the team, the estimates total 139
percent.22 Whenever people form cooperative groups, which are usually
of mutual benefit, self-serving biases threaten to fill group members with
mutual resentment. 
I’M RIGHT; YOU’RE BIASED 
If spouses, colleagues, and roommates so easily descend into resentment,
things get worse when people who lack affection or shared goals have to
negotiate. Vast societal resources are expended on litigation, labor
strikes, divorce disputes, and violence after failed peace talks because the
same self-serving biases are at work fomenting hypocritical indignation.
In these high-pressure situations, the lawyers (real and metaphorical) are
working round the clock to spin and distort the case in their clients’
favor. George Loewenstein23 and his colleagues at Carnegie Mellon
found a way to study the process by giving pairs of research subjects a
real legal case to read (about a motorcycle accident in Texas), assigning
one subject to play the defendant and one the plaintiff, and then giving
them real money to negotiate with. Each pair was told to reach a fair
agreement and warned that, if they failed to agree, a settlement would be
imposed and “court costs” deducted from the pool of money, leaving
both players worse off. When both players knew which role each was to
play from the start, each read the case materials differently, made
different guesses about what settlement the judge in the real case had
imposed, and argued in a biased way. More than a quarter of all pairs
failed to reach an agreement. However, when the players didn’t know
which role they were to play until after they had read all the materials,
they became much more reasonable, and only 6 percent of pairs failed to
settle.
--- END PAGE 83 ---

--- PAGE 84 ---
Recognizing that hiding negotiators’ identities from them until the last
minute is not an option in the real world, Loewenstein set out to find
other ways to “de-bias” negotiators. He tried having subjects read a short
essay about the kinds of self-serving biases that affect people in their
situation to see whether subjects could correct for the biases. No dice.
Although the subjects used the information to predict their opponent’s
behavior more accurately, they did not change their own biases at all. As
Epley and Dunning had found, people really are open to information that
will predict the behavior of others, but they refuse to adjust their self-
assessments. In another study, Loewenstein followed the advice often
given by marriage therapists to have each subject first write an essay
arguing the other person’s case as convincingly as possible. Even worse
than no dice. The manipulation backfired, perhaps because thinking
about your opponent’s arguments automatically triggers additional
thinking on your own part as you prepare to refute them.
One manipulation did work. When subjects read the essay about self-
serving biases and were then asked to write an essay about weaknesses in 
their own case, their previous righteousness was shaken. Subjects in this
study were just as fair-minded as those who learned their identities at the
last minute. But before you get too optimistic about this technique for
reducing hypocrisy, you should realize that Loewenstein was asking
subjects to find weaknesses in their cases —in the positions they were
arguing for—not in their characters. When you try to persuade people to
look at their own personal picture of Dorian Gray, they put up a much
bigger fight. Emily Pronin at Princeton and Lee Ross at Stanford have
tried to help people overcome their self-serving biases by teaching them
about biases and then asking, “OK, now that you know about these
biases, do you want to change what you just said about yourself?”
Across many studies, the results were the same:24 People were quite
happy to learn about the various forms of self-serving bias and then
apply their newfound knowledge to predict others’ responses. But their
self-ratings were unaffected. Even when you grab people by the lapels,
shake them, and say, “Listen to me! Most people have an inflated view
of themselves. Be realistic!” they refuse, muttering to themselves, “Well,
other people may be biased, but I really am above average on
leadership.”
--- END PAGE 84 ---

--- PAGE 85 ---
Pronin and Ross trace this resistance to a phenomenon they call “naive
realism”: Each of us thinks we see the world directly, as it really is. We
further believe that the facts as we see them are there for all to see,
therefore others should agree with us. If they don’t agree, it follows
either that they have not yet been exposed to the relevant facts or else
that they are blinded by their interests and ideologies. People
acknowledge that their own backgrounds have shaped their views, but
such experiences are invariably seen as deepening one’s insights; for
example, being a doctor gives a person special insight into the problems
of the health-care industry. But the background of other people is used to
explain their biases and covert motivations; for example, doctors think
that lawyers disagree with them about tort reform not because they work
with the victims of malpractice (and therefore have their own special
insights) but because their self-interest biases their thinking. It just seems
plain as day, to the naive realist, that everyone is influenced by ideology
and self-interest. Except for me. I see things as they are.
If I could nominate one candidate for “biggest obstacle to world peace
and social harmony,” it would be naive realism because it is so easily
ratcheted up from the individual to the group level: My group is right
because we see things as they are. Those who disagree are obviously
biased by their religion, their ideology, or their self-interest. Naive
realism gives us a world full of good and evil, and this brings us to the
most disturbing implication of the sages’ advice about hypocrisy: Good
and evil do not exist outside of our beliefs about them. 
SATAN SATISFIES 
One day in 1998 I received a handwritten letter from a woman in my
town whom I did not know. The woman wrote about how crime, drugs,
and teen pregnancy were all spiraling out of control. Society was going
downhill as Satan spread his wings. The woman invited me to come to
her church and find spiritual shelter. As I read her letter, I had to agree
with her that Satan had spread his wings, but only to fly away and leave
us in peace. The late 1990s was a golden age. The cold war was over,
democracy and human rights were spreading, South Africa had
vanquished apartheid, Israelis and Palestinians were reaping the fruits of
--- END PAGE 85 ---

--- PAGE 86 ---
the Oslo accords, and there were encouraging signs from North Korea.
Here in the United States, crime and unemployment had plummeted, the
stock market was climbing ever higher, and the ensuing prosperity was
promising to erase the national debt. Even cockroaches were
disappearing from our cities because of widespread use of the roach
poison Combat. So what on earth was she talking about?
When the moral history of the 1990s is written, it might be titled 
Desperately Seeking Satan. With peace and harmony ascendant,
Americans seemed to be searching for substitute villains. We tried drug
dealers (but then the crack epidemic waned) and child abductors (who
are usually one of the parents). The cultural right vilified homosexuals;
the left vilified racists and homophobes. As I thought about these various
villains, including the older villains of communism and Satan himself, I
realized that most of them share three properties: They are invisible (you
can’t identify the evil one from appearance alone); their evil spreads by
contagion, making it vital to protect impressionable young people from
infection (for example from communist ideas, homosexual teachers, or
stereotypes on television); and the villains can be defeated only if we all
pull together as a team. It became clear to me that people want to believe
they are on a mission from God, or that they are fighting for some more
secular good (animals, fetuses, women’s rights), and you can’t have
much of a mission without good allies and a good enemy.
The problem of evil has bedeviled many religions since their birth. If
God is all good and all powerful, either he allows evil to flourish (which
means he is not all good), or else he struggles against evil (which means
he is not all powerful). Religions have generally chosen one of three
resolutions of this paradox.25 One solution is straight dualism: There
exists a good force and an evil force, they are equal and opposite, and
they fight eternally. Human beings are part of the battleground. We were
created part good, part evil, and we must choose which side we will be
on. This view is clearest in religions emanating from Persia and
Babylonia, such as Zoroastrianism, and the view influenced Christianity
as a long-lived doctrine called Manichaeism. A second resolution is
straight monism: There is one God; he created the world as it needs to
be, and evil is an illusion, a view that dominated religions that developed
in India. These religions hold that the entire world—or, at least, its
emotional grip upon us—is an illusion, and that enlightenment consists
--- END PAGE 86 ---

--- PAGE 87 ---
of breaking out of the illusion. The third approach, taken by Christianity,
blends monism and dualism in a way that ultimately reconciles the
goodness and power of God with the existence of Satan. This argument
is so complicated that I cannot understand it. Nor, apparently, can many
Christians who, judging by what I hear on gospel radio stations in
Virginia, seem to hold a straight Manichaean world view, according to
which God and Satan are fighting an eternal war. In fact, despite the
diversity of theological arguments made in different religions, concrete
representations of Satan, demons, and other evil entities are surprisingly
similar across continents and eras.26
From a psychological perspective, Manichaeism makes perfect sense.
“Our life is the creation of our mind,” as Buddha said, and our minds
evolved to play Machiavellian tit for tat. We all commit selfish and
shortsighted acts, but our inner lawyer ensures that we do not blame
ourselves or our allies for them. We are thus convinced of our own
virtue, but quick to see bias, greed, and duplicity in others. We are often
correct about others’ motives, but as any conflict escalates we begin to
exaggerate grossly, to weave a story in which pure virtue (our side) is in
a battle with pure vice (theirs). 
THE MYTH OF PURE EVIL 
In the days after receiving that letter, I thought a lot about the need for
evil. I decided to write an article on this need and use the tools of modern
psychology to understand evil in a new way. But as soon as I started my
research, I found out I was too late. By one year. A three-thousand-year-
old question had been given a complete and compelling psychological
explanation the previous year by Roy Baumeister, one of today’s most
creative social psychologists. In Evil: Inside Human Cruelty and
Aggression, 27 Baumeister examined evil from the perspective of both
victim and perpetrator. When taking the perpetrator’s perspective, he
found that people who do things we see as evil, from spousal abuse all
the way to genocide, rarely think they are doing anything wrong. They
almost always see themselves as responding to attacks and provocations
in ways that are justified. They often think that they themselves are
victims. But, of course, you can see right through this tactic; you are
--- END PAGE 87 ---

--- PAGE 88 ---
good at understanding the biases that others use to protect their self-
esteem. The disturbing part is that Baumeister shows us our own
distortions as victims, and as righteous advocates of victims. Almost
everywhere Baumeister looked in the research literature, he found that
victims often shared some of the blame. Most murders result from an
escalating cycle of provocation and retaliation; often, the corpse could
just as easily have been the murderer. In half of all domestic disputes,
both sides used violence. 28 Baumeister points out that, even in instances
of obvious police brutality, such as the infamous videotaped beating of
Rodney King in Los Angeles in 1991, there is usually much more to the
story than is shown on the news. (News programs gain viewers by
satisfying people’s need to believe that evil stalks the land.)
Baumeister is an extraordinary social psychologist, in part because in
his search for truth he is unconcerned about political correctness.
Sometimes evil falls out of a clear blue sky onto the head of an innocent
victim, but most cases are much more complicated, and Baumeister is
willing to violate the taboo against “blaming the victim” in order to
understand what really happened. People usually have reasons for
committing violence, and those reasons usually involve retaliation for a
perceived injustice, or self-defense. This does not mean that both sides
are equally to blame: Perpetrators often grossly overreact and
misinterpret (using self-serving biases). But Baumeister’s point is that
we have a deep need to understand violence and cruelty through what he
calls “the myth of pure evil.” Of this myth’s many parts, the most
important are that evildoers are pure in their evil motives (they have no
motives for their actions beyond sadism and greed); victims are pure in
their victimhood (they did nothing to bring about their victimization);
and evil comes from outside and is associated with a group or force that
attacks our group. Furthermore, anyone who questions the application of
the myth, who dares muddy the waters of moral certainty, is in league
with evil.
The myth of pure evil is the ultimate self-serving bias, the ultimate
form of naive realism. And it is the ultimate cause of most long-running
cycles of violence because both sides use it to lock themselves into a
Manichaean struggle. When George W. Bush said that the 9/11 terrorists
did what they did because they “hate our freedom,” he showed a
stunning lack of psychological insight. Neither the 9/11 hijackers nor
--- END PAGE 88 ---

--- PAGE 89 ---
Osama Bin Laden were particularly upset because American women can
drive, vote, and wear bikinis. Rather, many Islamic extremists want to
kill Americans because they are using the Myth of Pure Evil to interpret
Arab history and current events. They see America as the Great Satan,
the current villain in a long pageant of Western humiliation of Arab
nations and peoples. They did what they did as a reaction to America’s
actions and impact in the Middle East, as they see it through the
distortions of the Myth of Pure Evil. However horrifying it is for
terrorists to lump all civilians into the category of “enemy” and then kill
them indiscriminately, such actions at least make psychological sense,
whereas killing because of a hatred for freedom does not.
In another unsettling conclusion, Baumeister found that violence and
cruelty have four main causes. The first two are obvious attributes of
evil: greed/ambition (violence for direct personal gain, as in robbery) and
sadism (pleasure in hurting people). But greed/ambition explains only a
small portion of violence, and sadism explains almost none. Outside of
children’s cartoons and horror films, people almost never hurt others for
the sheer joy of hurting someone. The two biggest causes of evil are two
that we think are good, and that we try to encourage in our children: high
self-esteem and moral idealism. Having high self-esteem doesn’t directly
cause violence, but when someone’s high esteem is unrealistic or
narcissistic, it is easily threatened by reality; in reaction to those threats,
people—particularly young men—often lash out violently.29 Baumeister
questions the usefulness of programs that try raise children’s self-esteem
directly instead of by teaching them skills they can be proud of. Such
direct enhancement can potentially foster unstable narcissism.
Threatened self-esteem accounts for a large portion of violence at the
individual level, but to really get a mass atrocity going you need idealism
—the belief that your violence is a means to a moral end. The major
atrocities of the twentieth century were carried out largely either by men
who thought they were creating a utopia or else by men who believed
they were defending their homeland or tribe from attack.30 Idealism
easily becomes dangerous because it brings with it, almost inevitably, the
belief that the ends justify the means. If you are fighting for good or for
God, what matters is the outcome, not the path. People have little respect
for rules; we respect the moral principles that underlie most rules. But
when a moral mission and legal rules are incompatible, we usually care
--- END PAGE 89 ---

--- PAGE 90 ---
more about the mission. The psychologist Linda Skitka31 finds that
when people have strong moral feelings about a controversial issue—
when they have a “moral mandate”—they care much less about
procedural fairness in court cases. They want the “good guys” freed by
any means, and the “bad guys” convicted by any means. It is thus not
surprising that the administration of George W. Bush consistently argues
that extra-judicial killings, indefinite imprisonment without trial, and
harsh physical treatment of prisoners are legal and proper steps in
fighting the Manichaean “war on terror.” 
FINDING THE GREAT WAY 
In philosophy classes, I often came across the idea that the world is an
illusion. I never really knew what that meant, although it sounded deep.
But after two decades studying moral psychology, I think I finally get it.
The anthropologist Clifford Geertz wrote that “man is an animal
suspended in webs of significance that he himself has spun.”32 That is,
the world we live in is not really one made of rocks, trees, and physical
objects; it is a world of insults, opportunities, status symbols, betrayals,
saints, and sinners. All of these are human creations which, though real
in their own way, are not real in the way that rocks and trees are real.
These human creations are like fairies in J. M. Barrie’s Peter Pan: They
exist only if you believe in them. They are the Matrix (from the movie of
that name); they are a consensual hallucination.
The inner lawyer, the rose-colored mirror, naive realism, and the myth
of pure evil—these mechanisms all conspire to weave for us a web of
significance upon which angels and demons fight it out. Our ever-
judging minds then give us constant flashes of approval and disapproval,
along with the certainty that we are on the side of the angels. From this
vantage point it all seems so silly, all this moralism, righteousness, and
hypocrisy. It’s beyond silly; it is tragic, for it suggests that human beings
will never achieve a state of lasting peace and harmony. So what can you
do about it?
The first step is to see it as a game and stop taking it so seriously. The
great lesson that comes out of ancient India is that life as we experience
--- END PAGE 90 ---

--- PAGE 91 ---
it is a game called “samsara.” It is a game in which each person plays out
his “dharma,” his role or part in a giant play. In the game of samsara,
good things happen to you, and you are happy. Then bad things happen,
and you are sad or angry. And so it goes, until you die. Then you are
reborn back into it, and it repeats. The message of the Bhagavad Gita (a
central text of Hinduism) is that you can’t quit the game entirely; you
have a role to play in the functioning of the universe, and you must play
that role. But you should do it in the right way, without being attached to
the “fruits” or outcomes of your action. The god Krishna says:
I love the man who hates not nor exults, who mourns not nor
desires . . . who is the same to friend and foe, [the same] whether
he be respected or despised, the same in heat and cold, in
pleasure and in pain, who has put away attachment and remains
unmoved by praise or blame . . . contented with whatever comes
his way.33
Buddha went a step further. He, too, counseled indifference to the ups
and downs of life, but he urged that we quit the game entirely. Buddhism
is a set of practices for escaping samsara and the endless cycle of rebirth.
Though divided on whether to retreat from the world or engage with it,
Buddhists all agree on the importance of training the mind to stop its
incessant judging. Sen-ts’an, an early Chinese Zen master, urged
nonjudgmentalism as a prerequisite to following “the perfect way” in this
poem from the eighth century CE: 
The Perfect Way is only difficult for those who pick and choose;
Do not like, do not dislike; all will then be clear.
Make a hairbreadth difference, and Heaven and Earth are set
apart;
If you want the truth to stand clear before you, never be for or
against.
The struggle between “for” and “against” is the mind’s worst
disease.34 
Judgmentalism is indeed a disease of the mind: it leads to anger,
torment, and conflict. But it is also the mind’s normal condition—the
elephant is always evaluating, always saying “Like it” or “Don’t like it.”
So how can you change your automatic reactions? You know by now
that you can’t simply resolve to stop judging others or to stop being a
--- END PAGE 91 ---

--- PAGE 92 ---
hypocrite. But, as Buddha taught, the rider can gradually learn to tame
the elephant, and meditation is one way to do so. Meditation has been
shown to make people calmer, less reactive to the ups and downs and
petty provocations of life.35 Meditation is the Eastern way of training
yourself to take things philosophically.
Cognitive therapy works, too. In Feeling Good, 36 a popular guide to
cognitive therapy, David Burns has written a chapter on cognitive
therapy for anger. He advises using many of the same techniques that
Aaron Beck used for depression: Write down your thoughts, learn to
recognize the distortions in your thoughts, and then think of a more
appropriate thought. Burns focuses on the should statements we carry
around—ideas about how the world should work, and about how people 
should treat us. Violations of these should statements are the major
causes of anger and resentment. Burns also advises empathy: In a
conflict, look at the world from your opponent’s point of view, and you’ll
see that she is not entirely crazy.
Although I agree with Burns’s general approach, the material I have
reviewed in this chapter suggests that, once anger comes into play,
people find it extremely difficult to empathize with and understand
another perspective. A better place to start is, as Jesus advised, with
yourself and the log in your own eye. (Batson and Loewenstein both
found that debiasing occurred only when subjects were forced to look at
themselves.) And you will see the log only if you set out on a deliberate
and effortful quest to look for it. Try this now: Think of a recent
interpersonal conflict with someone you care about and then find one
way in which your behavior was not exemplary. Maybe you did
something insensitive (even if you had a right to do it), or hurtful (even if
you meant well), or inconsistent with your principles (even though you
can readily justify it). When you first catch sight of a fault in yourself,
you’ll likely hear frantic arguments from your inner lawyer excusing you
and blaming others, but try not to listen. You are on a mission to find at
least one thing that you did wrong. When you extract a splinter it hurts,
briefly, but then you feel relief, even pleasure. When you find a fault in
yourself it will hurt, briefly, but if you keep going and acknowledge the
fault, you are likely to be rewarded with a flash of pleasure that is mixed,
oddly, with a hint of pride. It is the pleasure of taking responsibility for
your own behavior. It is the feeling of honor.
--- END PAGE 92 ---

--- PAGE 93 ---
Finding fault with yourself is also the key to overcoming the
hypocrisy and judgmentalism that damage so many valuable
relationships. The instant you see some contribution you made to a
conflict, your anger softens—maybe just a bit, but enough that you might
be able to acknowledge some merit on the other side. You can still
believe you are right and the other person is wrong, but if you can move
to believing that you are mostly right, and your opponent is mostly 
wrong, you have the basis for an effective and nonhumiliating apology.
You can take a small piece of the disagreement and say, “I should not
have done X, and I can see why you felt Y.” Then, by the power of
reciprocity, the other person will likely feel a strong urge to say, “Yes, I
was really upset by X. But I guess I shouldn’t have done P, so I can see
why you felt Q.” Reciprocity amplified by self-serving biases drove you
apart back when you were matching insults or hostile gestures, but you
can turn the process around and use reciprocity to end a conflict and save
a relationship.
The human mind may have been shaped by evolutionary processes to
play Machiavellian tit for tat, and it seems to come equipped with
cognitive processes that predispose us to hypocrisy, self-righteousness,
and moralistic conflict. But sometimes, by knowing the mind’s structure
and strategies, we can step out of the ancient game of social
manipulation and enter into a game of our choosing. By seeing the log in
your own eye you can become less biased, less moralistic, and therefore
less inclined toward argument and conflict. You can begin to follow the
perfect way, the path to happiness that leads through acceptance, which
is the subject of the next chapter.
--- END PAGE 93 ---

--- PAGE 94 ---
5 
The Pursuit of Happiness 
Good men, at all times, surrender in truth all attachments. The holy
spend not idle words on things of desire. When pleasure or pain comes
to them, the wise feel above pleasure and pain.
—BUDDHA1 
Do not seek to have events happen as you want them to, but instead
want them to happen as they do happen, and your life will go well.
—EPICTETUS2 
I F MONEY OR POWER could buy happiness, then the author of the
Old Testament book of Ecclesiastes should have been overjoyed. The
text attributes itself to a king in Jerusalem, who looks back on his life
and his search for happiness and fulfillment. He tried at one point to
“make a test of pleasure,” by seeking happiness in his riches:
I made great works; I built houses and planted vineyards for
myself; I made myself gardens and parks, and planted in them all
kinds of fruit trees . . . I also had great possessions of herds and
flocks, more than any who had been before me in Jerusalem. I
also gathered for myself silver and gold and the treasure of kings
and of the provinces; I got singers, both men and women, and
delights of the flesh, and many concubines. So I became great
and surpassed all who were before me in Jerusalem; also my
wisdom remained with me. Whatever my eyes desired I did not
keep from them. (ECCLESIASTES 2:4-10)
But in what may be one of the earliest reports of a midlife crisis, the
author finds it all pointless:
--- END PAGE 94 ---

--- PAGE 95 ---
Then I considered all that my hands had done and the toil I had
spent in doing it, and again, all was vanity and a chasing after
wind, and there was nothing to be gained under the sun.
(ECCLESIASTES 2:11)
The author tells us about many other avenues he pursued—hard work,
learning, wine—but nothing brought satisfaction; nothing could banish
the feeling that his life had no more intrinsic worth or purpose than that
of an animal. From the perspective of Buddha and the Stoic philosopher
Epictetus, the author’s problem is obvious: his pursuit of happiness.
Buddhism and Stoicism teach that striving for external goods, or to make
the world conform to your wishes, is always a striving after wind.
Happiness can only be found within, by breaking attachments to external
things and cultivating an attitude of acceptance. (Stoics and Buddhists
can have relationships, jobs, and possessions, but, to avoid becoming
upset upon losing them, they must not be emotionally attached to them.)
This idea is of course an extension of the truth of chapter 2: life itself is
but what you deem it, and your mental state determines how you deem
things. But recent research in psychology suggests that Buddha and
Epictetus may have taken things too far. Some things are worth striving
for, and happiness comes in part from outside of yourself, if you know
where to look. 
THE PROGRESS PRINCIPLE 
The author of Ecclesiastes wasn’t just battling the fear of
meaninglessness; he was battling the disappointment of success. The
pleasure of getting what you want is often fleeting. You dream about
getting a promotion, being accepted into a prestigious school, or
finishing a big project. You work every waking hour, perhaps imagining
how happy you’d be if you could just achieve that goal. Then you
succeed, and if you’re lucky you get an hour, maybe a day, of euphoria,
particularly if your success was unexpected and there was a moment in
which it was revealed (. . . the envelope, please). More typically,
however, you don’t get any euphoria. When success seems increasingly
probable and some final event confirms what you already had begun to
expect, the feeling is more one of relief—the pleasure of closure and
--- END PAGE 95 ---

--- PAGE 96 ---
release. In such circumstances, my first thought is seldom “Hooray!
Fantastic!”; it is “Okay, what do I have to do now?”
My underjoyed response to success turns out to be normal. And from
an evolutionary point of view, it’s even sensible. Animals get a rush of
dopamine, the pleasure neurotransmitter, whenever they do something
that advances their evolutionary interests and moves them ahead in the
game of life. Food and sex give pleasure, and that pleasure serves as a
reinforcer (in behaviorist terms) that motivates later efforts to find food
and sex. For humans, however, the game is more complex. People win at
the game of life by achieving high status and a good reputation,
cultivating friendships, finding the best mate(s), accumulating resources,
and rearing their children to be successful at the same game. People have
many goals and therefore many sources of pleasure. So you’d think we
would receive an enormous and long-lasting shot of dopamine whenever
we succeed at an important goal. But here’s the trick with reinforcement:
It works best when it comes seconds—not minutes or hours—after the
behavior. Just try training your dog to fetch by giving him a big steak ten
minutes after each successful retrieval. It can’t be done.
The elephant works the same way: It feels pleasure whenever it takes
a step in the right direction. The elephant learns whenever pleasure (or
pain) follows immediately after behavior, but it has trouble connecting
success on Friday with actions it took on Monday. Richard Davidson, the
psychologist who brought us affective style and the approach circuits of
the front left cortex, writes about two types of positive affect. The first
he calls “pre-goal attainment positive affect,” which is the pleasurable
feeling you get as you make progress toward a goal. The second is called
“post-goal attainment positive affect,” which Davidson says arises once
you have achieved something you want.3 You experience this latter
feeling as contentment, as a short-lived feeling of release when the left
prefrontal cortex reduces its activity after a goal has been achieved. In
other words, when it comes to goal pursuit, it really is the journey that
counts, not the destination. Set for yourself any goal you want. Most of
the pleasure will be had along the way, with every step that takes you
closer. The final moment of success is often no more thrilling than the
relief of taking off a heavy backpack at the end of a long hike. If you
went on the hike only to feel that pleasure, you are a fool. Yet people
sometimes do just this. They work hard at a task and expect some special
--- END PAGE 96 ---

--- PAGE 97 ---
euphoria at the end. But when they achieve success and find only
moderate and short-lived pleasure, they ask (as the singer Peggy Lee
once did): Is that all there is? They devalue their accomplishments as a
striving after wind.
We can call this “the progress principle”: Pleasure comes more from
making progress toward goals than from achieving them. Shakespeare
captured it perfectly: “Things won are done; joy’s soul lies in the
doing.”4 
THE ADAPTATION PRINCIPLE 
If I gave you ten seconds to name the very best and very worst things
that could ever happen to you, you might well come up with these:
winning a 20-million-dollar lottery jackpot and becoming paralyzed from
the neck down. Winning the lottery would bring freedom from so many
cares and limitations; it would enable you to pursue your dreams, help
others, and live in comfort, so it ought to bring long-lasting happiness
rather than one serving of dopamine. Losing the use of your body, on the
other hand, would bring more limitations than life in prison. You’d have
to give up on nearly all your goals and dreams, forget about sex, and
depend on other people for help with eating and bathroom functions.
Many people think they would rather be dead than paraplegic. But they
are mistaken.
Of course, it’s better to win the lottery than to break your neck, but not
by as much as you’d think. Because whatever happens, you’re likely to
adapt to it, but you don’t realize up front that you will. We are bad at
“affective forecasting,” 5 that is, predicting how we’ll feel in the future.
We grossly overestimate the intensity and the duration of our emotional
reactions. Within a year, lottery winners and paraplegics have both (on
average) returned most of the way to their baseline levels of happiness.6
The lottery winner buys a new house and a new car, quits her boring job,
and eats better food. She gets a kick out of the contrast with her former
life, but within a few months the contrast blurs and the pleasure fades.
The human mind is extraordinarily sensitive to changes in conditions,
but not so sensitive to absolute levels. The winner’s pleasure comes from
--- END PAGE 97 ---

--- PAGE 98 ---
rising in wealth, not from standing still at a high level, and after a few
months the new comforts have become the new baseline of daily life.
The winner takes them for granted and has no way to rise any further.
Even worse: The money might damage her relationships. Friends,
relatives, swindlers, and sobbing strangers swarm around lottery
winners, suing them, sucking up to them, demanding a share of the
wealth. (Remember the ubiquity of self-serving biases; everyone can find
a reason to be owed something.) Lottery winners are so often harassed
that many have to move, hide, end relationships, and finally turn to each
other, forming lottery winner support groups to deal with their new
difficulties.7 (It should be noted, however, that nearly all lottery winners
are still glad that they won.)
At the other extreme, the quadriplegic takes a huge happiness loss up
front. He thinks his life is over, and it hurts to give up everything he once
hoped for. But like the lottery winner, his mind is sensitive more to
changes than to absolute levels, so after a few months he has begun
adapting to his new situation and is setting more modest goals. He
discovers that physical therapy can expand his abilities. He has nowhere
to go but up, and each step gives him the pleasure of the progress
principle. The physicist Stephen Hawking has been trapped in a shell of
a body since his early twenties, when he was diagnosed with motor
neurone disease. Yet he went on to solve major problems in cosmology,
win many prizes, and write the best-selling science book of all time.
During a recent interview in the New York Times, he was asked how he
keeps his spirits up. He replied: “My expectations were reduced to zero
when I was twenty-one. Everything since then has been a bonus.”8
This is the adaptation principle at work: People’s judgments about
their present state are based on whether it is better or worse than the state
to which they have become accustomed.9 Adaptation is, in part, just a
property of neurons: Nerve cells respond vigorously to new stimuli, but
gradually they “habituate,” firing less to stimuli that they have become
used to. It is change that contains vital information, not steady states.
Human beings, however, take adaptation to cognitive extremes. We don’t
just habituate, we recalibrate. We create for ourselves a world of targets,
and each time we hit one we replace it with another. After a string of
successes we aim higher; after a massive setback, such as a broken neck,
we aim lower. Instead of following Buddhist and Stoic advice to
--- END PAGE 98 ---

--- PAGE 99 ---
surrender attachments and let events happen, we surround ourselves with
goals, hopes, and expectations, and then feel pleasure and pain in relation
to our progress.10
When we combine the adaptation principle with the discovery that
people’s average level of happiness is highly heritable,11 we come to a
startling possibility: In the long run, it doesn’t much matter what happens
to you. Good fortune or bad, you will always return to your happiness
setpoint—your brain’s default level of happiness—which was
determined largely by your genes. In 1759, long before anyone knew
about genes, Adam Smith reached the same conclusion:
In every permanent situation, where there is no expectation of
change, the mind of every man, in a longer or shorter time,
returns to its natural and usual state of tranquility. In prosperity,
after a certain time, it falls back to that state; in adversity, after a
certain time, it rises up to it.12
If this idea is correct, then we are all stuck on what has been called the
“hedonic treadmill.”13 On an exercise treadmill you can increase the
speed all you want, but you stay in the same place. In life, you can work
as hard as you want, and accumulate all the riches, fruit trees, and
concubines you want, but you can’t get ahead. Because you can’t change
your “natural and usual state of tranquility,” the riches you accumulate
will just raise your expectations and leave you no better off than you
were before. Yet, not realizing the futility of our efforts, we continue to
strive, all the while doing things that help us win at the game of life.
Always wanting more than we have, we run and run and run, like
hamsters on a wheel. 
AN EARLY HAPPINESS HYPOTHESIS 
Buddha, Epictetus, and many other sages saw the futility of the rat race
and urged people to quit. They proposed a particular happiness
hypothesis: Happiness comes from within, and it cannot be found by
making the world conform to your desires. Buddhism teaches that
attachment leads inevitably to suffering and offers tools for breaking
--- END PAGE 99 ---

--- PAGE 100 ---
attachments. The Stoic philosophers of Ancient Greece, such as
Epictetus, taught their followers to focus only on what they could fully
control, which meant primarily their own thoughts and reactions. All
other events—the gifts and curses of fortune—were externals, and the
true Stoic was unaffected by externals.
Neither Buddha nor the Stoics urged people to withdraw into a cave.
In fact, both doctrines have such enduring appeal precisely because they
offer guidance on how to find peace and happiness while participating in
a treacherous and ever-changing social world. Both doctrines are based
on an empirical claim, a happiness hypothesis that asserts that striving to
obtain goods and goals in the external world cannot bring you more than
momentary happiness. You must work on your internal world. If the
hypothesis is true, it has profound implications for how we should live
our lives, raise our children, and spend our money. But is it true? It all
depends on what kind of externals we are talking about.
The second biggest finding in happiness research, after the strong
influence of genes upon a person’s average level of happiness, is that
most environmental and demographic factors influence happiness very
little. Try to imagine yourself changing places with either Bob or Mary.
Bob is thirty-five years old, single, white, attractive, and athletic. He
earns $100,000 a year and lives in sunny Southern California. He is
highly intellectual, and he spends his free time reading and going to
museums. Mary and her husband live in snowy Buffalo, New York,
where they earn a combined income of $40,000. Mary is sixty-five years
old, black, overweight, and plain in appearance. She is highly sociable,
and she spends her free time mostly in activities related to her church.
She is on dialysis for kidney problems. Bob seems to have it all, and few
readers of this book would prefer Mary’s life to his. Yet if you had to bet
on it, you should bet that Mary is happier than Bob.
What Mary has that Bob lacks are strong connections. A good
marriage is one of the life-factors most strongly and consistently
associated with happiness.14 Part of this apparent benefit comes from
“reverse correlation”: Happiness causes marriage. Happy people marry
sooner and stay married longer than people with a lower happiness
setpoint, both because they are more appealing as dating partners and
because they are easier to live with as spouses.15 But much of the
--- END PAGE 100 ---

--- PAGE 101 ---
apparent benefit is a real and lasting benefit of dependable
companionship, which is a basic need; we never fully adapt either to it or
to its absence.16 Mary also has religion, and religious people are
happier, on average, than nonreligious people.17 This effect arises from
the social ties that come with participation in a religious community, as
well as from feeling connected to something beyond the self.
What Bob has going for him is a string of objective advantages in
power, status, freedom, health, and sunshine—all of which are subject to
the adaptation principle. White Americans are freed from many of the
hassles and indignities that affect black Americans, yet, on average, they
are only very slightly happier.18 Men have more freedom and power
than women, yet they are not on average any happier. (Women
experience more depression, but also more intense joy).19 The young
have so much more to look forward to than the elderly, yet ratings of life
satisfaction actually rise slightly with age, up to age sixty-five, and, in
some studies, well beyond.20 People are often surprised to hear that the
old are happier than the young because the old have so many more health
problems, yet people adapt to most chronic health problems such as
Mary’s21 (although ailments that grow progressively worse do reduce
well-being, and a recent study finds that adaptation to disability is not, on
average, complete).22 People who live in cold climates expect people
who live in California to be happier, but they are wrong.23 People
believe that attractive people are happier than unattractive people,24 but
they, too, are wrong.25
The one thing Bob does have going for him is wealth, but here the
story is complicated. The most widely reported conclusion, from surveys
done by psychologist Ed Diener,26 is that within any given country, at
the lowest end of the income scale money does buy happiness: People
who worry every day about paying for food and shelter report
significantly less well-being than those who don’t. But once you are
freed from basic needs and have entered the middle class, the
relationship between wealth and happiness becomes smaller. The rich are
happier on average than the middle class, but only by a little, and part of
this relationship is reverse correlation: Happy people grow rich faster
--- END PAGE 101 ---

--- PAGE 102 ---
because, as in the marriage market, they are more appealing to others
(such as bosses), and also because their frequent positive emotions help
them to commit to projects, to work hard, and to invest in their futures.27
Wealth itself has only a small direct effect on happiness because it so
effectively speeds up the hedonic treadmill. For example, as the level of
wealth has doubled or tripled in the last fifty years in many industrialized
nations, the levels of happiness and satisfaction with life that people
report have not changed, and depression has actually become more
common.28 Vast increases in gross domestic product led to
improvements in the comforts of life—a larger home, more cars,
televisions, and restaurant meals, better health and longer life—but these
improvements became the normal conditions of life; all were adapted to
and taken for granted, so they did not make people feel any happier or
more satisfied.
These findings would have pleased Buddha and Epictetus—if, that is,
they found pleasure in such external events as being proved right. As in
their day, people today devote themselves to the pursuit of goals that
won’t make them happier, in the process neglecting the sort of inner
growth and spiritual development that could bring lasting satisfaction.
One of the most consistent lessons the ancient sages teach is to let go,
stop striving, and choose a new path. Turn inwards, or toward God, but
for God’s sake stop trying to make the world conform to your will. The 
Bhagavad Gita is a Hindu treatise on nonattachment. In a section on
“human devils,” the god Krishna describes humanity’s lower nature and
the people who give in to it: “Bound by hundreds of fetters forged by
hope, obsessed by anger and desire, they seek to build up wealth unjustly
to satisfy their lusts.”29 Krishna then parodies the thinking of such a
devil:
This have I gained today, this whim I’ll satisfy; this wealth is
mine and much more too will be mine as time goes on. He was an
enemy of mine, I’ve killed him, and many another too I’ll kill.
I’m master here. I take my pleasure as I will. I’m strong and
happy and successful.
Substitute “defeat” for “kill” and you have a pretty good description of
the modern Western ideal, at least in some corners of the business world.
So even if Bob were just as happy as Mary, if he has an arrogant, entitled
--- END PAGE 102 ---

--- PAGE 103 ---
attitude and treats people badly, his life would still be spiritually and
aesthetically worse. 
THE HAPPINESS FORMULA 
In the 1990s, the two big findings of happiness research (strong relation
to genes, weak relation to environment) hit the psychological community
hard, because they applied not just to happiness but to most aspects of
personality. Psychologists since Freud had shared a nearly religious
devotion to the idea that personality is shaped primarily by childhood
environment. This axiom was taken on faith: The evidence for it
consisted almost entirely of correlations—usually small ones—between
what parents did and how their children turned out, and anyone who
suggested that these correlations were caused by genes was dismissed as
a reductionist. But as twin studies revealed the awesome reach of genes
and the relative unimportance of the family environment that siblings
share,30 the ancient happiness hypothesis grew ever more plausible.
Maybe there really is a set point31 fixed into every brain, like a
thermostat set forever to 58 degrees Fahrenheit (for depressives) or 75
degrees (for happy people)? Maybe the only way to find happiness
therefore is to change one’s own internal setting (for example, through
meditation, Prozac, or cognitive therapy) instead of changing one’s
environment?
As psychologists wrestled with these ideas, however, and as biologists
worked out the first sketch of the human genome, a more sophisticated
understanding of nature and nurture began to emerge. Yes, genes explain
far more about us than anyone had realized, but the genes themselves
often turn out to be sensitive to environmental conditions.32 And yes,
each person has a characteristic level of happiness, but it now looks as
though it’s not so much a set point as a potential range or probability
distribution. Whether you operate on the high or the low side of your
potential range is determined by many factors that Buddha and Epictetus
would have considered externals.
When Martin Seligman founded positive psychology in the late 1990s,
one of his first moves was to bring together small groups of experts to
--- END PAGE 103 ---

--- PAGE 104 ---
tackle specific problems. One group was created to study the externals
that matter for happiness. Three psychologists, Sonja Lyubomirsky, Ken
Sheldon, and David Schkade, reviewed the available evidence and
realized that there are two fundamentally different kinds of externals: the 
conditions of your life and the voluntary activities that you undertake.33
Conditions include facts about your life that you can’t change (race, sex,
age, disability) as well as things that you can (wealth, marital status,
where you live). Conditions are constant over time, at least during a
period in your life, and so they are the sorts of things that you are likely
to adapt to. Voluntary activities, on the other hand, are the things that you 
choose to do, such as meditation, exercise, learning a new skill, or taking
a vacation. Because such activities must be chosen, and because most of
them take effort and attention, they can’t just disappear from your
awareness the way conditions can. Voluntary activities, therefore, offer
much greater promise for increasing happiness while avoiding adaptation
effects.
One of the most important ideas in positive psychology is what
Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, Schkade, and Seligman call the “happiness
formula:”
H=S+C+V
The level of happiness that you actually experience (H) is determined
by your biological set point (S) plus the conditions of your life (C) plus
the voluntary activities (V) you do.34 The challenge for positive
psychology is to use the scientific method to find out exactly what kinds
of C and V can push H up to the top of your potential range. The extreme
biological version of the happiness hypothesis says that H = S, and that
C and V don’t matter. But we have to give Buddha and Epictetus credit
for V because Buddha prescribed the “eightfold noble path” (including
meditation and mindfulness), and Epictetus urged methods of thought to
cultivate indifference (apatheia) to externals. So to test the wisdom of
the sages properly we must examine this hypothesis: H = S + V, where V
= voluntary or intentional activities that cultivate acceptance and weaken
emotional attachments. If there are many conditions (C) that matter, and
if there are a variety of voluntary activities beyond those aimed at
nonattachment, then the happiness hypothesis of Buddha and Epictetus is
wrong and people would be poorly advised simply to look within.
--- END PAGE 104 ---

--- PAGE 105 ---
It turns out that there really are some external conditions (C) that
matter. There are some changes you can make in your life that are not
fully subject to the adaptation principle, and that might make you
lastingly happier. It may be worth striving to achieve them. 
Noise. When I lived in Philadelphia, I learned a valuable lesson about
real estate: If you must buy a house on a busy street, don’t buy one
within thirty yards of a traffic light. Every ninety-five seconds I had to
listen to forty-two seconds of several people’s musical selections
followed by twelve seconds of engines revving, with an impatient honk
thrown in once every fifteen cycles. I never got used to it, and when my
wife and I were looking for a house in Charlottesville, I told our agent
that if a Victorian mansion were being given away on a busy street, I
would not take it. Research shows that people who must adapt to new
and chronic sources of noise (such as when a new highway is built)
never fully adapt, and even studies that find some adaptation still find
evidence of impairment on cognitive tasks. Noise, especially noise that is
variable or intermittent, interferes with concentration and increases
stress.35 It’s worth striving to remove sources of noise in your life. 
Commuting. Many people choose to move farther away from their jobs
in search of a larger house. But although people quickly adapt to having
more space,36 they don’t fully adapt to the longer commute, particularly
if it involves driving in heavy traffic.37 Even after years of commuting,
those whose commutes are traffic-filled still arrive at work with higher
levels of stress hormones. (Driving under ideal conditions is, however,
often enjoyable and relaxing.)38 It’s worth striving to improve your
commute. 
Lack of control. One of the active ingredients of noise and traffic, the
aspect that helps them get under your skin, is that you can’t control them.
In one classic study, David Glass and Jerome Singer exposed people to
loud bursts of random noise. Subjects in one group were told they could
terminate the noise by pressing a button, but they were asked not to press
--- END PAGE 105 ---

--- PAGE 106 ---
the button unless it was absolutely necessary. None of these subjects
pressed the button, yet the belief that they had some form of control
made the noise less distressing to them. In the second part of the
experiment, the subjects who thought they had control were more
persistent when working on difficult puzzles, but the subjects who had
experienced noise without control gave up more easily.39
In another famous study, Ellen Langer and Judith Rodin gave benefits
to residents on two floors of a nursing home—for example, plants in
their rooms, and a movie screening one night a week. But on one floor,
these benefits came with a sense of control: The residents were allowed
to choose which plants they wanted, and they were responsible for
watering them. They were allowed to choose as a group which night
would be movie night. On the other floor, the same benefits were simply
doled out: The nurses chose the plants and watered them; the nurses
decided which night was movie night. This small manipulation had big
effects: On the floor with increased control, residents were happier, more
active, and more alert (as rated by the nurses, not just by the residents),
and these benefits were still visible eighteen months later. Most
amazingly, at the eighteen-month follow-up, residents of the floor given
control had better health and half as many deaths (15 percent versus 30
percent).40 In a review paper that Rodin and I wrote, we concluded that
changing an institution’s environment to increase the sense of control
among its workers, students, patients, or other users was one of the most
effective possible ways to increase their sense of engagement, energy,
and happiness.41 
Shame. Overall, attractive people are not happier than unattractive ones.
Yet, surprisingly, some improvements in a person’s appearance do lead to
lasting increases in happiness.42 People who undergo plastic surgery
report (on average) high levels of satisfaction with the process, and they
even report increases in the quality of their lives and decreases in
psychiatric symptoms (such as depression and anxiety) in the years after
the operation. The biggest gains were reported for breast surgery, both
enlargement and reduction. I think the way to understand the long-lasting
effects of such seemingly shallow changes is to think about the power of
shame in everyday life. Young women whose breasts are much larger or
--- END PAGE 106 ---

--- PAGE 107 ---
smaller than their ideal often report feeling self-consciousness every day
about their bodies. Many adjust their posture or their wardrobe in an
attempt to hide what they see as a personal deficiency. Being freed from
such a daily burden may lead to a lasting increase in self-confidence and
well-being. 
Relationships. The condition that is usually said43 to trump all others in
importance is the strength and number of a person’s relationships. Good
relationships make people happy, and happy people enjoy more and
better relationships than unhappy people.44 This effect is so important
and interesting that it gets its own chapter—the next one. For now, I’ll
just mention that conflicts in relationships—having an annoying office
mate or room-mate, or having chronic conflict with your spouse—is one
of the surest ways to reduce your happiness. You never adapt to
interpersonal conflict;45 it damages every day, even days when you
don’t see the other person but ruminate about the conflict nonetheless.
There are many other ways in which you can increase your happiness
by getting the conditions of your life right, particularly in relationships,
work, and the degree of control you have over stressors. So in the
happiness formula, C is real and some externals matter. Some things are
worth striving for, and positive psychology can help identify them. Of
course, Buddha would adapt fully to noise, traffic, lack of control and
bodily deficiencies, but it has always been difficult, even in ancient
India, for real people to become like Buddha. In the modern Western
world, it is even harder to follow Buddha’s path of nondoing and
nonstriving. Some of our poets and writers in fact urge us to forswear
that path and embrace action wholeheartedly: “It is vain to say that
human beings ought to be satisfied with tranquility: they must have
action; and they will make it if they cannot find it.” (CHARLOTTE
BRONTË, 1847)46 
FINDING FLOW
--- END PAGE 107 ---

--- PAGE 108 ---
Not all action, however, will work. Chasing after wealth and prestige, for
example, will usually backfire. People who report the greatest interest in
attaining money, fame, or beauty are consistently found to be less happy,
and even less healthy, than those who pursue less materialistic goals.47
So what is the right kind of activity? What is V in the happiness
formula?
The tool that helped psychologists answer that question is the
“experience sampling method,” invented by Mihalyi Csikszentmihalyi
(pronounced “cheeks sent me high”), the Hungarian-born cofounder of
positive psychology. In Csikszentmihalyi’s studies,48 people carry with
them a pager that beeps several times a day. At each beep, the subject
pulls out a small notebook and records what she is doing at that moment,
and how much she is enjoying it. Through this “beeping” of thousands of
people tens of thousands of times, Csikszentmihalyi found out what
people really enjoy doing, not just what they remember having enjoyed.
He discovered that there are two different kinds of enjoyment. One is
physical or bodily pleasure. At meal times, people report the highest
levels of happiness, on average. People really enjoy eating, especially in
the company of others, and they hate to be interrupted by telephone calls
(and perhaps Csikszentmihalyi’s beeps) during meals, or (worst of all)
during sex. But you can’t enjoy physical pleasure all day long. By their
very nature, food and sex satiate. To continue eating or having sex
beyond a certain level of satisfaction can lead to disgust.49
Csikszentmihalyi’s big discovery is that there is a state many people
value even more than chocolate after sex. It is the state of total
immersion in a task that is challenging yet closely matched to one’s
abilities. It is what people sometimes call “being in the zone.”
Csikszentmihalyi called it “flow” because it often feels like effortless
movement: Flow happens, and you go with it. Flow often occurs during
physical movement—skiing, driving fast on a curvy country road, or
playing team sports. Flow is aided by music or by the action of other
people, both of which provide a temporal structure for one’s own
behavior (for example, singing in a choir, dancing, or just having an
intense conversation with a friend). And flow can happen during solitary
creative activities, such as painting, writing, or photography. The keys to
flow: There’s a clear challenge that fully engages your attention; you
have the skills to meet the challenge; and you get immediate feedback
--- END PAGE 108 ---

--- PAGE 109 ---
about how you are doing at each step (the progress principle). You get
flash after flash of positive feeling with each turn negotiated, each high
note correctly sung, or each brushstroke that falls into the right place. In
the flow experience, elephant and rider are in perfect harmony. The
elephant (automatic processes) is doing most of the work, running
smoothly through the forest, while the rider (conscious thought) is
completely absorbed in looking out for problems and opportunities,
helping wherever he can.
Drawing on Csikszentmihalyi’s work, Seligman proposes a
fundamental distinction between pleasures and gratifications. Pleasures
are “delights that have clear sensory and strong emotional
components,”50 such as may be derived from food, sex, backrubs, and
cool breezes. Gratifications are activities that engage you fully, draw on
your strengths, and allow you to lose self-consciousness. Gratifications
can lead to flow. Seligman proposes that V (voluntary activities) is
largely a matter of arranging your day and your environment to increase
both pleasures and gratifications. Pleasures must be spaced to maintain
their potency. Eating a quart of ice cream in an afternoon or listening to a
new CD ten times in a row are good ways to overdose and deaden
yourself to future pleasure. Here’s where the rider has an important role
to play: Because the elephant has a tendency to overindulge, the rider
needs to encourage it to get up and move on to another activity.
Pleasures should be both savored and varied. The French know how to
do this: They eat many fatty foods, yet they end up thinner and healthier
than Americans, and they derive a great deal more pleasure from their
food by eating slowly and paying more attention to the food as they eat
it.51 Because they savor, they ultimately eat less. Americans, in contrast,
shovel enormous servings of high-fat and high-carbohydrate food into
their mouths while doing other things. The French also vary their
pleasure by serving many small courses; Americans are seduced by
restaurants that serve large portions. Variety is the spice of life because it
is the natural enemy of adaptation. Super-sizing portions, on the other
hand, maximizes adaptation. Epicurus, one of the few ancient
philosophers to embrace sensual pleasure, endorsed the French way
when he said that the wise man “chooses not the greatest quantity of
food but the most tasty.”52
--- END PAGE 109 ---

--- PAGE 110 ---
One reason for the widespread philosophical wariness of sensual
pleasure is that it gives no lasting benefit. Pleasure feels good in the
moment, but sensual memories fade quickly, and the person is no wiser
or stronger afterwards. Even worse, pleasure beckons people back for
more, away from activities that might be better for them in the long run.
But gratifications are different. Gratifications ask more of us; they
challenge us and make us extend ourselves. Gratifications often come
from accomplishing something, learning something, or improving
something. When we enter a state of flow, hard work becomes effortless.
We want to keep exerting ourselves, honing our skills, using our
strengths. Seligman suggests that the key to finding your own
gratifications is to know your own strengths.53 One of the big
accomplishments of positive psychology has been the development of a
catalog of strengths. You can find out your strengths by taking an online
test at www.authentichappiness.org.
Recently I asked the 350 students in my introductory psychology class
to take the strengths test and then, a week later, to engage in four
activities over a few days. One of the activities was to indulge the senses,
as by taking a break for ice cream in the middle of the afternoon, and
then savoring the ice cream. This activity was the most enjoyable at the
time; but, like all pleasures, it faded quickly. The other three activities
were potential gratifications: Attend a lecture or class that you don’t
normally go to; perform an act of kindness for a friend who could use
some cheering up; and write down the reasons you are grateful to
someone and later call or visit that person to express your gratitude. The
least enjoyable of the four activities was going to a lecture—except for
those whose strengths included curiosity and love of learning. They got a
lot more out of it. The big finding was that people experienced longer-
lasting improvements in mood from the kindness and gratitude activities
than from those in which they indulged themselves. Even though people
were most nervous about doing the kindness and gratitude activities,
which required them to violate social norms and risk embarrassment,
once they actually did the activities they felt better for the rest of the day.
Many students even said their good feelings continued on into the next
day—which nobody said about eating ice cream. Furthermore, these
benefits were most pronounced for those whose strengths included
kindness and gratitude.
--- END PAGE 110 ---

--- PAGE 111 ---
So V (voluntary activity) is real, and it’s not just about detachment.
You can increase your happiness if you use your strengths, particularly in
the service of strengthening connections—helping friends, expressing
gratitude to benefactors. Performing a random act of kindness every day
could get tedious, but if you know your strengths and draw up a list of
five activities that engage them, you can surely add at least one
gratification to every day. Studies that have assigned people to perform a
random act of kindness every week, or to count their blessings regularly
for several weeks, find small but sustained increases in happiness.54 So
take the initiative! Choose your own gratifying activities, do them
regularly (but not to the point of tedium), and raise your overall level of
happiness. 
MISGUIDED PURSUITS 
An axiom of economics is that people pursue their interests more or less
rationally, and that’s what makes markets work—Adam Smith’s
“invisible hand” of self-interest. But in the 1980s, a few economists
began studying psychology and messing up the prevailing models.
Leading the way was the Cornell economist Robert Frank, whose 1987
book Passions Within Reason analyzed some of the things people do that
just don’t fit into economic models of pure self-interest—such as tipping
in restaurants when far from home, seeking costly revenge, and staying
loyal to friends and spouses when better opportunities come along. Frank
argued that these behaviors make sense only as products of moral
emotions (such as love, shame, vengeance, or guilt), and these moral
emotions make sense only as products of evolution. Evolution seems to
have made us “strategically irrational” at times for our own good; for
example, a person who gets angry when cheated, and who will pursue
vengeance regardless of the cost, earns a reputation that discourages
would-be cheaters. A person who pursued vengeance only when the
benefits outweighed the costs could be cheated with impunity in many
situations.
In his more recent book, Luxury Fever, 55 Frank used the same
approach to understand another kind of irrationality: the vigor with
which people pursue many goals that work against their own happiness.
--- END PAGE 111 ---

--- PAGE 112 ---
Frank begins with the question of why, as nations rise in wealth, their
citizens become no happier, and he considers the possibility that once
basic needs are met, money simply cannot buy additional happiness.
After a careful review of the evidence, however, Frank concludes that
those who think money can’t buy happiness just don’t know where to
shop. Some purchases are much less subject to the adaptation principle.
Frank wants to know why people are so devoted to spending money on
luxuries and other goods, to which they adapt completely, rather than on
things that would make them lastingly happier. For example, people
would be happier and healthier if they took more time off and “spent” it
with their family and friends, yet America has long been heading in the
opposite direction. People would be happier if they reduced their
commuting time, even if it meant living in smaller houses, yet American
trends are toward ever larger houses and ever longer commutes. People
would be happier and healthier if they took longer vacations, even if that
meant earning less, yet vacation times are shrinking in the United States,
and in Europe as well. People would be happier, and in the long run
wealthier, if they bought basic, functional appliances, automobiles, and
wristwatches, and invested the money they saved for future
consumption; yet, Americans in particular spend almost everything they
have—and sometimes more—on goods for present consumption, often
paying a large premium for designer names and superfluous features.
Frank’s explanation is simple: Conspicuous and inconspicuous
consumption follow different psychological rules. Conspicuous
consumption refers to things that are visible to others and that are taken
as markers of a person’s relative success. These goods are subject to a
kind of arms race, where their value comes not so much from their
objective properties as from the statement they make about their owner.
When everyone wore Timex watches, the first person in the office buy a
Rolex stood out. When everyone moved up to Rolex, it took a $20,000
Patek Philip to achieve high status, and a Rolex no longer gave as much
satisfaction. Conspicuous consumption is a zero-sum game: Each
person’s move up devalues the possessions of others. Furthermore, it’s
difficult to persuade an entire group or subculture to ratchet down, even
though everyone would be better off, on average, if they all went back to
simple watches. Inconspicuous consumption, on the other hand, refers to
goods and activities that are valued for themselves, that are usually
consumed more privately, and that are not bought for the purpose of
--- END PAGE 112 ---

--- PAGE 113 ---
achieving status. Because Americans, at least, gain no prestige from
taking the longest vacations or having the shortest commutes, these
inconspicuous consumables are not subject to an arms race.
Just try this thought experiment. Which job would you rather have:
one in which you earned $90,000 a year and your coworkers earned on
average $70,000, or one in which you earned $100,000 but your
coworkers earned on average $150,000? Many people choose the first
job, thereby revealing that relative position is worth at least $10,000 to
them. Now try this one: Would you rather work for a company that gave
you two weeks of vacation a year, but other employees were given, on
average, only one; or would you prefer a company that gave you four
weeks of vacation a year, but other employees were given, on average,
six? The great majority of people choose the longer absolute time.56
Time off is inconspicuous consumption, although people can easily turn
a vacation into conspicuous consumption by spending vast amounts of
money to impress others instead of using the time to rejuvenate
themselves.
Frank’s conclusions are bolstered by recent research on the benefits of
“doing versus having.” The psychologists Leaf van Boven and Tom
Gilovich asked people to think back to a time when they spent more than
a hundred dollars with the intention of increasing their happiness and
enjoyment. One group of subjects was asked to pick a material
possession; the other was asked to pick an experience or activity they
had paid for. After describing their purchases, subjects were asked to fill
out a questionnaire. Those who described buying an experience (such as
a ski trip, a concert, or a great meal) were happier when thinking about
their purchase, and thought that their money was better spent, than those
who described buying a material object (such as clothing, jewelry, or
electronics).57 After conducting several variations of this experiment
with similar findings each time, Van Boven and Gilovich concluded that
experiences give more happiness in part because they have greater social
value: Most activities that cost more than a hundred dollars are things we
do with other people, but expensive material possessions are often
purchased in part to impress other people. Activities connect us to others;
objects often separate us.
--- END PAGE 113 ---

--- PAGE 114 ---
So now you know where to shop. Stop trying to keep up with the
Joneses. Stop wasting your money on conspicuous consumption. As a
first step, work less, earn less, accumulate less, and “consume” more
family time, vacations, and other enjoyable activities. The Chinese sage
Lao Tzu warned people to make their own choices and not pursue the
material objects everyone else was pursuing:
Racing and hunting madden the mind. Precious things lead one
astray. Therefore the sage is guided by what he feels and not by
what he sees. He lets go of that and chooses this.58
Unfortunately, letting go of one thing and choosing another is difficult
if the elephant wraps his trunk around the “precious thing” and refuses to
let go. The elephant was shaped by natural selection to win at the game
of life, and part of its strategy is to impress others, gain their admiration,
and rise in relative rank. The elephant cares about prestige, not
happiness, 59 and it looks eternally to others to figure out what is
prestigious. The elephant will pursue its evolutionary goals even when
greater happiness can be found elsewhere. If everyone is chasing the
same limited amount of prestige, then all are stuck in a zero-sum game,
an eternal arms race, a world in which rising wealth does not bring rising
happiness. The pursuit of luxury goods is a happiness trap; it is a dead
end that people race toward in the mistaken belief that it will make them
happy.
Modern life has many other traps. Here’s some bait. Of the following
words, pick the one that is most appealing to you: constraint, limit,
barrier, choice. Odds are you chose choice, because the first three gave
you a flash of negative affect (remember the like-o-meter). Choice and
its frequent associate freedom are unquestioned goods of modern life.
Most people would rather shop at a supermarket that stocks ten items in
each food category than at a small store that stocks just two. Most people
would prefer to invest their retirement savings through a company that
offers forty funds than one that offers four. Yet, when people are actually
given a larger array of choices—for example, an assortment of thirty
(rather than six) gourmet chocolates from which to choose—they are less
likely to make a choice; and if they do, they are less satisfied with it.60
The more choices there are, the more you expect to find a perfect fit; yet,
at the same time, the larger the array, the less likely it becomes that you
--- END PAGE 114 ---

--- PAGE 115 ---
picked the best item. You leave the store less confident in your choice,
more likely to feel regret, and more likely to think about the options you
didn’t choose. If you can avoid making a choice, you are more likely to
do so. The psychologist Barry Schwartz calls this the “paradox of
choice”:61 We value choice and put ourselves in situations of choice,
even though choice often undercuts our happiness. But Schwartz and his
colleagues62 find that the paradox mostly applies to people they call
“maximizers”—those who habitually try to evaluate all the options, seek
out more information, and make the best choice (or “maximize their
utility,” as economists would say). Other people—“satisficers”—are
more laid back about choice. They evaluate an array of options until they
find one that is good enough, and then they stop looking. Satisficers are
not hurt by a surfeit of options. Maximizers end up making slightly
better decisions than satisficers, on average (all that worry and
information-gathering does help), but they are less happy with their
decisions, and they are more inclined to depression and anxiety.
In one clever study,63 maximizers and satisficers were asked to solve
anagrams while sitting next to another subject (really a co-experimenter)
who was solving them either much faster or much slower. Satisficers
were relatively unfazed by the experience. Their ratings of their own
ability, and of how much they enjoyed the study, were barely affected by
what the other subject did. But maximizers were thrown for a loop when
the other subject was faster than they were. They later reported lower
estimates of their own abilities and higher levels of negative emotions.
(Being paired with a slower peer didn’t have much effect—another
instance of negative events being stronger than positive). The point here
is that maximizers engage in more social comparison, and are therefore
more easily drawn into conspicuous consumption. Paradoxically,
maximizers get less pleasure per dollar they spend.
Modern life is full of traps. Some of these traps are set by marketers
and advertisers who know just what the elephant wants—and it isn’t
happiness. 
THE HAPPINESS HYPOTHESIS RECONSIDERED
--- END PAGE 115 ---

--- PAGE 116 ---
When I began writing this book, I thought that Buddha would be a strong
contender for the “Best Psychologist of the Last Three Thousand Years”
award. To me, his diagnosis of the futility of striving felt so right, his
promise of tranquility so alluring. But in doing research for the book, I
began to think that Buddhism might be based on an overreaction,
perhaps even an error. According to legend,64 Buddha was the son of a
king in northern India. When he was born (as Siddhartha Gautama), the
king heard a prophecy that his son was destined to leave, to go into the
forest and turn his back on the kingdom. So as the boy grew into
adulthood, his father tried to tie him down with sensual pleasures and
hide from him anything that might disturb his mind. The young prince
was married to a beautiful princess and raised on the upper floors of the
palace, surrounded by a harem of other beautiful women. But he grew
bored (the adaptation principle) and curious about the world outside.
Eventually, he prevailed upon his father to let him go for a chariot ride.
On the morning of the ride, the king ordered that all people who were
old, sick, or crippled were to retreat indoors. Yet one old man remained
on the road, and the prince saw him. The prince asked his chariot driver
to explain the odd-looking creature, and the driver told him that everyone
grows old. Stunned, the young prince returned to his palace. On the next
day’s excursion, he saw a sick man, his body hobbled by disease. More
explanation, more retreating to the palace. On the third day, the prince
saw a corpse being carried through the streets. This was the last straw.
Upon discovering that old age, disease, and death are the destiny of all
people, the prince cried, “Turn back the chariot! This is no time or place
for pleasure excursions. How could an intelligent person pay no heed at a
time of disaster, when he knows of his impending destruction?”65 The
prince then left his wife, his harem, and, as prophesied, his royal future.
He went into the forest and began his journey to enlightenment. After his
enlightenment, Buddha66 (the “awakened one”) preached that life is
suffering, and that the only way to escape this suffering is by breaking
the attachments that bind us to pleasure, achievement, reputation, and
life.
But what would have happened if the young prince had actually
descended from his gilded chariot and talked to the people he assumed
were so miserable? What if he had interviewed the poor, the elderly, the
crippled, and the sick? One of the most adventurous young
--- END PAGE 116 ---

--- PAGE 117 ---
psychologists, Robert Biswas-Diener (son of the happiness pioneer Ed
Diener), has done just that. He has traveled the world interviewing
people about their lives and how satisfied they are with them. Wherever
he goes, from Greenland to Kenya to California, he finds that most
people (with the exception of homeless people) are more satisfied than
dissatisfied with their lives.67 He even interviewed sex workers in the
slums of Calcutta, forced by poverty to sell their bodies and sacrifice
their futures to disease. Although these women were substantially less
satisfied with their lives than was a comparison group of college students
in Calcutta, they still (on average) rated their satisfaction with each of
twelve specific aspects of their lives as more satisfied than dissatisfied,
or else as neutral (neither satisfied nor dissatisfied). Yes, they suffered
privations that seem to us in the West unbearable, but they also had close
friends with whom they spent much of their time, and most of them
stayed in touch with their families. Biswas-Diener concludes that “while
the poor of Calcutta do not lead enviable lives, they do lead meaningful
lives. They capitalize on the non-material resources available to them
and find satisfaction in many areas of their lives.”68 Like quadriplegics,
the elderly, or any other class of people the young Buddha might have
pitied, the lives of these prostitutes are much better from the inside than
they seem from the outside.
Another reason for Buddha’s emphasis on detachment may have been
the turbulent times he lived in: Kings and city-states were making war,
and people’s lives and fortunes could be burned up overnight. When life
is unpredictable and dangerous (as it was for the Stoic philosophers,
living under capricious Roman emperors), it might be foolish to seek
happiness by controlling one’s external world. But now it is not. People
living in wealthy democracies can set long-term goals and expect to meet
them. We are immunized against disease, sheltered from storms, and
insured against fire, theft, and collision. For the first time in human
history, most people (in wealthy countries) will live past the age of
seventy and will not see any of their children die before them. Although
all of us will get unwanted surprises along the way, we’ll adapt and cope
with nearly all of them, and many of us will believe we are better off for
having suffered. So to cut off all attachments, to shun the pleasures of
sensuality and triumph in an effort to escape the pains of loss and defeat
--- END PAGE 117 ---

--- PAGE 118 ---
—this now strikes me as an inappropriate response to the inevitable
presence of some suffering in every life.
Many Western thinkers have looked at the same afflictions as Buddha
—sickness, aging, and mortality—and come to a very different
conclusion from his: Through passionate attachments to people, goals,
and pleasures, life must be lived to the fullest. I once heard a talk by the
philosopher Robert Solomon, who directly challenged the philosophy of
nonattachment as an affront to human nature.69 The life of cerebral
reflection and emotional indifference (apatheia) advocated by many
Greek and Roman philosophers and that of calm nonstriving advocated
by Buddha are lives designed to avoid passion, and a life without passion
is not a human life. Yes, attachments bring pain, but they also bring our
greatest joys, and there is value in the very variation that the
philosophers are trying to avoid. I was stunned to hear a philosopher
reject so much of ancient philosophy, but I was also inspired in a way
that I had never been as an undergraduate student of philosophy. I
walked out of the lecture hall feeling that I wanted to do something then
and there to embrace life.
Solomon’s message was unorthodox in philosophy, but it is common
in the work of romantic poets, novelists, and nature writers: “We do not
live but a quarter part of our life—why do we not let on the flood—raise
the gates—& set our wheels in motion—He that hath ears to hear let him
hear. Employ your senses.” (HENRY DAVID THOREAU, 1851)70
Even a future justice of the U.S. Supreme Court—a body devoted to
reason—issued this opinion: “I think that, as life is action and passion, it
is required of a man that he should share the passion and action of his
time at peril of being judged not to have lived.” (OLIVER WENDELL
HOLMES, JR., 1884)71
Buddha, Lao Tzu, and other sages of the East discovered a path to
peace and tranquility, the path of letting go. They told us how to follow
the path using meditation and stillness. Millions of people in the West
have followed, and although few, if any, have reached Nirvana, many
have found some degree of peace, happiness, and spiritual growth. So I
do not mean to question the value or relevance of Buddhism in the
modern world, or the importance of working on yourself in an effort to
find happiness. Rather, I would like to suggest that the happiness
--- END PAGE 118 ---

--- PAGE 119 ---
hypothesis be extended—for now—into a yin-yang formulation: 
Happiness comes from within, and happiness comes from without. (In
chapter 10, I’ll suggest a further refinement of the hypothesis.) To live
both the yin and the yang, we need guidance. Buddha is history’s most
perceptive guide to the first half; he is a constant but gentle reminder of
the yin of internal work. But I believe that the Western ideal of action,
striving, and passionate attachment is not as misguided as Buddhism
suggests. We just need some balance (from the East) and some specific
guidance (from modern psychology) about what to strive for.
--- END PAGE 119 ---

--- PAGE 120 ---
6 
Love and Attachments 
No one can live happily who has regard to himself alone and transforms
everything into a question of his own utility; you must live for your
neighbour, if you would live for yourself.
—SENECA1 
No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the
continent, a part of the main.
—JOHN DONNE2 
I N 1931, AT THE AGE of four, my father was diagnosed with polio. He
was immediately put into an isolation room at the local hospital in
Brooklyn, New York. There was no cure and no vaccine for polio at that
time, and city dwellers lived in fear of its spread. For several weeks my
father had no human contact, save for an occasional visit by a masked
nurse. His mother came to see him every day, but that’s all she could do
—wave to him and try to talk to him through the glass pane on the door.
My father remembers calling out to her, begging her to come in. It must
have broken her heart, and one day she ignored the rules and went in.
She was caught and sternly reprimanded. My father recovered with no
paralysis, but this image has always stayed with me: a small boy alone in
a room, gazing at his mother through a pane of glass.
My father had the bad luck to be born at the confluence point of three
big ideas. The first was germ theory, proposed in the 1840s by Ignaz
Semmelweis and incorporated into hospitals and homes with gradually
increasing ferocity over the next century. When they began to collect
statistics from orphanages and foundling homes in the 1920s,
--- END PAGE 120 ---

--- PAGE 121 ---
pediatricians came to fear germs above all else. As far back as records
went, they showed that most children dropped off at foundling homes
died within one year. In 1915, a New York physician, Henry Chapin,
reported to the American Pediatric Society that out of the ten foundling
homes he had examined, in all but one of them all the children had died
before their second birthday.3 As pediatricians came to grips with the
deadly effects of institutions on young children, they reacted in a logical
way by launching a crusade against germs. It became a priority in
orphanages and hospitals to isolate children as much as possible in clean
cubicles to prevent them from infecting each other. Beds were separated,
dividers were placed between beds, nurses retreated behind masks and
gloves, and mothers were scolded for violating quarantine.
The other two big ideas were psychoanalysis and behaviorism. These
two theories agreed on very little, but they both agreed that the infant’s
attachment to its mother is based on milk. Freud thought that the infant’s
libido (desire for pleasure) is first satisfied by the breast, and therefore
the infant develops its first attachment (psychological need) to the breast.
Only gradually does the child generalize that desire to the woman who
owns the breast. The behaviorists didn’t care about libido, but they, too,
saw the breast as the first reinforcer, the first reward (milk) for the first
behavior (sucking). The heart of behaviorism, if it had one, was
conditioning—the idea that learning occurs when rewards are 
conditional upon behaviors. Unconditional love—holding, nuzzling, and
cuddling children for no reason—was seen as the surest way to make
children lazy, spoiled, and weak. Freudians and behaviorists were united
in their belief that highly affectionate mothering damages children, and
that scientific principles could improve child rearing. Three years before
my father entered the hospital, John Watson, the leading American
behaviorist (in the years before B. F. Skinner), published the best-seller 
Psychological Care of Infant and Child. 4 Watson wrote of his dream that
one day babies would be raised in baby farms, away from the corrupting
influences of parents. But until that day arrived, parents were urged to
use behaviorist techniques to rear strong children: Don’t pick them up
when they cry, don’t cuddle or coddle them, just dole out benefits and
punishments for each good and bad action.
How could science have gotten it so wrong? How could doctors and
psychologists not have seen that children need love as well as milk? This
--- END PAGE 121 ---

--- PAGE 122 ---
chapter is about that need—the need for other people, for touch, and for
close relationships. No man, woman, or child is an island. Scientists have
come a long way since John Watson, and there is now a much more
humane science of love. The story of this science begins with orphans
and rhesus monkeys and ends with a challenge to the dismal view of love
held by many of the ancients, East and West. The heroes of this story are
two psychologists who rejected the central tenets of their training: Harry
Harlow and John Bowlby. These two men knew that something was
missing in behaviorism and in psychoanalysis, respectively. Against
great odds they changed their fields, they humanized the treatment of
children, and they made it possible for science to greatly improve upon
the wisdom of the ancients. 
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD 
Harry Harlow5 earned his Ph.D. in 1930 at Stanford, where he wrote his
dissertation on the feeding behavior of baby rats. He took a job at the
University of Wisconsin, where he found himself overwhelmed with
teaching and undersupplied with research subjects—he had no lab space,
no rats, no way to perform the experiments he was expected to publish.
Out of desperation, Harlow took his students to the little zoo in Madison,
Wisconsin, which had a small number of primates. Harlow and his first
graduate student, Abe Maslow, couldn’t run controlled experiments
using so few animals. They were forced instead to observe, to keep their
minds open, and to learn from species closely related to human beings.
And one of the first things they saw was curiosity. The apes and
monkeys liked to solve puzzles (the humans gave them tests to measure
physical dexterity and intelligence), and would work at tasks for what
seemed to be the sheer pleasure of it. Behaviorism, in contrast, said that
animals will only do what they have been reinforced for doing.
Harlow sensed he had found a flaw in behaviorism, but he couldn’t
prove it with anecdotes from the local zoo. He desperately wanted a lab
in which to study primates, not rats, so he built one himself—literally
built it, in the shell of an abandoned building, with the help of his
students. In that makeshift lab, for the next thirty years, Harlow and his
students infuriated behaviorists by demonstrating with ever more
--- END PAGE 122 ---

--- PAGE 123 ---
precision that monkeys are curious, intelligent creatures who like to
figure things out. They follow the laws of reinforcement to some degree,
as do humans, but there is much more going on in a monkey brain than
the brain of a behaviorist could grasp. For example, giving monkeys
raisins as a reward for each correct step in solving a puzzle (such as
opening a mechanical latch with several moving parts) actually interferes
with the solving, because it distracts the monkeys.6 They enjoy the task
for its own sake.
As Harlow’s lab grew, he faced perennial shortages of monkeys. They
were hard to import and, when they arrived they were often sick,
bringing a stream of new infections into the lab. In 1955, Harlow
conceived the bold idea of starting his own breeding colony of rhesus
monkeys. Nobody had ever created a self-sustaining breeding colony of
monkeys in the United States, let alone in the cold climate of Wisconsin,
but Harlow was undeterred. He allowed his rhesus monkeys to mate, and
then he took away the children within hours of their birth—to save them
from infections in the crowded lab. After much experimentation, he and
his students created an artificial baby formula full of nutrients and
antibiotics. They found the optimum pattern of feeding, light and dark
cycles, and temperature. Each baby was raised in its own cage, safe from
disease. Harlow had in a way realized Watson’s dream of a baby farm,
and the crop grew large and healthy-looking. But when the farm-raised
monkeys were brought into the company of others, they were stunned
and unnerved. They never developed normal social or problem-solving
skills, so they were useless for experiments. Harlow and his students
were stumped. What had they forgotten?
The clue was in plain sight, clutched in the monkeys’ hands, until
finally a grad student, Bill Mason, noticed it: diapers. The cages in the
baby hatchery were sometimes lined with old diapers to provide bedding
material and protect the babies from the cold floor. The monkeys clung
to the diapers, especially when they were afraid, and took them along
when they were carried to new cages. Mason proposed a test to Harlow:
Let’s expose some young monkeys to a bundle of cloth and a bundle of
wood. Let’s see whether the monkeys just need to hold on to something,
anything, or whether there’s something special about the softness of the
cloth. Harlow loved the idea, and, as he thought it over, he saw an even
grander question: Were the diapers really substitutes for mothers? Did
--- END PAGE 123 ---

--- PAGE 124 ---
the monkeys have an innate need to hold and be held, a need that was
utterly starved in the baby farm? If so, how could he prove it? Harlow’s
proof became one of the most famous experiments in all of psychology.
Harlow put the milk hypothesis to a direct test. He created two kinds
of surrogate mother, each one a cylinder about the size of an adult female
rhesus monkey, complete with a wooden head that had eyes and a mouth.
One kind was made of wire mesh, the other was covered with a layer of
foam and then a layer of soft terrycloth. Each of eight baby rhesus
monkeys was raised alone in a cage with two surrogate mothers, one of
each kind. For four of the monkeys, milk was delivered only from a tube
coming through the chest of the wire mother. For the other four, the tube
came through the chest of the cloth mother. If Freud and Watson were
right that milk was the cause of attachment, the monkeys should attach to
their milk givers. But that’s not what happened. All the monkeys spent
nearly all their time clinging to, climbing on, and pushing themselves
into the soft folds of the cloth mother. Harlow’s experiment7 is so
elegant and so convincing that you don’t need to see statistics to
understand the results. You just need to see the famous photo, now
included in every introductory psychology book, in which a baby
monkey clings to the cloth mother with its hind legs while stretching
over to feed from the tube protruding from the wire mother.
Harlow argued that “contact comfort” is a basic need that young
mammals have for physical contact with their mother. In the absence of a
real mother, young mammals will seek out whatever feels most like a
mother. Harlow chose the term carefully, because the mother, even a
cloth mother, provides comfort when it is most needed, and that comfort
comes mostly from direct contact.
Displays of familial love often move people to tears, and Deborah
Blum’s wonderful biography of Harlow, Love at Goon Park, 8 is full of
touching expressions of familial love. It is an uplifting story, ultimately,
but along the way it is full of sadness and unrequited love. The cover of
the book, for example, shows a picture of a young rhesus monkey alone
in a cage, gazing at its cloth “mother” through a pane of glass. 
LOVE CONQUERS FEAR
--- END PAGE 124 ---

--- PAGE 125 ---
John Bowlby’s life followed an entirely different path from Harlow’s,
even though it led, ultimately, to the same discovery.9 Bowlby was an
English aristocrat, raised by a nanny, and sent to boarding school. He
studied medicine and became a psychoanalyst, but during his early
training years, he did some volunteer work that shaped the rest of his
career. He worked at two homes for maladjusted children, many of
whom had no real contact with their parents. Some were aloof and
uncommunicative; others were hopelessly clingy, following him around
anxiously if he paid the slightest attention to them. After serving in
World War II, Bowlby returned to England to run the children’s clinic in
a hospital. He began to do research on how separation from parents
affects children. Europe at that time had just experienced more parent-
child separations than had any place in all of human history. The war had
created vast numbers of orphans, refugees, and children sent away to the
countryside for their own safety. The new World Health Organization
commissioned Bowlby to write a report on the best way to deal with
these children. Bowlby toured hospitals and orphanages, and his report,
published in 1951, was a passionate argument against prevailing notions
that separation and isolation are harmless, and that biological needs such
as nutrition are paramount. Children need love to develop properly, he
argued; children need mothers.
Throughout the 1950s, Bowlby developed his ideas and weathered the
scorn of psychoanalysts such as Anna Freud and Melanie Klein, whose
theories (about libido and breasts) he contradicted. He had the good luck
to meet a leading ethologist of the day, Robert Hinde, who taught him
about new research on animal behavior. Konrad Lorenz, for example,
had demonstrated that ducklings, ten to twelve hours after they hatch,
will lock onto whatever duck-sized thing moves around in their
environment and then follow it around for months.10 In nature this thing
is always mom, but in Lorenz’s demonstrations, anything he moved
around worked—even his own boots (with him in them). This visual
“imprinting” mechanism is quite different from what happens in people,
but once Bowlby began to think about how evolution creates
mechanisms to make sure that mothers and children stay together, the
way was open for an entirely new approach to human parent-child
relationships. There’s no need to derive the bond from milk,
reinforcement, libido, or anything else. Rather, the attachment of mother
--- END PAGE 125 ---

--- PAGE 126 ---
and child is so enormously important for the survival of the child that a
dedicated system is built into mother and child in all species that rely on
maternal care. As Bowlby began to pay more attention to animal
behavior, he saw many similarities between the behaviors of baby
monkeys and baby humans: clinging, sucking, crying when left behind,
following whenever possible. All these behaviors functioned in other
primates to keep the child close to mom, and all were visible in human
children, even the “pick me up” signal of upstretched arms.
In 1957, Hinde learned about Harlow’s not-yet-published cloth-mother
studies and told Bowlby, who wrote to Harlow and later visited him in
Wisconsin. The two men became great allies and supporters of each
other. Bowlby, the great theorist, created the framework that has unified
most subsequent research on parent-child relations; and Harlow, the great
experimentalist, provided the first irrefutable lab demonstrations of the
theory.
Bowlby’s grand synthesis is called attachment theory.11 It borrows
from the science of cybernetics—the study of how mechanical and
biological systems can regulate themselves to achieve preset goals while
the environment around and inside them changes. Bowlby’s first
metaphor was the simplest cybernetic system of all—a thermostat that
turns on a heater when the temperature drops below a set point.
Attachment theory begins with the idea that two basic goals guide
children’s behavior: safety and exploration. A child who stays safe
survives; a child who explores and plays develops the skills and
intelligence needed for adult life. (This is why all mammal babies play;
and the larger their frontal cortex, the more they need to play).12 These
two needs are often opposed, however, so they are regulated by a kind of
thermostat that monitors the level of ambient safety. When the safety
level is adequate, the child plays and explores. But as soon as it drops too
low, it’s as though a switch were thrown and suddenly safety needs
become paramount. The child stops playing and moves toward mom. If
mom is unreachable, the child cries, and with increasing desperation;
when mom returns, the child seeks touch, or some other reassurance,
before the system can reset and play can resume. This is an instance of
the “design” principle I discussed in chapter 2: opposing systems push
against each other to reach a balance point. (Fathers make perfectly good
--- END PAGE 126 ---

--- PAGE 127 ---
attachment figures, but Bowlby focused on mother-child attachments,
which usually get off to a faster start.)
If you want to see the system in action, just try engaging a two-year-
old in play. If you go to a friend’s house and meet her child for the first
time, it should take only a minute. The child feels secure in his familiar
surroundings, and his mother functions as what Bowlby called a “secure
base”—an attachment figure whose presence guarantees safety, turns off
fear, and thereby enables the explorations that lead to healthy
development. But if your friend brings her son over to your house for the
first time, it will take longer. You’ll probably have to walk around your
friend just to find the little head hiding behind her thighs. And then, if
you succeed in starting a game—making faces at him to make him laugh,
perhaps—just watch what happens when his mother goes to the kitchen
to get a glass of water. The thermostat clicks, the game ends, and your
play partner scampers off to the kitchen, too. Harlow had shown all the
same behavior in monkeys.13 Young monkeys placed with their cloth
mother in the center of an open room full of toys eventually climbed
down from mom to explore, but they returned often to touch her and
reconnect. If the cloth mother was removed from the room, all play
stopped and frantic screaming ensued.
When children are separated from their attachment figures for a long
time, as in a hospital stay, they quickly descend into passivity and
despair. When they are denied a stable and enduring attachment
relationship (raised, for example, by a succession of foster parents or
nurses), they are likely to be damaged for life, Bowlby said. They might
become the aloof loners or hopeless clingers that Bowlby had seen in his
volunteer work. Bowlby’s theory directly contradicted Watson as well as
the Freuds (Sigmund and Anna): If you want your children to grow up to
be healthy and independent, you should hold them, hug them, cuddle
them, and love them. Give them a secure base and they will explore and
then conquer the world on their own. The power of love over fear was
well expressed in the New Testament: “There is no fear in love, but
perfect love casts out fear” (I JOHN 4:18). 
THE PROOF IS IN THE PARTING
--- END PAGE 127 ---

--- PAGE 128 ---
If you’re going to contradict the prevailing wisdom of your day, you’d
better have darn good evidence. Harlow’s studies were darn good, but
skeptics claimed they didn’t apply to people. Bowlby needed more proof,
and he got it from a Canadian woman who happened to answer an ad he
placed for a research assistant in 1950. Mary Ainsworth, who had moved
to London with her husband, spent three years working with Bowlby on
his early studies of hospitalized children. When her husband took an
academic job in Uganda, Ainsworth went with him again and took
advantage of the opportunity to make careful observations of children in
Ugandan villages. Even in a culture where women share mothering
duties for all the children in the extended family household, Ainsworth
observed a special bond between a child and his own mother. The mother
was much more effective as a secure base than were other women.
Ainsworth then moved to the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore,
and after that to the University of Virginia, where she thought about how
to test Bowlby’s ideas, and her own, about the mother-child relationship.
In Bowlby’s cybernetic theory, the action is in the changes. You can’t
just watch a child play; you have to look at how the exploration and
safety goals shift in response to changing conditions. So Ainsworth
developed a little drama, later called the “Strange Situation,” and cast the
child in the star-ring role.14 In essence, she re-created the experiments in
which Harlow had placed monkeys in an open room with novel toys. In
the first scene, the mother and her child enter a comfortable room, full of
toys. Most children in the experiment soon crawl or toddle off to explore.
In scene two, a friendly woman enters, talks with the mother for a few
minutes, and then joins the child in play. In scene three, the mother gets
up and leaves the child alone for a few minutes with the stranger. In
scene four, she returns and the stranger leaves. In scene five, the mother
leaves again, and the child is all alone in the room. In scene six, the
stranger returns; and in scene seven, the mother returns for good. The
play is designed to ratchet up the child’s stress level in order to see how
the child’s attachment system manages the scene changes. Ainsworth
found three common patterns of managing.
In about two-thirds of American children, the system does just what
Bowlby said it should, that is, shift smoothly between play and security-
seeking as the situation changes. Children following this pattern, called
“secure” attachment, reduce or stop their play when their mothers leave,
--- END PAGE 128 ---

--- PAGE 129 ---
and then show anxiety, which the stranger cannot fully relieve. In the two
scenes where mom returns, these children show delight, often moving
toward her or touching her to reestablish contact with their secure base;
but then they quickly settle down and return to play. In the other third of
children, the scene changes are more awkward; these children have one
of two types of insecure attachment. The majority of them don’t seem to
care very much whether mom comes or goes, although subsequent
physiological research showed that they are indeed distressed by the
separation. Rather, these children seem to be suppressing their distress
by trying to manage it on their own instead of relying upon mom for
comfort. Ainsworth called this pattern “avoidant” attachment. The
remaining children, about 12 percent in the United States, are anxious
and clingy throughout the study. They become extremely upset when
separated from mom, they sometimes resist her efforts to comfort them
when she returns, and they never fully settle down to play in the
unfamiliar room. Ainsworth called this pattern “resistant.”15
Ainsworth first thought these differences were caused entirely by good
or bad mothering. She observed mothers at home and found that those
who were warm and highly responsive to their children were most likely
to have children who showed secure attachment in the strange situation.
These children had learned that they could count on their mothers, and
were therefore the most bold and confident. Mothers who were aloof and
unresponsive were more likely to have avoidant children, who had
learned not to expect much help and comfort from mom. Mothers whose
responses were erratic and unpredictable were more likely to have
resistant children, who had learned that their efforts to elicit comfort
sometimes paid off, but sometimes not.
But whenever I hear about correlations between mother and child, I’m
skeptical. Twin studies almost always show that personality traits are due
more to genetics than to parenting.16 Maybe it’s just that happy women,
those who won the cortical lottery, are warm and loving, and they pass
on their happy genes to their children, who then show up as securely
attached. Or maybe the correlation runs in reverse: Children do have
stable inborn temperaments17—sunny, cranky, or anxious—and the
sunny ones are just so much fun that their mothers want to be more
responsive. My skepticism is bolstered by the fact that studies done after
Ainsworth’s home study have generally found only small correlations
--- END PAGE 129 ---

--- PAGE 130 ---
between mothers’ responsiveness and the attachment style of their
children.18 On the other hand, twin studies have found that genes play
only a small role in determining attachment style.19 So now we have a
real puzzle, a trait that correlates weakly with mothering and weakly
with genes. Where does it come from?
Bowlby’s cybernetic theory forces us to think outside the usual nature-
nurture dichotomy. You have to see attachment style as a property that
emerges gradually during thousands of interactions. A child with a
particular (genetically influenced) temperament makes bids for
protection. A mother with a particular (genetically influenced)
temperament responds, or doesn’t respond, based on her mood, on how
overworked she is, or on what childcare guru she has been reading. No
one event is particularly important, but over time the child builds up
what Bowlby called an “internal working model” of himself, his mother,
and their relationship. If the model says that mom is always there for
you, you’ll be bolder in your play and explorations. Round after round,
predictable and reciprocal interactions build trust and strengthen the
relationship. Children with sunny dispositions who have happy mothers
are almost certain to play the game well and develop a secure attachment
style, but a dedicated mother can overcome either her own or her child’s
less pleasant disposition and foster a secure internal working model of
their relationship. (Everything I have reported above is true for fathers
too, but most children in all cultures spend more time with their
mothers.) 
IT’S NOT JUST FOR CHILDREN 
When I started writing this chapter, I planned to review attachment
theory in a page or two and then move on to the stuff that we adults
really care about. When we hear the word “love,” we think of romantic
love. We might hear an occasional song about love between parents and
children on a country music radio station, but anywhere else on the dial
love means the kind of love you fall into and then struggle to hold onto.
The more I delved into the research, however, the more I realized that
Harlow, Bowlby, and Ainsworth can help us understand grown-up love.
--- END PAGE 130 ---

--- PAGE 131 ---
See for yourself. Which of the following statements best describes you in
romantic relationships?
1. I find it relatively easy to get close to others and am comfortable
depending on them and having them depend on me. I don’t often
worry about being abandoned or about someone getting too close
to me.
2. I am somewhat uncomfortable being close to others; I find it
difficult to trust them completely, difficult to allow myself to
depend on them. I am nervous when anyone gets too close, and
often love partners want me to be more intimate than I feel
comfortable being.
3. I find that others are reluctant to get as close as I would like. I
often worry that my partner doesn’t really love me or won’t want
to stay with me. I want to merge completely with another person,
and this desire sometimes scares people away.20
The attachment researchers Cindy Hazan and Phil Shaver developed
this simple test to see whether Ainsworth’s three styles were still at work
when adults try to form relationships. They are. Some people change
style as they grow up, but the great majority of adults choose the
descriptor that matched the way they were as a child.21 (The three
choices above correspond to Ainsworth’s secure, avoidant, and resistant
patterns.) Internal working models are fairly stable (though not
unchangeable), guiding people in their most important relationships
throughout their lives. And just as secure babies are happier and more
well-adjusted, secure adults enjoy happier, longer relationships as well as
lower rates of divorce.22
But does adult romantic love really grow out of the same
psychological system that attaches children to their mothers? To find out,
Hazan traced the process by which childhood attachment changes with
age. Bowlby had been specific about the four defining features of
attachment relationships:23
1. proximity maintenance (the child wants and strives to be near the
parent)
2. separation distress (self-explanatory)
3. safe haven (the child, when frightened or distressed, comes to the
parent for comfort)
--- END PAGE 131 ---

--- PAGE 132 ---
4. secure base (the child uses the parent as a base from which to
launch exploration and personal growth)
Hazan and her colleagues24 surveyed hundreds of people from the
ages of six through eighty-two, asking which people in their lives
fulfilled each of the four defining features of attachment (for example:
“Whom do you most like to spend time with?” “Whom do you turn to
when you are feeling upset?”). If babies could take the survey, they
would nominate mom or dad as the answer to all questions, but by the
time they are eight, children want most strongly to spend time with their
peers. (When children resist leaving their friends to come home for
dinner, that’s proximity maintenance.) Between the ages of eight and
fourteen, safe haven expands from parents to include peers as
adolescents begin turning to each other for emotional support. But it’s
only at the end of adolescence, around the ages fifteen to seventeen, that
all four components of attachment can be satisfied by a peer, specifically
a romantic partner. The New Testament records this normal transference
of attachment: “For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother
and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh. So they
are no longer two, but one flesh” (MARK 10:7-9).
Evidence that romantic partners become true attachment figures, like
parents, comes from a review25 of research on how people cope with the
death of a spouse, or a long separation. The review found that adults
experience the same sequence Bowlby had observed in children placed
in hospitals: initial anxiety and panic, followed by lethargy and
depression, followed by recovery through emotional detachment.
Furthermore, the review found that contact with close friends was of
little help in blunting the pain, but renewed contact with one’s parents 
was much more effective.
Once you think about it, the similarities between romantic
relationships and parent-infant relationships are obvious. Lovers in the
first rush of love spend endless hours in face-to-face mutual gaze,
holding each other, nuzzling and cuddling, kissing, using baby voices,
and enjoying the same release of the hormone oxytocin that binds
mothers and babies to each other in a kind of addiction. Oxytocin
prepares female mammals to give birth (triggering uterine contractions
and milk release), but it also affects their brains, fostering nurturant
--- END PAGE 132 ---

--- PAGE 133 ---
behaviors and reducing feelings of stress when mothers are in contact
with their children.26
This powerful attachment of mothers to infants—often called the
“caregiving system”—is a different psychological system from the
attachment system in infants, but the two systems obviously evolved in
tandem. The infant’s distress signals are effective only because they
trigger caregiving desires in the mother. Oxytocin is the glue that makes
the two parts stick together. Oxytocin has been oversimplified in the
popular press as a hormone that makes people (even ornery men)
suddenly sweet and affectionate, but more recent work suggests that it
can also be thought of as a stress hormone in women:27 It is secreted
when women are under stress and their attachment needs are not being
met, causing a need for contact with a loved one. On the other hand,
when oxytocin floods the brain (male or female) while two people are in
skin-to-skin contact, the effect is soothing and calming, and it
strengthens the bond between them. For adults, the biggest rush of
oxytocin—other than giving birth and nursing—comes from sex.28
Sexual activity, especially if it includes cuddling, extended touching, and
orgasm, turns on many of the same circuits that are used to bond infants
and parents. It’s no wonder that childhood attachment styles persist in
adulthood: The whole attachment system persists. 
LOVE AND THE SWELLED HEAD 
Adult love relationships are therefore built out of two ancient and
interlocking systems: an attachment system that bonds child to mother
and a caregiving system that bonds mother to child. These systems are as
old as mammals—older perhaps, because birds have them, too. But we
still have to add something else to explain why sex is related to love. No
problem; nature was motivating animals to seek each other out for sex
long before mammals or birds existed. The “mating system” is
completely separate from the other two systems, and it involves
distinctive brain areas and hormones.29 In some animals, such as rats,
the mating system draws male and female together just long enough for
them to copulate. In other species, such as elephants, male and female
--- END PAGE 133 ---

--- PAGE 134 ---
are drawn together for several days—the duration of the fertile period—
during which they share tender caresses, play joyfully, and show many
other signs that remind human observers of mutual infatuation.30
Whatever the duration, for most mammals (other than humans) the three
systems are strung together with perfect predictability. First, hormonal
changes in the female around the time of ovulation trigger
advertisements of her fertility: Female dogs and cats, for example,
release pheromones; female chimpanzees and bonobos exhibit enormous
red genital swellings. Next, the males become turned on and compete (in
some species) to see who gets to mate. The female makes some sort of
choice (in most species), which in turn activates her own mating system;
and then, some months later, birth activates the caregiving system in the
mother and the attachment system in the child. Dad is left out in the cold,
where he spends his time sniffing for more pheromones, or scanning for
more swellings. Sex is for reproduction; lasting love is for mothers and
children. So why are people so different? How did human females come
to hide all signs of ovulation and get men to fall in love with them and
their children?
Nobody knows, but the most plausible theory31 in my opinion begins
with the enormous expansion of the human brain that I talked about in
chapters 1 and 3. When the first hominids split off from the ancestors of
modern chimpanzees, their brains were no bigger than those of
chimpanzees. These human ancestors were basically just bipedal apes.
But then, around 3 million years ago, something changed. Something in
the environment, or perhaps an increase in tool use made possible by
increasingly dextrous hands, made it highly adaptive to have a much
larger brain and much higher intelligence. However, brain growth faced a
literal bottleneck: the birth canal. There were physical limits to how large
a head hominid females could give birth to and still have a pelvis that
would allow them to walk upright. At least one species of hominid—our
ancestor—evolved a novel technique that got around this limitation by
sending babies out of the uterus long before their brains were developed
enough to control their bodies. In all other primate species, brain growth
slows dramatically soon after birth because the brain is mostly complete
and ready for service; only some fine tuning during a few years of
childhood play and learning is needed. In humans, however, the rapid
rate of embryonic brain growth continues for about two years after birth,
--- END PAGE 134 ---

--- PAGE 135 ---
followed by a slower but continuous increase in brain weight for another
twenty years.32 Humans are the only creatures on Earth whose young
are utterly helpless for years, and heavily dependent on adult care for
more than a decade.
Given the enormous burden that is the human child, women can’t do it
on their own. Studies of hunter-gatherer societies show that mothers of
young children cannot collect enough calories to keep themselves and
their children alive.33 They rely on the large quantity of food as well as
the protection provided by males in their peak years of productivity. Big
brains, so useful for gossip and social manipulation (as well as hunting
and gathering), could therefore have evolved only if men began chipping
in. But in the competitive game of evolution, it’s a losing move for a
male to provide resources to a child who is not his own. So active
fathers, male-female pair-bonds, male sexual jealousy, and big-headed
babies all co-evolved—that is, arose gradually but together. A man who
felt some desire to stay with a woman, guard her fidelity, and contribute
to the rearing of their children could produce smarter children than could
his less paternal competitors. In environments in which intelligence was
highly adaptive (which may have been all human environments, once we
began making tools), male investment in children may have paid off for
the men themselves (for their genes, that is), and therefore became more
common with each successive generation.
But from what raw material could a tie evolve between men and
women where one did not exist before? Evolution cannot design
anything from scratch. Evolution is a process in which bones and
hormones and behavioral patterns that were already coded for by the
genes are changed slightly (by random mutation of those genes) and then
selected if they confer an advantage on an individual. It didn’t take much
change to modify the attachment system, which every man and every
woman had used as a child to attach to mom, and have it link up with the
mating system, which was already turning on in each young person at the
time of puberty.
Granted, this theory is speculative (the fossilized bones of a
committed father look no different from those of an indifferent one), but
it does tie together neatly many of the distinctive features of human life,
such as our painful childbirth, long infancy, large brains, and high
--- END PAGE 135 ---

--- PAGE 136 ---
intelligence. The theory connects these biological quirks about human
beings to some of the most important emotional oddities of our species:
the existence of strong and (often) enduring emotional bonds between
men and women, and between men and children. Because men and
women in a relationship have many conflicting interests, evolutionary
theory does not view love relationships as harmonious partnerships for
childrearing;34 but a universal feature of human cultures is that men and
women form relationships intended to last for years (marriage) that
constrain their sexual behavior in some way and institutionalize their ties
to children and to each other. 
TWO LOVES, TWO ERRORS 
Take one ancient attachment system, mix with an equal measure of
caregiving system, throw in a modified mating system and voila, that’s
romantic love. I seem to have lost something here; romantic love is so
much more than the sum of its parts. It is an extraordinary psychological
state that launched the Trojan war, inspired much of the world’s best
(and worst) music and literature, and gave many of us the most perfect
days of our lives. But I think that romantic love is widely misunderstood,
and looking at its psychological subcomponents can clear up some
puzzles and guide the way around love’s pitfalls.
In some corners of universities, the professors tell their students that
romantic love is a social construction, invented by the French
troubadours of the twelfth century with their stories of chivalry,
idealization of women, and the uplifting ache of unconsummated desire.
It’s certainly true that cultures create their own understandings of
psychological phenomena, but many of those phenomena will occur
regardless of what people think about them. (For example, death is
socially constructed by every culture, but bodies die without consulting
those constructions.) A survey of ethnographies from 166 human
cultures35 found clear evidence of romantic love in 88 percent of them;
for the rest, the ethnographic record was too thin to be sure either way.
What the troubadours did give us is a particular myth of “true” love—
the idea that real love burns brightly and passionately, and then it just
--- END PAGE 136 ---

--- PAGE 137 ---
keeps on burning until death, and then it just keeps on burning after
death as the lovers are reunited in heaven. This myth seems to have
grown and diffused in modern times into a set of interrelated ideas about
love and marriage. As I see it, the modern myth of true love involves
these beliefs: True love is passionate love that never fades; if you are in
true love, you should marry that person; if love ends, you should leave
that person because it was not true love; and if you can find the right
person, you will have true love forever. You might not believe this myth
yourself, particularly if you are older than thirty; but many young people
in Western nations are raised on it, and it acts as an ideal that they
unconsciously carry with them even if they scoff at it. (It’s not just
Hollywood that perpetrates the myth; Bollywood, the Indian film
industry, is even more romanticized.)
But if true love is defined as eternal passion, it is biologically
impossible. To see this, and to save the dignity of love, you have to
understand the difference between two kinds of love: passionate and
companionate. According to the love researchers Ellen Berscheid and
Elaine Walster, passionate love is a “wildly emotional state in which
tender and sexual feelings, elation and pain, anxiety and relief, altruism
and jealousy coexist in a confusion of feelings.”36 Passionate love is the
love you fall into. It is what happens when Cupid’s golden arrow hits
your heart, and, in an instant, the world around you is transformed. You
crave union with your beloved. You want, somehow, to crawl into each
other. This is the urge that Plato captured in The Symposium, in which
Aristophanes’ toast to love is a myth about its origins. Aristophanes says
that people originally had four legs, four arms, and two faces, but one
day the gods felt threatened by the power and arrogance of human beings
and decided to cut them in half. Ever since that day, people have
wandered the world searching for their other halves. (Some people
originally had two male faces, some two female, and the rest a male and
a female, thereby explaining the diversity of sexual orientation.) As
proof, Aristophanes asks us to imagine that Hephaestus (the god of fire
and hence of blacksmiths) were to come upon two lovers as they lay
together in an embrace, and say to them:
What is it you human beings really want from each other? . . . Is
this your heart’s desire, then—for the two of you to become parts
of the same whole, as near as can be, and never to separate, day
--- END PAGE 137 ---

--- PAGE 138 ---
or night? Because if that’s your desire, I’d like to weld you
together and join you into something that is naturally whole, so
that the two of you are made into one. Then the two of you would
share one life, as long as you lived, because you would be one
being, and by the same token, when you died, you would be one
and not two in Hades, having died a single death. Look at your
love, and see if this is what you desire.37
Aristophanes says that no lovers would turn down such an offer.
Berscheid and Walster define companionate love, in contrast, as “the
affection we feel for those with whom our lives are deeply
intertwined.”38 Companionate love grows slowly over the years as
lovers apply their attachment and caregiving systems to each other, and
as they begin to rely upon, care for, and trust each other. If the metaphor
for passionate love is fire, the metaphor for companionate love is vines
growing, intertwining, and gradually binding two people together. The
contrast of wild and calm forms of love has occurred to people in many
cultures. As a woman in a hunter-gatherer tribe in Namibia put it: “When
two people come together their hearts are on fire and their passion is
very great. After a while, the fire cools and that’s how it stays.”39
Passionate love is a drug. Its symptoms overlap with those of heroin
(euphoric well-being, sometimes described in sexual terms) and cocaine
(euphoria combined with giddiness and energy).40 It’s no wonder:
Passionate love alters the activity of several parts of the brain, including
parts that are involved in the release of dopamine.41 Any experience that
feels intensely good releases dopamine, and the dopamine link is crucial
here because drugs that artificially raise dopamine levels, as do heroin
and cocaine, put you at risk of addiction. If you take cocaine once a
month, you won’t become addicted, but if you take it every day, you will.
No drug can keep you continuously high. The brain reacts to a chronic
surplus of dopamine, develops neurochemical reactions that oppose it,
and restores its own equilibrium. At that point, tolerance has set in, and
when the drug is withdrawn, the brain is unbalanced in the opposite
direction: pain, lethargy, and despair follow withdrawal from cocaine or
from passionate love.
--- END PAGE 138 ---

--- PAGE 139 ---
So if passionate love is a drug—literally a drug—it has to wear off
eventually. Nobody can stay high forever (although if you find
passionate love in a long-distance relationship, it’s like taking cocaine
once a month; the drug can retain its potency because of your suffering
between doses). If passionate love is allowed to run its joyous course,
there must come a day when it weakens. One of the lovers usually feels
the change first. It’s like waking up from a shared dream to see your
sleeping partner drooling. In those moments of returning sanity, the lover
may see flaws and defects to which she was blind before. The beloved
falls off the pedestal, and then, because our minds are so sensitive to
changes, her change in feeling can take on exaggerated importance. “Oh,
my God,” she thinks, “the magic has worn off—I’m not in love with him
anymore.” If she subscribes to the myth of true love, she might even
consider breaking up with him. After all, if the magic ended, it can’t be
true love. But if she does end the relationship, she might be making a
mistake.
Passionate love does not turn into companionate love. Passionate love
and companionate love are two separate processes, and they have
different time courses. Their diverging paths produce two danger points,
two places where many people make grave mistakes. In figure 6.1, I’ve
drawn out how the intensity of passionate and companionate love might
vary in one person’s relationship over the course of six months.
Passionate love ignites, it burns, and it can reach its maximum
temperature within days. During its weeks or months of madness, lovers
can’t help but think about marriage, and often they talk about it, too.
Sometimes they even accept Hephaestus’s offer and commit to marriage.
This is often a mistake. Nobody can think straight when high on
passionate love. The rider is as besotted as the elephant. People are not
allowed to sign contracts when they are drunk, and I sometimes wish we
could prevent people from proposing marriage when they are high on
passionate love because once a marriage proposal is accepted, families
are notified, and a date is set, it’s very hard to stop the train. The drug is
likely to wear off at some point during the stressful wed-ding planning
phase, and many of these couples will walk down the aisle with doubt in
their hearts and divorce in their future.
--- END PAGE 139 ---

--- PAGE 140 ---
Fig. 6.1 The Time Course of the Two Kinds of Love (Short Run) 
The other danger point is the day the drug weakens its grip. Passionate
love doesn’t end on that day, but the crazy and obsessional high period
does. The rider regains his senses and can, for the first time, assess where
the elephant has taken them. Breakups often happen at this point, and for
many couples that’s a good thing. Cupid is usually portrayed as an
impish fellow because he’s so fond of joining together the most
inappropriate couples. But sometimes breaking up is premature, because
if the lovers had stuck it out, if they had given companionate love a
chance to grow, they might have found true love.
True love exists, I believe, but it is not—cannot be—passion that lasts
forever. True love, the love that undergirds strong marriages, is simply
strong companionate love, with some added passion, between two people
who are firmly committed to each other.42 Companionate love looks
weak in the graph above because it can never attain the intensity of
passionate love. But if we change the time scale from six months to sixty
years, as in the next figure, it is passionate love that seems trivial—a
flash in the pan—while companionate love can last a lifetime. When we
admire a couple still in love on their fiftieth anniversary, it is this blend
of loves—mostly companionate—that we are admiring.
--- END PAGE 140 ---

--- PAGE 141 ---
Fig. 6.2 The Time Course of the Two Kinds of Love (Long Run) 
WHY DO PHILOSOPHERS HATE LOVE? 
If you are in passionate love and want to celebrate your passion, read
poetry. If your ardor has calmed and you want to understand your
evolving relationship, read psychology. But if you have just ended a
relationship and would like to believe you are better off without love,
read philosophy. Oh, there is plenty of work extolling the virtues of love,
but when you look closely, you find a deep ambivalence. Love of God,
love of neighbor, love of truth, love of beauty—all of these are urged
upon us. But the passionate, erotic love of a real person? Heavens no!
In the ancient East, the problem with love is obvious: Love is 
attachment. Attachments, particularly sensual and sexual attachments,
must be broken to permit spiritual progress. Buddha said, “So long as
lustful desire, however small, of man for women is not controlled, so
long the mind of man is not free, but is bound like a calf tied to a
cow.”43 The Laws of Manu, an ancient Hindu treatise on how young
Brahmin men should live, was even more negative about women: “It is
the very nature of women to corrupt men here on earth.”44 Even
Confucius, who was not focused on breaking attachments, saw romantic
love and sexuality as threats to the higher virtues of filial piety and
loyalty to one’s superiors: “I have never seen anyone who loved virtue as
much as sex.”45 (Of course, Buddhism and Hinduism are diverse, and
both have changed with time and place. Some modern leaders, such as
--- END PAGE 141 ---

--- PAGE 142 ---
the Dalai Lama, accept romantic love and its attendant sexuality as an
important part of life. But the spirit of the ancient religious and
philosophical texts is much more negative.)46
In the West, the story is a bit different: Love is widely celebrated by
the poets from Homer onwards. Love launches the drama of the Iliad, 
and the Odyssey ends with the lusty return of Odysseus to Penelope.
When the Greek and Roman philosophers get hold of romantic love,
however, they usually either despise it or try to turn it into something
else. Plato’s Symposium, for example, is an entire dialogue devoted to the
praise of love. But you never know what position Plato holds until
Socrates speaks, and when Socrates speaks, he trashes the eulogies to
love that Aristophanes and others have just given. He describes how love
produces a “disease” among the animals: “First they are sick for
intercourse with each other, then for nurturing their young.”47 (Note:
Mating system leads to caregiving system.) For Plato, when human love
resembles animal love, it is degrading. The love of a man for a woman,
as it aims at procreation, is therefore a debased kind of love. Plato’s
Socrates then shows how love can transcend its animal origins by aiming
at something higher. When an older man loves a young man, their love
can be elevating for both because the older man can, in between rounds
of intercourse, teach the young man about virtue and philosophy. But
even this love must be a stepping stone only: When a man loves a
beautiful body he must learn to love beauty in general, not the beauty of
one particular body. He must come to find beauty in men’s souls, and
then in ideas and philosophy. Ultimately he comes to know the form of
beauty itself:
The result is that he will see the beauty of knowledge and be
looking mainly not at beauty in a single example—as a servant
would who favored the beauty of a little boy or a man or a single
custom . . . but the lover is turned to the great sea of beauty, and,
gazing upon this, he gives birth to many gloriously beautiful
ideas and theories, in unstinting love of wisdom. . . .48
The essential nature of love as an attachment between two people is
rejected; love can be dignified only when it is converted into an
appreciation of beauty in general.
--- END PAGE 142 ---

--- PAGE 143 ---
The later Stoics also object to the particularity of love, to the way it
places the source of one’s happiness in the hands of another person,
whom one cannot fully control. Even the Epicureans, whose philosophy
was based on the pursuit of pleasure, value friendship but oppose
romantic love. In De Rerum Natura, the philosophical poet Lucretius
lays out the fullest surviving statement of the philosophy of Epicurus.
The end of Book 4 is widely known as the “Tirade Against Love,” in
which Lucretius compares love to a wound, a cancer, and a sickness. The
Epicureans were experts on desire and its satisfaction; they objected to
passionate love because it cannot be satisfied: 
When two lie tasting, limb by limb
life’s bloom, when flesh gives foretaste of delight,
and Venus is ready to sow the female field,
they hungrily seize each other, mouth to mouth
the spittle flows, they pant, press tooth to lip—
vainly, for they can chafe no substance off
nor pierce and be gone, one body in the other.
For often this seems to be their wish, their goal,
so greedily do they cling in passion’s bond.49 
Christianity brought forward many of these classical fears of love.
Jesus commands his followers to love God, using the same words as
Moses (“With all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your
might,” MATTHEW, 22:37, in referring to DEUTERONOMY 6:5).
Jesus’ second commandment is to love one another: “You shall love your
neighbor as yourself” (MATTHEW 22:39). But what can it mean to love
others as one loves oneself? The psychological origins of love are in
attachment to parents and sexual partners. We do not attach to ourselves;
we do not seek security and fulfillment in ourselves. What Jesus seems
to mean is that we should value others as much as we value ourselves;
we should be kind and generous even to strangers and even to our
enemies. This uplifting message is relevant to the issues of reciprocity
and hypocrisy that I talked about in chapters 3 and 4, but it has little to
do with the psychological systems I have been covering in this chapter.
Rather, Christian love has focused on two key words: caritas and agape.
Caritas (the origin of our word “charity”) is a kind of intense
benevolence and good will; agape is a Greek word that refers to a kind
of selfless, spiritual love with no sexuality, no clinging to a particular
--- END PAGE 143 ---

--- PAGE 144 ---
other person. (Of course, Christianity endorses the love of a man and a
woman within marriage, but even this love is idealized as the love of
Christ for his church—EPHESIANS 5:25) As in Plato, Christian love is
love stripped of its essential particularity, its focus on a specific other
person. Love is remodeled into a general attitude toward a much larger,
even infinite, class of objects.
Caritas and agape are beautiful, but they are not related to or derived
from the kinds of love that people need. Although I would like to live in
a world in which everyone radiates benevolence toward everyone else, I
would rather live in a world in which there was at least one person who
loved me specifically, and whom I loved in return. Suppose Harlow had
raised rhesus monkeys under two conditions. For the first group, each
was reared in its own cage, but each day Harlow put in a new but very
nurturing adult female monkey as a companion. For the second group,
each was reared in a cage with its own mother, and then each day Harlow
put in a new and not particularly nice other monkey. The monkeys in the
first group got something like caritas—benevolence without particularity
—and they would probably emerge emotionally damaged. Without
having formed an attachment relationship, they would likely be fearful of
new experiences and unable to love or care for other monkeys. The
monkeys in the second group would have had something closer to a
normal rhesus monkey childhood, and would probably emerge healthy
and able to love. Monkeys and people need close and long-lasting
attachments to particular others. In chapter 9, I will propose that agape is
real, but usually short-lived. It can change lives and enrich lives, but it
cannot substitute for the kinds of love based on attachments.
There are several reasons why real human love might make
philosophers uncomfortable. First, passionate love is notorious for
making people illogical and irrational, and Western philosophers have
long thought that morality is grounded in rationality. (In chapter 8, I will
argue against this view.) Love is a kind of insanity, and many people
have, while crazed with passion, ruined their lives and those of others.
Much of the philosophical opposition to love may therefore be well-
intentioned advice by the sages to the young: Shut your ears to the
sirens’ deceitful song.
I think, however, that at least two less benevolent motivations are at
work. First, there may be a kind of hypocritical self-interest in which the
--- END PAGE 144 ---

--- PAGE 145 ---
older generation says, “Do as we say, not as we did.” Buddha and St.
Augustine, for example, drank their fill of passionate love as young men
and came out only much later as opponents of sexual attachments. Moral
codes are designed to keep order within society; they urge us to rein in
our desires and play our assigned roles. Romantic love is notorious for
making young people give less than a damn about the rules and
conventions of their society, about caste lines, or about feuds between
Capulets and Montagues. So the sages’ constant attempts to redefine
love as something spiritual and prosocial sound to me like the moralism
of parents who, having enjoyed a variety of love affairs when they were
young, now try to explain to their daughter why she should save herself
for marriage.
A second motivation is the fear of death. Jamie Goldenberg50 at the
University of Colorado has shown that when people are asked to reflect
on their own mortality, they find the physical aspects of sexuality more
disgusting, and they are less likely to agree with an essay arguing for the
essential similarity of people and animals. Goldenberg and her
colleagues believe that people in all cultures have a pervasive fear of
death. Human beings all know that they are going to die, and so human
cultures go to great lengths to construct systems of meaning that dignify
life and convince people that their lives have more meaning than those of
the animals that die all around them. The extensive regulation of sex in
many cultures, the attempt to link love to God and then to cut away the
sex, is part of an elaborate defense against the gnawing fear of
mortality.51
If this is true, if the sages have a variety of unstated reasons for
warning us away from passionate love and attachments of many kinds,
perhaps we should be selective in heeding their advice. Perhaps we need
to look at our own lives, lived in a world very different from theirs, and
also at the evidence about whether attachments are good or bad for us. 
FREEDOM CAN BE HAZARDOUS TO YOUR HEALTH 
In the late nineteenth century, one of the founders of sociology, Emile
Durkheim, performed a scholarly miracle. He gathered data from across
--- END PAGE 145 ---

--- PAGE 146 ---
Europe to study the factors that affect the suicide rate. His findings can
be summarized in one word: constraints. No matter how he parsed the
data, people who had fewer social constraints, bonds, and obligations
were more likely to kill themselves. Durkheim looked at the “degree of
integration of religious society” and found that Protestants, who lived the
least demanding religious lives at the time, had higher suicide rates than
did Catholics; Jews, with the densest network of social and religious
obligations, had the lowest. He examined the “degree of integration of
domestic society”—the family—and found the same thing: People living
alone were most likely to kill themselves; married people, less; married
people with children, still less. Durkheim concluded that people need
obligations and constraints to provide structure and meaning to their
lives: “The more weakened the groups to which [a man] belongs, the less
he depends on them, the more he consequently depends only on himself
and recognizes no other rules of conduct than what are founded on his
private interests.”52
A hundred years of further studies have confirmed Durkheim’s
diagnosis. If you want to predict how happy someone is, or how long she
will live (and if you are not allowed to ask about her genes or
personality), you should find out about her social relationships. Having
strong social relationships strengthens the immune system, extends life
(more than does quitting smoking), speeds recovery from surgery, and
reduces the risks of depression and anxiety disorders.53 It’s not just that
extroverts are naturally happier and healthier; when introverts are forced
to be more outgoing, they usually enjoy it and find that it boosts their
mood.54 Even people who think they don’t want a lot of social contact
still benefit from it. And it’s not just that “we all need somebody to lean
on”; recent work on giving support shows that caring for others is often
more beneficial than is receiving help.55 We need to interact and
intertwine with others; we need the give and the take; we need to
belong.56 An ideology of extreme personal freedom can be dangerous
because it encourages people to leave homes, jobs, cities, and marriages
in search of personal and professional fulfillment, thereby breaking the
relationships that were probably their best hope for such fulfillment.
Seneca was right: “No one can live happily who has regard to himself
alone and transforms everything into a question of his own utility.” John
--- END PAGE 146 ---

--- PAGE 147 ---
Donne was right: No man, woman, or child is an island. Aristophanes
was right: We need others to complete us. We are an ultrasocial species,
full of emotions finely tuned for loving, befriending, helping, sharing,
and otherwise intertwining our lives with others. Attachments and
relationships can bring us pain: As a character in Jean-Paul Sartre’s play 
No Exit said, “Hell is other people.”57 But so is heaven.
--- END PAGE 147 ---

--- PAGE 148 ---
7 
The Uses of Adversity 
When heaven is about to confer a great responsibility on any man, it will
exercise his mind with suffering, subject his sinews and bones to hard
work, expose his body to hunger, put him to poverty, place obstacles in
the paths of his deeds, so as to stimulate his mind, harden his nature,
and improve wherever he is incompetent.
—MENG TZU,1 CHINA, 3RD CENT. BCE 
What doesn’t kill me makes me stronger.
—NIETSZCHE2 
M ANY TRADITIONS HAVE a notion of fate, predestination, or divine
foreknowledge. Hindus have a folk belief that on the day of birth, God
writes the destiny of each child upon his or her forehead. Suppose that on
the day your child is born, you are given two gifts: a pair of glasses that
allows you to read this forecast, and a pencil that allows you to edit it.
(Suppose further that the gifts come from God, with full permission to
use them as you please.) What would you do? You read the list: At age
nine: best friend dies of cancer. At eighteen: graduates high school at top
of class. At twenty: car accident while driving drunk leads to amputation
of left leg. At twenty-four: becomes single parent. At twenty-nine:
marries. At thirty-two: publishes successful novel. At thirty-three:
divorces; and so on. How painful you’d find it to see your child’s future
suffering written out before you! What parent could resist the urge to
cross off the traumas, to correct the self-inflicted wounds?
But be careful with that pencil. Your good intentions could make
things worse. If Nietzsche is right that what doesn’t kill you makes you
--- END PAGE 148 ---

--- PAGE 149 ---
stronger, then the complete erasure of serious adversity from your child’s
future would leave him or her weak and underdeveloped. This chapter is
about what we might call the “adversity hypothesis,” which says that
people need adversity, setbacks, and perhaps even trauma to reach the
highest levels of strength, fulfillment, and personal development.
Nietzsche’s dictum can’t be literally true, at least, not all the time.
People who face the real and present threat of their own deaths, or who
witness the violent deaths of others, sometimes develop posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), a debilitating condition that leaves its victims
anxious and over-reactive. People who suffer from PTSD are changed,
sometimes permanently: They panic or crumble more easily when faced
with later adversity. Even if we take Nietzsche figuratively (which he
would have much preferred anyway), fifty years of research on stress
shows that stressors are generally bad for people,3 contributing to
depression, anxiety disorders, and heart disease. So let’s be cautious
about accepting the adversity hypothesis. Let’s look to scientific research
to figure out when adversity is beneficial, and when it is harmful. The
answer is not just “adversity within limits.” It’s a much more interesting
story, one that reveals how human beings grow and thrive, and how you
(and your child) can best profit from the adversity that surely lies in your
future. 
POSTTRAUMATIC GROWTH 
Greg’s life fell apart on April 8, 1999. On that day, his wife and two
children, ages four and seven, disappeared. It took Greg three days just
to find out that they had not died in a car crash; Amy had taken the
children and run off with a man she had met in a shopping mall a few
weeks earlier. The four of them were now driving around the country and
had been spotted in several Western states. The private detective Greg
hired quickly discovered that the man who had ruined Greg’s life earned
his living as a con artist and petty criminal. How could this have
happened? Greg felt like Job, stripped in one day of all he loved most.
And like Job, he had no explanation for what had befallen him.
--- END PAGE 149 ---

--- PAGE 150 ---
Greg,4 an old friend of mine, called me to see whether I, as a
psychologist, could offer insight into how his wife had fallen under the
influence of such a fraud. The one insight I could offer was that the man
sounded like a psychopath. Most psychopaths are not violent (although
most serial murderers and serial rapists are psychopaths). They are
people, mostly men, who have no moral emotions, no attachment
systems, and no concerns for others.5 Because they feel no shame,
embarrassment, or guilt, they find it easy to manipulate people into
giving them money, sex, and trust. I told Greg that if this man was
indeed a psychopath, he was incapable of love and would soon tire of
Amy and the kids. Greg would probably see his children again soon.
Two months later, Amy returned. The police restored the children to
Greg’s custody. Greg’s panic phase was over, but so was his marriage,
and Greg began the long and painful process of rebuilding his life. He
was now a single parent living on an assistant professor’s salary, and he
faced years of legal expenses fighting Amy over the custody of their
children. He had little hope of finishing the book his academic career
depended upon, and he worried about his children’s mental health, and
his own. What was he going to do?
I visited Greg a few months later. It was a beautiful August evening,
and as we sat on his porch, Greg told me about how the crisis had
affected him. He was still in pain, but he had learned that many people
cared about him and were there to help him. Families from his church
were bringing him meals and helping out with childcare. His parents
were selling their house in Utah and moving to Charlottesville to help
him raise the children. Also, Greg said that the experience had radically
changed his perspective about what mattered in life. As long as he had
his children back, career success was no longer so important to him.
Greg said he now treated people differently, a change related to his
change in values: He found himself reacting to others with much greater
sympathy, love, and forgiveness. He just couldn’t get mad at people for
little things anymore. And then Greg said something so powerful that I
choked up. Referring to the often sad and moving solo that is at the heart
of many operas, he said: “This is my moment to sing the aria. I don’t
want to, I don’t want to have this chance, but it’s here now, and what am
I going to do about it? Am I going to rise to the occasion?”
--- END PAGE 150 ---

--- PAGE 151 ---
To have framed things in such a way showed that he was already
rising. With the help of family, friends, and deep religious faith, Greg
rebuilt his life, finished his book, and two years later found a better job.
When I spoke to him recently, he told me he still feels wounded by what
happened. But he also said that many of the positive changes had
endured, and that he now experiences more joy from each day with his
children than he did before the crisis.
For decades, research in health psychology focused on stress and its
damaging effects. A major concern in this research literature has always
been resilience—the ways people cope with adversity, fend off damage,
and “bounce back” to normal functioning. But it’s only in the last fifteen
years that researchers have gone beyond resilience and begun to focus on
the benefits of severe stress. These benefits are sometimes referred to
collectively as “posttraumatic growth,”6 in direct contrast to
posttraumatic stress disorder. Researchers have now studied people
facing many kinds of adversity, including cancer, heart disease, HIV,
rape, assault, paralysis, infertility, house fires, plane crashes, and
earthquakes. Researchers have studied how people cope with the loss of
their strongest attachments: children, spouses or partners, and parents.
This large body of research shows that although traumas, crises, and
tragedies come in a thousand forms, people benefit from them in three
primary ways—the same ones that Greg talked about.
The first benefit is that rising to a challenge reveals your hidden
abilities, and seeing these abilities changes your self-concept. None of us
knows what we are really capable of enduring. You might say to
yourself, “I would die if I lost X,” or “I could never survive what Y is
going through,” yet these are statements spun out of thin air by the rider.
If you did lose X, or find yourself in the same position as Y, your heart
would not stop beating. You would respond to the world as you found it,
and most of those responses would be automatic. People sometimes say
they are numb or on autopilot after a terrible loss or trauma.
Consciousness is severely altered, yet somehow the body keeps moving.
Over the next few weeks some degree of normalcy returns as one
struggles to make sense of the loss and of one’s altered circumstances.
What doesn’t kill you makes you, by definition, a survivor, about whom
people then say, “I could never survive what Y is going through.” One of
the most common lessons people draw from bereavement or trauma is
--- END PAGE 151 ---

--- PAGE 152 ---
that they are much stronger than they realized, and this new appreciation
of their strength then gives them confidence to face future challenges.
And they are not just confabulating a silver lining to wrap around a dark
cloud; people who have suffered through battle, rape, concentration
camps, or traumatic personal losses often seem to be inoculated 7 against
future stress: They recover more quickly, in part because they know they
can cope. Religious leaders have often pointed to exactly this benefit of
suffering. As Paul said in his Letter to the Romans (5:3-4): “Suffering
produces endurance, and endurance produces character, and character
produces hope.” More recently, the Dalai Lama said: “The person who
has had more experience of hardships can stand more firmly in the face
of problems than the person who has never experienced suffering. From
this angle, then, some suffering can be a good lesson for life.”8
The second class of benefit concerns relationships. Adversity is a
filter. When a person is diagnosed with cancer, or a couple loses a child,
some friends and family members rise to the occasion and look for any
way they can to express support or to be helpful. Others turn away,
perhaps unsure of what to say or unable to overcome their own
discomfort with the situation. But adversity doesn’t just separate the fair-
weather friends from the true; it strengthens relationships and it opens
people’s hearts to one another. We often develop love for those we care
for, and we usually feel love and gratitude toward those who cared for us
in a time of need. In a large study of bereavement, Susan Nolen-
Hoeksema and her colleagues at Stanford University found that one of
the most common effects of losing a loved one was that the bereaved had
a greater appreciation of and tolerance for the other people in his or her
life. A woman in the study, whose partner had died of cancer, explained:
“[The loss] enhanced my relationship with other people because I realize
that time is so important, and you can waste so much effort on small,
insignificant events or feelings.”9 Like Greg, this bereaved woman
found herself relating to others in a more loving and less petty way.
Trauma seems to shut off the motivation to play Machiavellian tit for tat
with its emphasis on self-promotion and competition.
This change in ways of relating points to the third common benefit:
Trauma changes priorities and philosophies toward the present (“Live
each day to the fullest”) and toward other people. We have all heard
stories about rich and powerful people who had a moral conversion when
--- END PAGE 152 ---

--- PAGE 153 ---
faced with death. In 1993, I saw one of the grandest such stories written
in the rocks outside the Indian city of Bhubaneswar, where I spent three
months studying culture and morality. King Ashoka, after assuming
control of the Maurya empire (in central India) around 272 BCE, set out
to expand his territory by conquest. He was successful, subduing by
slaughter many of the peoples and kingdoms around him. But after a
particularly bloody victory over the Kalinga people, near what is now
Bhubaneswar, he was seized with horror and remorse. He converted to
Buddhism, renounced all further conquest by violence, and devoted his
life to creating a kingdom based on justice and respect for dharma (the
cosmic law of Hinduism and Buddhism). He wrote out his vision of a
just society and his rules for virtuous behavior, and had these edicts
carved into rock walls throughout his kingdom. He sent emissaries as far
away as Greece to spread his vision of peace, virtue, and religious
tolerance. Ashoka’s conversion was caused by victory, not adversity, yet
people are often traumatized—as modern research on soldiers10
indicates—by killing as well as by facing the threat of death. Like so
many who experience posttraumatic growth, Ashoka underwent a
profound transformation. In his edicts, he described himself as having
become more forgiving, compassionate, and tolerant of those who
differed with him.
Few people have the chance to go from mass murderer to patron of
humanity, but a great many people facing death report changes in values
and perspectives. A diagnosis of cancer is often described, in retrospect,
as a wake-up call, a reality check, or a turning point. Many people
consider changing careers or reducing the time they spend at work. The
reality that people often wake up to is that life is a gift they have been
taking for granted, and that people matter more than money. Charles
Dickens’s A Christmas Carol captures a deep truth about the effects of
facing mortality: A few minutes with the ghost of “Christmas Yet to
Come” converts Scrooge, the ultimate miser, into a generous man who
takes delight in his family, his employees, and the strangers he passes on
the street.
I don’t want to celebrate suffering, prescribe it for everyone, or
minimize the moral imperative to reduce it where we can. I don’t want to
ignore the pain that ripples out from each diagnosis of cancer, spreading
fear along lines of kinship and friendship. I want only to make the point
--- END PAGE 153 ---

--- PAGE 154 ---
that suffering is not always all bad for all people. There is usually some
good mixed in with the bad, and those who find it have found something
precious: a key to moral and spiritual development. As Shakespeare
wrote: 
Sweet are the uses of adversity,
Which like the toad, ugly and venomous,
Wears yet a precious jewel in his head. 11 
MUST WE SUFFER? 
The adversity hypothesis has a weak and a strong version. In the weak
version, adversity can lead to growth, strength, joy, and self-
improvement, by the three mechanisms of posttraumatic growth
described above. The weak version is well-supported by research, but it
has few clear implications for how we should live our lives. The strong
version of the hypothesis is more unsettling: It states that people must 
endure adversity to grow, and that the highest levels of growth and
development are only open to those who have faced and overcome great
adversity. If the strong version of the hypothesis is valid, it has profound
implications for how we should live our lives and structure our societies.
It means that we should take more chances and suffer more defeats. It
means that we might be dangerously overprotecting our children,
offering them lives of bland safety and too much counseling while
depriving them of the “critical incidents”12 that would help them to
grow strong and to develop the most intense friendships. It means that
heroic societies, which fear dishonor more than death, or societies that
struggle together through war, might produce better human beings than
can a world of peace and prosperity in which people’s expectations rise
so high that they sue each other for “emotional damages.”
But is the strong version valid? People often say that they have been
profoundly changed by adversity, yet researchers have so far collected
little evidence of adversity-induced personality change beyond such
reports. People’s scores on personality tests are fairly stable over the
course of a few years, even for people who report that they have changed
a great deal in the interim.13 In one of the few studies that tried to verify
--- END PAGE 154 ---

--- PAGE 155 ---
reports of growth by asking the subjects’ friends about them, the friends
noticed much less change than the subjects had reported.14
These studies might, however, have been looking for change in the
wrong place. Psychologists often approach personality by measuring
basic traits such as the “big five”: neuroticism, extroversion, openness to
new experiences, agreeableness (warmth/niceness), and
conscientiousness.15 These traits are facts about the elephant, about a
person’s automatic reactions to various situations. They are fairly similar
between identical twins reared apart, indicating that they are influenced
in part by genes, although they are also influenced by changes in the
conditions of one’s life or the roles one plays, such as becoming a
parent.16 But psychologist Dan McAdams has suggested that personality
really has three levels,17 and too much attention has been paid to the
lowest level, the basic traits. A second level of personality,
“characteristic adaptations,” includes personal goals, defense and coping
mechanisms, values, beliefs, and life-stage concerns (such as those of
parenthood or retirement) that people develop to succeed in their
particular roles and niches. These adaptations are influenced by basic
traits: A person high on neuroticism will have many more defense
mechanisms; an extrovert will rely more heavily on social relationships.
But in this middle level, the person’s basic traits are made to mesh with
facts about the person’s environment and stage of life. When those facts
change—as after losing a spouse—the person’s characteristic adaptations
change. The elephant might be slow to change, but the elephant and
rider, working together, find new ways of getting through the day.
The third level of personality is that of the “life story.” Human beings
in every culture are fascinated by stories; we create them wherever we
can. (See those seven stars up there? They are seven sisters who once . . .
) It’s no different with our own lives. We can’t stop ourselves from
creating what McAdams describes as an “evolving story that integrates a
reconstructed past, perceived present, and anticipated future into a
coherent and vitalizing life myth.”18 Although the lowest level of
personality is mostly about the elephant, the life story is written
primarily by the rider. You create your story in consciousness as you
interpret your own behavior, and as you listen to other people’s thoughts
about you. The life story is not the work of a historian—remember that
--- END PAGE 155 ---

--- PAGE 156 ---
the rider has no access to the real causes of your behavior; it is more like
a work of historical fiction that makes plenty of references to real events
and connects them by dramatizations and interpretations that might or
might not be true to the spirit of what happened.
From this three-level perspective, it becomes clear why adversity
might be necessary for optimal human development. Most of the life
goals that people pursue at the level of “characteristic adaptations” can
be sorted—as the psychologist Robert Emmons19 has found—into four
categories: work and achievement, relationships and intimacy, religion
and spirituality, and generativity (leaving a legacy and contributing
something to society). Although it is generally good for you to pursue
goals, not all goals are equal. People who strive primarily for
achievement and wealth are, Emmons finds, less happy, on average, than
those whose strivings focus on the other three categories.20 The reason
takes us back to happiness traps and conspicuous consumption (see
chapter 5): Because human beings were shaped by evolutionary
processes to pursue success, not happiness, people enthusiastically
pursue goals that will help them win prestige in zero-sum competitions.
Success in these competitions feels good but gives no lasting pleasure,
and it raises the bar for future success.
When tragedy strikes, however, it knocks you off the treadmill and
forces a decision: Hop back on and return to business as usual, or try
something else? There is a window of time—just a few weeks or months
after the tragedy—during which you are more open to something else.
During this time, achievement goals often lose their allure, sometimes
coming to seem pointless. If you shift toward other goals—family,
religion, or helping others—you shift to inconspicuous consumption, and
the pleasures derived along the way are not fully subject to adaptation
(treadmill) effects. The pursuit of these goals therefore leads to more
happiness but less wealth (on average). Many people change their goals
in the wake of adversity; they resolve to work less, to love and play
more. If in those first few months you take action—you do something
that changes your daily life—then the changes might stick. But if you do
nothing more than make a resolution (“I must never forget my new
outlook on life”), then you will soon slip back into old habits and pursue
old goals. The rider can exert some influence at forks in the road; but the
elephant handles daily life, responding automatically to the environment.
--- END PAGE 156 ---

--- PAGE 157 ---
Adversity may be necessary for growth because it forces you to stop
speeding along the road of life, allowing you to notice the paths that
were branching off all along, and to think about where you really want to
end up.
At the third level of personality, the need for adversity is even more
obvious: You need interesting material to write a good story. McAdams
says that stories are “fundamentally about the vicissitudes of human
intention organized in time.”21 You can’t have a good life story without
vicissitudes, and if the best you can come up with is that your parents
refused to buy you a sports car for your sixteenth birthday, nobody will
want to read your memoirs. In the thousands of life stories McAdams has
gathered, several genres are associated with well-being. For example, in
the “commitment story,” the protagonist has a supportive family
background, is sensitized early in life to the sufferings of others, is
guided by a clear and compelling personal ideology, and, at some point,
transforms or redeems failures, mistakes, or crises into a positive
outcome, a process that often involves setting new goals that commit the
self to helping others. The life of the Buddha is a classic example.
In contrast, some people’s life stories show a “contamination”
sequence in which emotionally positive events go bad and everything is
spoiled. People who tell such stories are, not surprisingly, more likely to
be depressed. 22 Indeed, part of the pathology of depression is that,
while ruminating, the depressed person reworks her life narrative by
using the tools of Beck’s negative triad: I’m bad, the world is bad, and
my future is dark. Although adversity that is not overcome can create a
story of depressing bleakness, substantial adversity might be necessary
for a meaningful story.
McAdams’s ideas are profoundly important for understanding
posttraumatic growth. His three levels of personality allow us to think
about coherence among the levels. What happens when the three levels
of personality don’t match up? Imagine a woman whose basic traits are
warm and gregarious but who strives for success in a career that offers
few chances for close contacts with people, and whose life story is about
an artist forced by her parents to pursue a practical career. She is a mess
of mismatched motives and stories, and it may be that only through
adversity will she be able to make the radical changes she would need to
--- END PAGE 157 ---

--- PAGE 158 ---
achieve coherence among levels. The psychologists Ken Sheldon and
Tim Kasser have found that people who are mentally healthy and happy
have a higher degree of “vertical coherence” among their goals—that is,
higher-level (long term) goals and lower-level (immediate) goals all fit
together well so that pursuing one’s short-term goals advances the
pursuit of long-term goals.23
Trauma often shatters belief systems and robs people of their sense of
meaning. In so doing, it forces people to put the pieces back together,
and often they do so by using God or some other higher purpose as a
unifying principle.24 London and Chicago seized the opportunities
provided by their great fires to remake themselves into grander and more
coherent cities. People sometimes seize such opportunities, too,
rebuilding beautifully those parts of their lives and life stories that they
could never have torn down voluntarily. When people report having
grown after coping with adversity, they could be trying to describe a new
sense of inner coherence. This coherence might not be visible to one’s
friends, but it feels like growth, strength, maturity, and wisdom from the
inside.25 
BLESSED ARE THE SENSE MAKERS 
When bad things happen to good people, we have a problem. We know
consciously that life is unfair, but unconsciously we see the world
through the lens of reciprocity. The downfall of an evil man (in our
biased and moralistic assessment) is no puzzle: He had it coming to him.
But when the victim was virtuous, we struggle to make sense of his
tragedy. At an intuitive level, we all believe in karma, the Hindu notion
that people reap what they sow. The psychologist Mel Lerner has
demonstrated that we are so motivated to believe that people get what
they deserve and deserve what they get that we often blame the victim of
a tragedy, particularly when we can’t achieve justice by punishing a
perpetrator or compensating the victim.26
In Lerner’s experiments, the desperate need to make sense of events
can lead people to inaccurate conclusions (for example, a woman “led
on” a rapist); but, in general, the ability to make sense of tragedy and
--- END PAGE 158 ---

--- PAGE 159 ---
then find benefit in it is the key that unlocks posttraumatic growth.27
When trauma strikes, some people find the key dangling around their
necks with instructions printed on it. Others are left to fend for
themselves, and they do not fend as well. Psychologists have devoted a
great deal of effort to figuring out who benefits from trauma and who is
crushed. The answer compounds the already great unfairness of life:
Optimists are more likely to benefit than pessimists.28 Optimists are, for
the most part, people who won the cortical lottery: They have a high
happiness setpoint, they habitually look on the bright side, and they
easily find silver linings. Life has a way of making the rich get richer and
the happy get happier.
When a crisis strikes, people cope in three primary ways:29 active
coping (taking direct action to fix the problem), reappraisal (doing the
work within—getting one’s own thoughts right and looking for silver
linings), and avoidance coping (working to blunt one’s emotional
reactions by denying or avoiding the events, or by drinking, drugs, and
other distractions). People who have a basic-level trait of optimism
(McAdams’s level 1) tend to develop a coping style (McAdams’s level 2)
that alternates between active coping and reappraisal. Because optimists
expect their efforts to pay off, they go right to work fixing the problem.
But if they fail, they expect that things usually work out for the best, and
so they can’t help but look for possible benefits. When they find them,
they write a new chapter in their life story (McAdams’s level 3), a story
of continual overcoming and growth. In contrast, people who have a
relatively negative affective style (complete with more activity in the
front right cortex than the front left) live in a world filled with many
more threats and have less confidence that they can deal with them. They
develop a coping style that relies more heavily on avoidance and other
defense mechanisms. They work harder to manage their pain than to fix
their problems, so their problems often get worse. Drawing the lesson
that the world is unjust and uncontrollable, and that things often work
out for the worst, they weave this lesson into their life story where it
contaminates the narrative.
If you are a pessimist, you are probably feeling gloomy right now. But
despair not! The key to growth is not optimism per se; it is the sense
making that optimists find easy. If you can find a way to make sense of
adversity and draw constructive lessons from it, you can benefit, too.
--- END PAGE 159 ---

--- PAGE 160 ---
And you can learn to become a sense maker by reading Jamie
Pennebaker’s Opening Up. 30 Pennebaker began his research by studying
the relationship between trauma, such as childhood sexual abuse, and
later health problems. Trauma and stress are usually bad for people, and
Pennebaker thought that self-disclosure—talking with friends or
therapists—might help the body at the same time that it helps the mind.
One of his early hypotheses was that traumas that carry more shame,
such as being raped (as opposed to a non-sexual assault) or losing a
spouse to suicide (rather than to a car accident), would produce more
illness because people are less likely to talk about such events with
others. But the nature of the trauma turned out to be almost irrelevant.
What mattered was what people did afterward: Those who talked with
their friends or with a support group were largely spared the health-
damaging effects of trauma.
Once Pennebaker had found a correlation between disclosure and
health, he took the next step in the scientific process and tried to create 
health benefits by getting people to disclose their secrets. Pennebaker
asked people to write about “the most upsetting or traumatic experience
of your entire life,” preferably one they had not talked about with others
in great detail. He gave them plenty of blank paper and asked them to
keep writing for fifteen minutes, on four consecutive days. Subjects in a
control group were asked to write about some other topic (for example,
their houses, a typical work day) for the same amount of time. In each of
his studies, Pennebaker got his subjects’ permission to obtain their
medical records at some point in the future. Then he waited a year and
observed how often people in the two groups got sick. The people who
wrote about traumas went to the doctor or the hospital fewer times in the
following year. I did not believe this result when I first heard it. How on
earth could one hour of writing stave off the flu six months later?
Pennebaker’s results seemed to support an old-fashioned Freudian notion
of catharsis: People who express their emotions, “get it off their chests”
or “let off steam,” are healthier. Having once reviewed the literature on
the catharsis hypothesis, I knew that there was no evidence for it.31
Letting off steam makes people angrier, not calmer.
Pennebaker discovered that it’s not about steam; it’s about sense
making. The people in his studies who used their writing time to vent got
no benefit. The people who showed deep insight into the causes and
--- END PAGE 160 ---

--- PAGE 161 ---
consequences of the event on their first day of writing got no benefit,
either: They had already made sense of things. It was the people who
made progress across the four days, who showed increasing insight; they
were the ones whose health improved over the next year. In later studies,
Pennebaker asked people to dance or sing to express their emotions, but
these emotionally expressive activities gave no health benefit.32 You
have to use words, and the words have to help you create a meaningful
story. If you can write such a story you can reap the benefits of
reappraisal (one of the two healthy coping styles) even years after an
event. You can close a chapter of your life that was still open, still
affecting your thoughts and preventing you from moving on with the
larger narrative.
Anyone, therefore, can benefit from adversity, although a pessimist
will have to take some extra steps, some conscious, rider-initiated steps,
to guide the elephant gently in the right direction. The first step is to do
what you can, before adversity strikes, to change your cognitive style. If
you are a pessimist, consider meditation, cognitive therapy, or even
Prozac. All three will make you less subject to negative rumination,
more able to guide your thoughts in a positive direction, and therefore
more able to withstand future adversity, find meaning in it, and grow
from it. The second step is to cherish and build your social support
network. Having one or two good attachment relationships helps adults
as well as children (and rhesus monkeys) to face threats. Trusted friends
who are good listeners can be a great aid to making sense and finding
meaning. Third, religious faith and practice can aid growth, both by
directly fostering sense making (religions provide stories and interpretive
schemes for losses and crises) and by increasing social support (religious
people have relationships through their religious communities, and many
have a relationship with God). A portion of the benefits of religiosity33
could also be a result of the confession and disclosure of inner turmoil,
either to God or to a religious authority that many religions encourage.
And finally, no matter how well or poorly prepared you are when
trouble strikes, at some point in the months afterwards, pull out a piece
of paper and start writing. Pennebaker suggests34 that you write
continuously for fifteen minutes a day, for several days. Don’t edit or
censor yourself; don’t worry about grammar or sentence structure; just
keep writing. Write about what happened, how you feel about it, and why
--- END PAGE 161 ---

--- PAGE 162 ---
you feel that way. If you hate to write, you can talk into a tape recorder.
The crucial thing is to get your thoughts and feelings out without
imposing any order on them—but in such a way that, after a few days,
some order is likely to emerge on its own. Before you conclude your last
session, be sure you have done your best to answer these two questions:
Why did this happen? What good might I derive from it? 
FOR EVERYTHING THERE IS A SEASON 
If the adversity hypothesis is true, and if the mechanism of benefit has to
do with sense making and getting those three levels of personality to
cohere, then there should be times in life when adversity will be more or
less beneficial. Perhaps the strong version of the hypothesis is true
during only a part of the life course?
There are many reasons for thinking that children are particularly
vulnerable to adversity. Genes guide brain development throughout
childhood, but that development is also affected by environmental
context, and one of the most important contextual factors is the overall
level of safety versus threat. Good parenting can help tune up the
attachment system to make a child more adventurous; yet, even beyond
such effects, if a child’s environment feels safe and controllable, the
child will (on average) develop a more positive affective style, and will
be less anxious as an adult.35 But if the environment offers daily
uncontrollable threats (from predators, bullies, or random violence), the
child’s brain will be altered, set to be less trusting and more vigilant.36
Given that most people in modern Western nations live in safe worlds
where optimism and approach motivations generally pay off, and given
that most people in psychotherapy need loosening up, not tightening up,
it is probably best for children to develop the most positive affective
style, or the highest set range (S from chapter 5), that their genes will
allow. Major adversity is unlikely to have many—or perhaps any—
beneficial effects for children. (On the other hand, children are
amazingly resilient and are not as easily damaged by one-time events,
even by sexual abuse, as most people think.37 Chronic conditions are
much more important.) Of course, children need limits to learn self-
--- END PAGE 162 ---

--- PAGE 163 ---
control, and they need plenty of failure to learn that success takes hard
work and persistence. Children should be protected, but not spoiled.
Things might be different for teenagers. Younger children know some
stories about themselves, but the active and chronic striving to integrate
one’s past, present, and future into a coherent narrative begins only in the
mid to late teens.38 This claim is supported by a curious fact about auto-
biographical memory called the “memory bump.” When people older
than thirty are asked to remember the most important or vivid events of
their lives, they are disproportionately likely to recall events that
occurred between the ages of fifteen and twenty-five.39 This is the age
when a person’s life blooms—first love, college and intellectual growth,
living and perhaps traveling independently—and it is the time when
young people (at least in Western countries) make many of the choices
that will define their lives. If there is a special period for identity
formation, a time when life events are going to have the biggest
influence on the rest of the life-story, this is it. So adversity, especially if
overcome fully, is probably most beneficial in the late teens and early
twenties.
We can’t ethically conduct experiments that induce trauma at different
ages, but in a way life has performed these experiments for us. The
major events of the twentieth century—the Great Depression, World War
II—hit people at different ages, and the sociologist Glen Elder40 has
produced elegant analyses of longitudinal data (collected from the same
people over many decades) to find out why some thrived and others
crumbled after these adversities hit. Elder once summarized his findings
this way: “There is a storyline across all the work I’ve done. Events do
not have meaning in themselves. Those meanings are derived from the
interactions between people, groups, and the experience itself. Kids who
went through very difficult circumstances usually came out rather
well.”41 Elder found that a lot hinged on the family and the person’s
degree of social integration: Children as well as adults who weathered
crises while embedded within strong social groups and networks fared
much better; they were more likely to come out stronger and mentally
healthier than were those who faced adversity without such social
support. Social networks didn’t just reduce suffering, they offered
avenues for finding meaning and purpose (as Durkheim concluded from
--- END PAGE 163 ---

--- PAGE 164 ---
his studies of suicide).42 For example, the widely shared adversity of the
Great Depression offered many young people the chance to make a real
contribution to their families by finding a job that brought in a few
dollars a week. The need for people to pull together within their nations
to fight World War II appears to have made those who lived through it
more responsible and civic minded, at least in the United States, even if
they played no direct role in the war effort.43
There is, however, a time limit on first adversity. Elder says that life
starts to “crystallize” by the late twenties. Even young men who had not
been doing well before serving in World War II often turned their lives
around afterward, but people who faced their first real life test after the
age of thirty (for example, combat in that war, or financial ruin in the
Great Depression) were less resilient and less likely to grow from their
experiences. So adversity may be most beneficial for people in their late
teens and into their twenties.
Elder’s work is full of reminders that the action is in the interactions—
that is, the ways that one’s unique personality interacts with details about
an event and its social context to produce a particular and often
unpredictable outcome. In the area of research known as “life-span
development,” 44 there are few simple rules in the form of “X causes Y.”
Nobody, therefore, can propose an ideal life course with carefully
scheduled adversity that would be beneficial for everyone. We can say,
however, that for many people, particularly those who overcame
adversity in their twenties, adversity made them stronger, better, and
even happier than they would have been without it. 
ERROR AND WISDOM 
I expect that when I have children, I’ll be no different from other parents
in wanting to edit their forehead writing and remove all adversity. Even
if I could be convinced that a trauma experienced at the age of twenty-
four was going to teach my daughter important lessons and make her a
better person, I’d think: Well, why can’t I just teach her those lessons
directly? Isn’t there some way she can reap the benefits without the
--- END PAGE 164 ---

--- PAGE 165 ---
costs? But a common piece of worldly wisdom is that life’s most
important lessons cannot be taught directly. Marcel Proust said:
We do not receive wisdom, we must discover it for ourselves,
after a journey through the wilderness which no one else can
make for us, which no one can spare us, for our wisdom is the
point of view from which we come at last to regard the world.45
Recent research on wisdom proves Proust correct. Knowledge comes
in two major forms: explicit and tacit. Explicit knowledge is all the facts
you know and can consciously report, independent of context. Wherever
I am, I know that the capital of Bulgaria is Sofia. Explicit knowledge is
taught directly in schools. The rider gathers it up and files it away, ready
for use in later reasoning. But wisdom is based—according to Robert
Sternberg,46 a leading wisdom researcher—on “tacit knowledge.” Tacit
knowledge is procedural (it’s “knowing how” rather than “knowing
that”), it is acquired without direct help from others, and it is related to
goals that a person values. Tacit knowledge resides in the elephant. It’s
the skills that the elephant acquires, gradually, from life experience. It
depends on context: There is no universal set of best practices for ending
a romantic relationship, consoling a friend, or resolving a moral
disagreement.
Wisdom, says Sternberg, is the tacit knowledge that lets a person
balance two sets of things. First, wise people are able to balance their
own needs, the needs of others, and the needs of people or things beyond
the immediate interaction (e.g., institutions, the environment, or people
who may be adversely affected later on). Ignorant people see everything
in black and white—they rely heavily on the myth of pure evil—and they
are strongly influenced by their own self-interest. The wise are able to
see things from others’ points of view, appreciate shades of gray, and
then choose or advise a course of action that works out best for everyone
in the long run. Second, wise people are able to balance three responses
to situations: adaptation (changing the self to fit the environment),
shaping (changing the environment), and selection (choosing to move to
a new environment). This second balance corresponds roughly to the
famous “serenity prayer”: “God, grant me the serenity to accept the
things I cannot change, courage to change the things I can, and wisdom
to know the difference.”47 If you already know this prayer, your rider
--- END PAGE 165 ---

--- PAGE 166 ---
knows it (explicitly). If you live this prayer, your elephant knows it, too
(tacitly), and you are wise.
Sternberg’s ideas show why parents can’t teach their children wisdom
directly. The best they can do is provide a range of life experiences that
will help their children acquire tacit knowledge in a variety of life
domains. Parents can also model wisdom in their own lives and gently
encourage children to think about situations, look at other viewpoints,
and achieve balance in challenging times. Shelter your children when
young, but if the sheltering goes on through the child’s teens and
twenties, it may keep out wisdom and growth as well as pain. Suffering
often makes people more compassionate, helping them find balance
between self and others. Suffering often leads to active coping
(Sternberg’s shaping), reappraisal coping (Sternberg’s adaptation), or
changes in plans and directions (Sternberg’s selection). Posttraumatic
growth usually involves, therefore, the growth of wisdom.
The strong version of the adversity hypothesis might be true, but only
if we add caveats: For adversity to be maximally beneficial, it should
happen at the right time (young adulthood), to the right people (those
with the social and psychological resources to rise to challenges and find
benefits), and to the right degree (not so severe as to cause PTSD). Each
life course is so unpredictable that we can never know whether a
particular setback will be beneficial to a particular person in the long run.
But perhaps we do know enough to allow some editing of a child’s
forehead writing: Go ahead and erase some of those early traumas, but
think twice, or await future research, before erasing the rest.
--- END PAGE 166 ---

--- PAGE 167 ---
8 
The Felicity of Virtue 
It is impossible to live the pleasant life without also living sensibly,
nobly and justly, and it is impossible to live sensibly, nobly and justly
without living pleasantly.
—EPICURUS1 
Set your heart on doing good. Do it over and over again, and you will
be filled with joy. A fool is happy until his mischief turns against him.
And a good man may suffer until his goodness flowers.
—BUDDHA2 
W HEN SAGES AND ELDERS urge virtue on the young, they
sometimes sound like snake-oil salesmen. The wisdom literature of many
cultures essentially says, “Gather round, I have a tonic that will make
you happy, healthy, wealthy, and wise! It will get you into heaven, and
bring you joy on earth along the way! Just be virtuous!” Young people
are extremely good, though, at rolling their eyes and shutting their ears.
Their interests and desires are often at odds with those of adults; they
quickly find ways to pursue their goals and get themselves into trouble,
which often becomes character-building adventure. Huck Finn runs away
from his foster mother to raft down the Mississippi with an escaped
slave; the young Buddha leaves his father’s palace to begin his spiritual
quest in the forest; Luke Skywalker leaves his home planet to join the
galactic rebellion. All three set off on epic journeys that make each into
an adult, complete with a set of new virtues. These hard-won virtues are
especially admirable to us as readers because they reveal a depth and
authenticity of character that we don’t see in the obedient kid who
simply accepts the virtues he was raised with.
--- END PAGE 167 ---

--- PAGE 168 ---
In this light, Ben Franklin is supremely admirable. Born in Boston in
1706, he was apprenticed at the age of twelve to his older brother James,
who owned a printing shop. After many disputes with (and beatings
from) his brother, he yearned for freedom, but James would not release
him from the legal contract of his apprenticeship. So at the age of
seventeen, Ben broke the law and skipped town. He got on a boat to New
York and, failing to find work there, kept on going to Philadelphia. There
he found work as an apprentice printer and, through skill and diligence,
eventually opened his own print shop and published his own newspaper.
He went on to spectacular success in business ( Poor Richard’s Almanack 
—a compendium of sayings and maxims—was a hit in its day); in
science (he proved that lightning is electricity, then tamed it by inventing
the lightning rod); in politics (he held too many offices to name); and in
diplomacy (he persuaded France to join the American colonies’ war
against Britain, though France had little to gain from the enterprise). He
lived to eighty-four and enjoyed the ride. He took pride in his scientific
discoveries and civic creations; he basked in the love and esteem of
France as well as of America; and even as an old man he relished the
attentions of women.
What was his secret? Virtue. Not the sort of uptight, pleasure-hating
Puritanism that some people now associate with that word, but a broader
kind of virtue that goes back to ancient Greece. The Greek word aretē 
meant excellence, virtue, or goodness, especially of a functional sort.
The aretē of a knife is to cut well; the aretē of an eye is to see well; the 
aretē of a person is . . . well, that’s one of the oldest questions of
philosophy: What is the true nature, function, or goal of a person,
relative to which we can say that he or she is living well or badly? Thus
in saying that well being or happiness (eudaimonia) is “an activity of
soul in conformity with excellence or virtue,”3 Aristotle wasn’t saying
that happiness comes from giving to the poor and suppressing your
sexuality. He was saying that a good life is one where you develop your
strengths, realize your potential, and become what it is in your nature to
become. (Aristotle believed that all things in the universe had a telos, or
purpose toward which they aimed, even though he did not believe that
the gods had designed all things.)
One of Franklin’s many gifts was his extraordinary ability to see
potential and then realize it. He saw the potential of paved and lighted
--- END PAGE 168 ---

--- PAGE 169 ---
streets, volunteer fire departments, and public libraries, and he pushed to
make them all appear in Philadelphia. He saw the potential of the young
American republic and played many roles in creating it. He also saw the
potential in himself for improving his ways, and he set out to do so. In
his late twenties, as a young printer and entrepreneur, he embarked on
what he called a “bold and arduous project of arriving at moral
perfection.”4 He picked a few virtues he wanted to cultivate, and he tried
to live accordingly. He discovered immediately the limitations of the
rider:
While my care was employed in guarding against one fault, I was
often surprised by another; habit took the advantage of
inattention; inclination was sometimes too strong for reason. I
concluded, at length, that the mere speculative conviction that it
was our interest to be completely virtuous was not sufficient to
prevent our slipping, and that the contrary habits must be broken,
and good ones acquired and established, before we can have any
dependence on a steady, uniform rectitude of conduct.5
Franklin was a brilliant intuitive psychologist. He realized that the
rider can be successful only to the extent that it trains the elephant
(though he did not use those terms), so he devised a training regimen. He
wrote out a list of thirteen virtues, each linked to specific behaviors that
he should or should not do. (For example: “Temperance: Eat not to
dullness”; “Frugality: Make no expense but to do good to others or
yourself”; “Chastity: Rarely use venery but for health or offspring”). He
then printed a table made up of seven columns (one for each day of the
week) and thirteen rows (one for each virtue), and he put a black spot in
the appropriate square each time he failed to live a whole day in
accordance with a particular virtue. He concentrated on only one virtue a
week, hoping to keep its row clear of spots while paying no special
attention to the other virtues, though he filled in their rows whenever
violations occurred. Over thirteen weeks, he worked through the whole
table. Then he repeated the process, finding that with repetition the table
got less and less spotty. Franklin wrote in his autobiography that, though
he fell far short of perfection: “I was, by the endeavor, a better and a
happier man than I otherwise should have been if I had not attempted it.”
He went on: “My posterity should be informed that to this little artifice,
--- END PAGE 169 ---

--- PAGE 170 ---
with the blessing of God, their ancestor ow’d the constant felicity of his
life, down to his 79th year, in which this is written.”6
We can’t know whether, without his virtue table, Franklin would have
been any less happy or successful, but we can search for other evidence
to test his main psychological claim. This claim, which I will call the
“virtue hypothesis,” is the same claim made by Epicurus and the Buddha
in the epigraphs that open this chapter: Cultivating virtue will make you
happy. There are plenty of reasons to doubt the virtue hypothesis.
Franklin himself admitted that he failed utterly to develop the virtue of
humility, yet he reaped great social gains by learning to fake it. Perhaps
the virtue hypothesis will turn out to be true only in a cynical,
Machiavellian way: Cultivating the appearance of virtue will make you
successful, and therefore happy, regardless of your true character. 
THE VIRTUES OF THE ANCIENTS 
Ideas have pedigrees, ideas have baggage. When we Westerners think
about morality, we use concepts that are thousands of years old, but that
took a turn in their development in the last two hundred years. We don’t
realize that our approach to morality is odd from the perspective of other
cultures, or that it is based on a particular set of psychological
assumptions—a set that now appears to be wrong.
Every culture is concerned about the moral development of its
children, and in every culture that left us more than a few pages of
writing, we find texts that reveal its approach to morality. Specific rules
and prohibitions vary, but the broad outlines of these approaches have a
lot in common. Most cultures wrote about virtues that should be
cultivated, and many of those virtues were and still are valued across
most cultures7 (for example, honesty, justice, courage, benevolence, self-
restraint, and respect for authority). Most approaches then specified
actions that were good and bad with respect to those virtues. Most
approaches were practical, striving to inculcate virtues that would benefit
the person who cultivates them.
One of the oldest works of direct moral instruction is the Teaching of
Amenemope, an Egyptian text thought to have been written around 1300
--- END PAGE 170 ---

--- PAGE 171 ---
BCE. It begins by describing itself as “instruction about life” and as a
“guide for well-being,” promising that whoever commits its lessons to
heart will “discover . . . a treasure house of life, and [his] body will
flourish upon earth.” Amenemope then offers thirty chapters of advice
about how to treat other people, develop self-restraint, and find success
and contentment in the process. For example, after repeatedly urging
honesty, particularly in respecting the boundary markers of other
farmers, the text says: 
Plow your fields, and you’ll find what you need,
You’ll receive bread from your threshing floor.
Better is a bushel given you by God
Than five thousand through wrongdoing. . . .
Better is bread with a happy heart
Than wealth with vexation.8 
If this last line sounds familiar to you, it is because the biblical book
of Proverbs borrowed a lot from Amenemope. For example: “Better is a
little with the fear of the Lord than great treasure and trouble with it”
(PROVERBS 15:16).
An additional common feature is that these ancient texts rely heavily
on maxims and role models rather than proofs and logic. Maxims are
carefully phrased to produce a flash of insight and approval. Role models
are presented to elicit admiration and awe. When moral instruction
triggers emotions, it speaks to the elephant as well as the rider. The
wisdom of Confucius and Buddha, for example, comes down to us as
lists of aphorisms so timeless and evocative that people still read them
today for pleasure and guidance, refer to them as “worldwide laws of
life,”9 and write books about their scientific validity.
A third feature of many ancient texts is that they emphasize practice
and habit rather than factual knowledge. Confucius compared moral
development to learning how to play music;10 both require the study of
texts, observance of role models, and many years of practice to develop
“virtuosity.” Aristotle used a similar metaphor:
Men become builders by building houses, and harpists by playing
the harp. Similarly, we grow just by the practice of just actions,
--- END PAGE 171 ---

--- PAGE 172 ---
self-controlled by exercising our self-control, and courageous by
performing acts of courage.11
Buddha offered his followers the “Eightfold Noble Path,” a set of
activities that will, with practice, create an ethical person (by right
speech, right action, right livelihood), and a mentally disciplined person
(by right effort, right mindfulness, right concentration).
In all these ways, the ancients reveal a sophisticated understanding of
moral psychology, similar to Franklin’s. They all knew that virtue resides
in a well-trained elephant. They all knew that training takes daily
practice and a great deal of repetition. The rider must take part in the
training, but if moral instruction imparts only explicit knowledge (facts
that the rider can state), it will have no effect on the elephant, and
therefore little effect on behavior. Moral education must also impart tacit 
knowledge—skills of social perception and social emotion so finely
tuned that one automatically feels the right thing in each situation, knows 
the right thing to do, and then wants to do it. Morality, for the ancients,
was a kind of practical wisdom. 
HOW THE WEST WAS LOST 
The Western approach to morality got off to a great start; as in other
ancient cultures, it focused on virtues. The Old Testament, the New
Testament, Homer, and Aesop all show that our founding cultures relied
heavily on proverbs, maxims, fables, and role models to illustrate and
teach the virtues. Plato’s Republic and Aristotle’s Nichomachean Ethics, 
two of the greatest works of Greek philosophy, are essentially treatises
on the virtues and their cultivation. Even the Epicureans, who thought
pleasure was the goal of life, believed that people needed virtues to
cultivate pleasures.
Yet contained in these early triumphs of Greek philosophy are the
seeds of later failure. First, the Greek mind that gave us moral inquiry
also gave us the beginnings of scientific inquiry, the aim of which is to
search for the smallest set of laws that can explain the enormous variety
of events in the world. Science values parsimony, but virtue theories,
with their long lists of virtues, were never parsimonious. How much
--- END PAGE 172 ---

--- PAGE 173 ---
more satisfying it would be to the scientific mind to have one virtue,
principle, or rule from which all others could be derived? Second, the
widespread philosophical worship of reason made many philosophers
uncomfortable with locating virtue in habits and feelings. Although Plato
located most of virtue in the rationality of his charioteer, even he had to
concede that virtue required the right passions; he therefore came up
with that complicated metaphor in which one of two horses contains
some virtue, but the other has none. For Plato and many later thinkers,
rationality was a gift from the gods, a tool to control our animal lusts.
Rationality had to be in charge.
These two seeds—the quest for parsimony and the worship of reason
—lay dormant in the centuries after the fall of Rome, but they sprouted
and bloomed in the European Enlightenment of the eighteenth century.
As advances in technology and commerce began to create a new world,
some people began to seek rationally justified social and political
arrangements. The French philosopher René Descartes, writing in the
seventeenth century, was quite happy to rest his ethical system on the
benevolence of God, but Enlightenment thinkers sought a foundation for
ethics that did not depend on divine revelation or on God’s enforcement.
It was as though somebody had offered a prize, like the prizes that lured
early aviators to undertake daring journeys: Ten thousand pounds
sterling to the first philosopher who can come up with a single moral
rule, to be applied through the power of reason, that can cleanly separate
good from bad.
Had there been such a prize, it would have gone to the German
philosopher Immanuel Kant.12 Like Plato, Kant believed that human
beings have a dual nature: part animal and part rational. The animal part
of us follows the laws of nature, just as does a falling rock or a lion
killing its prey. There is no morality in nature; there is only causality. But
the rational part of us, Kant said, can follow a different kind of law: It
can respect rules of conduct, and so people (but not lions) can be judged
morally for the degree to which they respect the right rules. What might
those rules be? Here Kant devised the cleverest trick in all moral
philosophy. He reasoned that for moral rules to be laws, they had to be
universally applicable. If gravity worked differently for men and women,
or for Italians and Egyptians, we could not speak of it as a law. But
rather than searching for rules to which all people would in fact agree (a
--- END PAGE 173 ---

--- PAGE 174 ---
difficult task, likely to produce only a few bland generalities), Kant
turned the problem around and said that people should think about
whether the rules guiding their own actions could reasonably be 
proposed as universal laws. If you are planning to break a promise that
has become inconvenient, can you really propose a universal rule that
states people ought to break promises that have become inconvenient?
Endorsing such a rule would render all promises meaningless. Nor could
you consistently will that people cheat, lie, steal, or in any other way
deprive other people of their rights or their property, for such evils would
surely come back to visit you. This simple test, which Kant called the
“categorical imperative,” was extraordinarily powerful. It offered to
make ethics a branch of applied logic, thereby giving it the sort of
certainty that secular ethics, without recourse to a sacred book, had
always found elusive.
Over the following decades, the English philosopher Jeremy Bentham
challenged Kant for the (hypothetical) prize. When Bentham became a
lawyer in 1767, he was appalled by the complexities and inefficiencies of
English law. He set out, with typical enlightenment boldness, to re-
conceive the entire legal and legislative system by stating clear goals and
proposing the most rational means of achieving those goals. The ultimate
goal of all legislation, he concluded, was the good of the people; and the
more good, the better. Bentham was the father of utilitarianism, the
doctrine that in all decisionmaking (legal and personal), our goal should
be the maximum total benefit (utility), but who gets the benefit is of little
concern.13
The argument between Kant and Bentham has continued ever since.
Descendants of Kant (known as “deontologists” from the Greek deon, 
obligation) try to elaborate the duties and obligations that ethical people
must respect, even when their actions lead to bad outcomes (for example,
you must never kill an innocent person, even if doing so will save a
hundred lives). Descendants of Bentham (known as “consequentialists”
because they evaluate actions only by their consequences) try to work
out the rules and policies that will bring about the greatest good, even
when doing so will sometimes violate other ethical principles (go ahead
and kill the one to save the hundred, they say, unless it will set a bad
example that leads to later problems).
--- END PAGE 174 ---

--- PAGE 175 ---
Despite their many differences, however, the two camps agree in
important ways. They both believe in parsimony: Decisions should be
based ultimately on one principle only, be it the categorical imperative or
the maximization of utility. They both insist that only the rider can make
such decisions because moral decision making requires logical reasoning
and sometimes even mathematical calculation. They both distrust
intuitions and gut feelings, which they see as obstacles to good
reasoning. And they both shun the particular in favor of the abstract: You
don’t need a rich, thick description of the people involved, or of their
beliefs and cultural traditions. You just need a few facts and a ranked list
of their likes and dislikes (if you are a utilitarian). It doesn’t matter what
country or historical era you are in; it doesn’t matter whether the people
involved are your friends, your enemies, or complete strangers. The
moral law, like a law of physics, works the same for all people at all
times.
These two philosophical approaches have made enormous
contributions to legal and political theory and practice; indeed, they
helped create societies that respect individual rights (Kant) while still
working efficiently for the good of the people (Bentham). But these ideas
have also permeated Western culture more generally, where they have
had some unintended consequences. The philosopher Edmund
Pincoffs14 has argued that consequentialists and deontologists worked
together to convince Westerners in the twentieth century that morality is
the study of moral quandaries and dilemmas. Where the Greeks focused
on the character of a person and asked what kind of person we should
each aim to become, modern ethics focuses on actions, asking when a
particular action is right or wrong. Philosophers wrestle with life-and-
death dilemmas: Kill one to save five? Allow aborted fetuses to be used
as a source of stem cells? Remove the feeding tube from a woman who
has been unconscious for fifteen years? Nonphilosophers wrestle with
smaller quandaries: Pay my taxes when others are cheating? Turn in a
wallet full of money that appears to belong to a drug dealer? Tell my
spouse about a sexual indiscretion?
This turn from character ethics to quandary ethics has turned moral
education away from virtues and toward moral reasoning. If morality is
about dilemmas, then moral education is training in problem solving.
Children must be taught how to think about moral problems, especially
--- END PAGE 175 ---

--- PAGE 176 ---
how to overcome their natural egoism and take into their calculations the
needs of others. As the United States became more ethnically diverse in
the 1970s and 1980s, and also more averse to authoritarian methods of
education, the idea of teaching specific moral facts and values went out
of fashion. Instead, the rationalist legacy of quandary ethics gave us
teachers and many parents who would enthusiastically endorse this line,
from a recent child-rearing handbook: “My approach does not teach
children what and what not to do and why, but rather, it teaches them
how to think so they can decide for themselves what and what not to do,
and why.”15
I believe that this turn from character to quandary was a profound
mistake, for two reasons. First, it weakens morality and limits its scope.
Where the ancients saw virtue and character at work in everything a
person does, our modern conception confines morality to a set of
situations that arise for each person only a few times in any given week:
tradeoffs between self-interest and the interests of others. In our thin and
restricted modern conception, a moral person is one who gives to charity,
helps others, plays by the rules, and in general does not put her own self-
interest too far ahead of others’. Most of the activities and decisions of
life are therefore insulated from moral concern. When morality is
reduced to the opposite of self-interest, however, the virtue hypothesis
becomes paradoxical: In modern terms, the virtue hypothesis says that
acting against your self-interest is in your self-interest. It’s hard to
convince people that this is true, and it can’t possibly be true in all
situations. In his time, Ben Franklin had a much easier task when he
extolled the virtue hypothesis. Like the ancients, he had a thicker, richer
notion of virtues as a garden of excellences that a person cultivates to
become more effective and appealing to others. Seen in this way, virtue
is, obviously, its own reward. Franklin’s example implicitly posed this
question for his contemporaries and his descendants: Are you willing to
work now for your own later well-being, or are you so lazy and short-
sighted that you won’t make the effort?
The second problem with the turn to moral reasoning is that it relies
on bad psychology. Many moral education efforts since the 1970s take
the rider off of the elephant and train him to solve problems on his own.
After being exposed to hours of case studies, classroom discussions
about moral dilemmas, and videos about people who faced dilemmas and
--- END PAGE 176 ---

--- PAGE 177 ---
made the right choices, the child learns how (not what) to think. Then
class ends, the rider gets back on the elephant, and nothing changes at
recess. Trying to make children behave ethically by teaching them to
reason well is like trying to make a dog happy by wagging its tail. It gets
causality backwards.
During my first year of graduate school at the University of
Pennsylvania, I discovered the weakness of moral reasoning in myself. I
read a wonderful book— Practical Ethics —by the Princeton philosopher
Peter Singer.16 Singer, a humane consequentialist, shows how we can
apply a consistent concern for the welfare of others to resolve many
ethical problems of daily life. Singer’s approach to the ethics of killing
animals changed forever my thinking about my food choices. Singer
proposes and justifies a few guiding principles: First, it is wrong to cause
pain and suffering to any sentient creature, therefore current factory
farming methods are unethical. Second, it is wrong to take the life of a
sentient being that has some sense of identity and attachments, therefore
killing animals with large brains and highly developed social lives (such
as other primates and most other mammals) is wrong, even if they could
be raised in an environment they enjoyed and were then killed painlessly.
Singer’s clear and compelling arguments convinced me on the spot, and
since that day I have been morally opposed to all forms of factory
farming. Morally opposed, but not behaviorally opposed. I love the taste
of meat, and the only thing that changed in the first six months after
reading Singer is that I thought about my hypocrisy each time I ordered a
hamburger.
But then, during my second year of graduate school, I began to study
the emotion of disgust, and I worked with Paul Rozin, one of the
foremost authorities on the psychology of eating. Rozin and I were trying
to find video clips to elicit disgust in the experiments we were planning,
and we met one morning with a research assistant who showed us some
videos he had found. One of them was Faces of Death, a compilation of
real and fake video footage of people being killed. (These scenes were so
disturbing that we could not ethically use them.) Along with the
videotaped suicides and executions, there was a long sequence shot
inside a slaughterhouse. I watched in horror as cows, moving down a
dripping disassembly line, were bludgeoned, hooked, and sliced up.
Afterwards, Rozin and I went to lunch to talk about the project. We both
--- END PAGE 177 ---

--- PAGE 178 ---
ordered vegetarian meals. For days afterwards, the sight of red meat
made me queasy. My visceral feelings now matched the beliefs Singer
had given me. The elephant now agreed with the rider, and I became a
vegetarian. For about three weeks. Gradually, as the disgust faded, fish
and chicken reentered my diet. Then red meat did, too, although even
now, eighteen years later, I still eat less red meat and choose non-factory-
farmed meats when they are available.
That experience taught me an important lesson. I think of myself as a
fairly rational person. I found Singer’s arguments persuasive. But, to
paraphrase Medea’s lament (from chapter 1): I saw the right way and
approved it, but followed the wrong, until an emotion came along to
provide some force. 
THE VIRTUES OF POSITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 
The cry that we’ve lost our way is heard from some quarter in every
country and era, but it has been particularly loud in the United States
since the social turmoil of the 1960s and the economic malaise and rising
crime of the 1970s. Political conservatives, particularly those who have
strong religious beliefs, bridled at the “value-free” approach to moral
education and the “empowering” of children to think for themselves
instead of teaching them facts and values to think about. In the 1980s,
these conservatives challenged the education establishment by pushing
for character education programs in schools, and by home-schooling
their own children.
Also in the 1980s, several philosophers helped to revive virtue
theories. Most notably, Alasdair MacIntyre argued in After Virtue 17 that
the “enlightenment project” of creating a universal, context-free morality
was doomed from the beginning. Cultures that have shared values and
rich traditions invariably generate a framework in which people can
value and evaluate each other. One can easily talk about the virtues of a
priest, a soldier, a mother, or a merchant in the context of fourth-century
BCE Athens. Strip away all identity and context, however, and there is
little to grab on to. How much can you say about the virtues of a
generalized Homo sapiens, floating in space with no particular sex, age,
occupation, or culture? The modern requirement that ethics ignore
--- END PAGE 178 ---

--- PAGE 179 ---
particularity is what gave us our weaker morality—applicable
everywhere, but encompassing nowhere. MacIntyre says that the loss of
a language of virtue, grounded in a particular tradition, makes it difficult
for us to find meaning, coherence, and purpose in life.18
In recent years, even psychology has become involved. In 1998,
Martin Seligman founded positive psychology when he asserted that
psychology had lost its way. Psychology had become obsessed with
pathology and the dark side of human nature, blind to all that was good
and noble in people. Seligman noted that psychologists had created an
enormous manual, known as the “DSM” (the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders ), to diagnose every possible mental illness
and behavioral annoyance, but psychology didn’t even have a language
with which to talk about the upper reaches of human health, talent, and
possibility. When Seligman launched positive psychology, one of his
first goals was to create a diagnostic manual for the strengths and virtues.
He and another psychologist, Chris Peterson of the University of
Michigan, set out to construct a list of the strengths and virtues, one that
might be valid for any human culture. I argued with them that the list did 
not have to be valid for all cultures to be useful; they should focus just
on large-scale industrial societies. Several anthropologists told them that
a universal list could never be created. Fortunately, however, they
persevered.
As a first step, Peterson and Seligman surveyed every list of virtues
they could find, from the holy books of major religions down to the Boy
Scout Oath (“trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly . . . ”). They made large
tables of virtues and tried to see which ones were common across lists.
Although no specific virtue made every list, six broad virtues, or families
of related virtues, appeared on nearly all lists: wisdom, courage,
humanity, justice, temperance, and transcendence (the ability to forge
connections to something larger than the self). These virtues are widely
endorsed because they are abstract: There are many ways to be wise, or
courageous, or humane, and it is impossible to find a human culture that
rejects all forms of any of these virtues. (Can we even imagine a culture
in which parents hope that their children will grow up to be foolish,
cowardly, and cruel?) But the real value of the list of six is that it serves
as an organizing framework for more specific strengths of character. 
Peterson and Seligman define character strengths as specific ways of
--- END PAGE 179 ---

--- PAGE 180 ---
displaying, practicing, and cultivating the virtues. Several paths lead to
each virtue. People, as well as cultures, vary in the degree to which they
value each path. This is the real power of the classification: It points to
specific means of growth toward widely valued ends without insisting
that any one way is mandatory for all people at all times. The
classification is a tool for diagnosing people’s diverse strengths and for
helping them find ways to cultivate excellence.
Peterson and Seligman suggest that there are twenty-four principle
character strengths, each leading to one of the six higher-level virtues.19
You can diagnose yourself by looking at the list below or by taking the
strengths test (at www.authentichappiness.org).
1. Wisdom:
• Curiosity
• Love of learning
• Judgment
• Ingenuity
• Emotional intelligence
• Perspective
2. Courage:
• Valor
• Perseverance
• Integrity
3. Humanity:
• Kindness
• Loving
4. Justice:
• Citizenship
• Fairness
• Leadership
5. Temperance:
• Self-control
• Prudence
• Humility
--- END PAGE 180 ---

--- PAGE 181 ---
6. Transcendence:
• Appreciation of beauty and excellence
• Gratitude
• Hope
• Spirituality
• Forgiveness
• Humor
• Zest
Odds are that you don’t have much trouble with the list of six virtue
families, but you do have objections to the longer list of strengths. Why
is humor a means to transcendence? Why is leadership on the list, but not
the virtues of followers and subordinates—duty, respect, and obedience?
Please, go ahead and argue. The genius of Peterson and Seligman’s
classification is to get the conversation going, to propose a specific list of
strengths and virtues, and then let the scientific and therapeutic
communities work out the details. Just as the DSM is thoroughly revised
every ten or fifteen years, the classification of strengths and virtues
(known among positive psychologists as the “un-DSM”) is sure to be
revised and improved in a few years. In daring to be specific, in daring to
be wrong, Peterson and Seligman have demonstrated ingenuity,
leadership, and hope.
This classification is already generating exciting research and
liberating ideas. Here’s my favorite idea: Work on your strengths, not
your weaknesses. How many of your New Year’s resolutions have been
about fixing a flaw? And how many of those resolutions have you made
several years in a row? It’s difficult to change any aspect of your
personality by sheer force of will, and if it is a weakness you choose to
work on, you probably won’t enjoy the process. If you don’t find
pleasure or reinforcement along the way, then—unless you have the
willpower of Ben Franklin—you’ll soon give up. But you don’t really
have to be good at everything. Life offers so many chances to use one
tool instead of another, and often you can use a strength to get around a
weakness.
In the positive psychology class I teach at the University of Virginia,
the final project is to make yourself a better person, using all the tools of
psychology, and then prove that you have done so. About half the
students each year succeed, and the most successful ones usually either
--- END PAGE 181 ---

--- PAGE 182 ---
use cognitive behavioral therapy on themselves (it really does work!) or
employ a strength, or both. For example, one student lamented her
inability to forgive. Her mental life was dominated by ruminations about
how those to whom she was closest had hurt her. For her project, she
drew on her strength of loving: Each time she found herself spiraling
down into thoughts about victimhood, she brought to mind a positive
memory about the person in question, which triggered a flash of
affection. Each flash cut off her anger and freed her, temporarily, from
rumination. In time, this effortful mental process became habitual and
she became more forgiving (as she demonstrated using the reports she
had filled out each day to chart her progress). The rider had trained the
elephant with rewards at each step.
Another outstanding project was done by a woman who had just
undergone surgery for brain cancer. At the age of twenty-one, Julia faced
no better than even odds of surviving. To deal with her fears, she
cultivated one of her strengths—zest. She made lists of the activities
going on at the university and of the beautiful hikes and parks in the
nearby Blue Ridge Mountains. She shared these lists with the rest of the
class, she took time away from her studies to go on these hikes, and she
invited friends and classmates to join her. People often say that adversity
makes them want to live each day to the fullest, and when Julia made a
conscious effort to cultivate her natural strength of zest, she really did it.
(She is still full of zest today.)
Virtue sounds like hard work, and often is. But when virtues are re-
conceived as excellences, each of which can be achieved by the practice
of several strengths of character, and when the practice of these strengths
is often intrinsically rewarding, suddenly the work sounds more like
Csikszentmihalyi’s flow and less like toil. It’s work that—like
Seligman’s description of gratifications—engages you fully, draws on
your strengths, and allows you to lose self-consciousness and immerse
yourself in what you are doing. Franklin would be pleased: The virtue
hypothesis is alive and well, firmly ensconced in positive psychology. 
HARD QUESTION, EASY ANSWERS
--- END PAGE 182 ---

--- PAGE 183 ---
Virtue can be its own reward, but that’s obvious only for the virtues that
one finds rewarding. If your strengths include curiosity or love of
learning, you’ll enjoy cultivating wisdom by traveling, going to
museums, and attending public lectures. If your strengths include
gratitude and appreciation of beauty, the feelings of transcendence you
get from contemplating the Grand Canyon will give you pleasure too.
But it would be naive to think that doing the right thing always feels
good. The real test of the virtue hypothesis is to see whether it is true
even in our restricted modern understanding of morality as altruism.
Forget all that stuff about growth and excellence. Is it true that acting
against my self-interest, for the good of others, even when I don’t want
to, is still good for me? Sages and moralists have always answered with
an unqualified yes, but the challenge for science is to qualify: When is it
true, and why?
Religion and science each begin with an easy and unsatisfying answer,
but then move on to more subtle and interesting explanations. For
religious sages, the easy way out is to invoke divine reciprocity in the
afterlife. Do good, because God will punish the wicked and reward the
virtuous. For Christians, there’s heaven or hell. Hindus have the
impersonal workings of karma: The universe will repay you in the next
life with a higher or lower rebirth, which will depend upon your virtue in
this life.
I’m in no position to say whether God, heaven, or an afterlife exists,
but as a psychologist I am entitled to point out that belief in postmortem
justice shows two signs of primitive moral thinking. In the 1920s, the
great developmental psychologist Jean Piaget20 got down on his knees
to play marbles and jacks with children and, in the process, mapped out
how morality develops. He found that, as children develop an
increasingly sophisticated understanding of right and wrong, they go
through a phase in which many rules take on a kind of sacredness and
unchangeability. During this phase, children believe in “immanent
justice”—justice that is inherent in an act itself. In this stage, they think
that if they break rules, even accidentally, something bad will happen to
them, even if nobody knows about their transgressions. Immanent justice
shows up in adults, too, particularly when it comes to explaining illness
and grave misfortune. A survey21 of beliefs about the causes of illness
across cultures shows that the three most common explanations are
--- END PAGE 183 ---

--- PAGE 184 ---
biomedical (referring to physical causes of disease), interpersonal
(illness is caused by witchcraft, related to envy and conflict), and moral
(illness is caused by one’s own past actions, particularly violations of
food and sexual taboos). Most Westerners consciously embrace the
biomedical explanation and reject the other two, yet when illness strikes
and Westerners ask, “Why me?” one of the places they often look for
answers is to their own past transgressions. The belief that God or fate
will dole out rewards and punishments for good and bad behavior seems
on its face to be a cosmic extension of our childhood belief in immanent
justice, which is itself a part of our obsession with reciprocity.
The second problem with postmortem justice is that it relies on the
myth of pure evil.22 Each of us can easily divide the world into good
and evil, but presumably God would not suffer from the many biases and
Machiavellian motivations that make us do so. Moral motivations
(justice, honor, loyalty, patriotism) enter into most acts of violence,
including terrorism and war. Most people believe their actions are
morally justified. A few paragons of evil stand out as candidates for hell,
but almost everyone else would end up in limbo. It just won’t work to
turn God into Santa Claus, a moral accountant keeping track of 6 billion
accounts, because most lives can’t be placed definitively in the naughty
or nice columns.
The scientific approach to the question also begins with an easy and
unsatisfying answer: Virtue is good for your genes under some
circumstances. When “survival of the fittest” came to mean “survival of
the fittest gene,” it became easy to see that the fittest genes would
motivate kind and cooperative behavior in two scenarios: when it
benefited those who bore a copy of those genes (that is, kin), or when it
benefited the bearers of the genes directly by helping them reap the
surplus of non-zero-sum games using the tit-for-tat strategy. These two
processes—kin altruism and reciprocal altruism—do indeed explain
nearly all altruism among nonhuman animals, and much of human
altruism, too. This answer is unsatisfying, however, because our genes
are, to some extent, puppet masters making us want things that are
sometimes good for them but bad for us (such as extramarital affairs, or
prestige bought at the expense of happiness). We cannot look to genetic
self-interest as a guide either to virtuous or to happy living. Furthermore,
anyone who does embrace reciprocal altruism as a justification for
--- END PAGE 184 ---

--- PAGE 185 ---
altruism (rather than merely a cause of it) would then be free to pick and
choose: Be nice to those who can help you, but don’t waste time or
money on anyone else (for example, never leave a tip in restaurants you
will not return to). So to evaluate the idea that altruism pays for the
altruist, we need to push the sages and the scientists harder: Does it even
pay when there is neither postmortem nor reciprocal payback? 
HARD QUESTION, HARD ANSWERS 
St. Paul quotes Jesus as having said that “it is more blessed to give than
to receive” (ACTS 20:35). One meaning of “bless” is “to confer
happiness or prosperity upon.”23 Does helping others really confer
happiness or prosperity on the helper? I know of no evidence showing
that altruists gain money from their altruism, but the evidence suggests
that they often gain happiness. People who do volunteer work are
happier and healthier than those who don’t; but, as always, we have to
contend with the problem of reverse correlation: Congenitally happy
people are just plain nicer to begin with,24 so their volunteer work may
be a consequence of their happiness, not a cause. The happiness-as-cause
hypothesis received direct support when the psychologist Alice Isen25
went around Philadelphia leaving dimes in pay phones. The people who
used those phones and found the dimes were then more likely to help a
person who dropped a stack of papers (carefully timed to coincide with
the phone caller’s exit), compared with people who used phones that had
empty coin-return slots. Isen has done more random acts of kindness
than any other psychologist: She has distributed cookies, bags of candy,
and packs of stationery; she has manipulated the outcome of video
games (to let people win); and she has shown people happy pictures,
always with the same finding: Happy people are kinder and more helpful
than those in the control group.
What we need to find, however, is the reverse effect: that altruistic acts
directly cause happiness and/or other long-term benefits. With its
exhortation to “give blood; all you’ll feel is good,” is the American Red
Cross telling the truth? The psychologist Jane Piliavin has studied blood
donors in detail and found that, yes, giving blood does indeed make
--- END PAGE 185 ---

--- PAGE 186 ---
people feel good, and good about themselves. Piliavin26 has reviewed
the broader literature on all kinds of volunteer work and reached the
conclusion that helping others does help the self, but in complex ways
that depend on one’s life stage. Research on “service learning,” in which
(mostly) high school students do volunteer work and engage in group
reflection on what they are doing as part of a course, provides generally
encouraging results: reduced delinquency and behavioral problems,
increased civic participation, and increased commitment to positive
social values. However, these programs do not appear to have much
effect on the self-esteem or happiness of the adolescents involved. For
adults, the story is a bit different. A longitudinal study27 that tracked
volunteering and well-being over many years in thousands of people was
able to show a causal effect: When a person increased volunteer work,
all measures of happiness and well-being increased (on average)
afterwards, for as long as the volunteer work was a part of the person’s
life. The elderly benefit even more than do other adults, particularly
when their volunteer work either involves direct person-to-person
helping or is done through a religious organization. The benefits of
volunteer work for the elderly are so large that they even show up in
improved health and longer life. Stephanie Brown and her colleagues at
the University of Michigan found striking evidence of such effects when
they examined data from a large longitudinal study of older married
couples.28 Those who reported giving more help and support to spouses,
friends, and relatives went on to live longer than those who gave less
(even after controlling for factors such as health at the beginning of the
study period), whereas the amount of help that people reported receiving 
showed no relationship to longevity. Brown’s finding shows directly that,
at least for older people, it really is more blessed to give than to receive.
This pattern of age-related change suggests that two of the big benefits
of volunteer work are that it brings people together, and it helps them to
construct a McAdams-style life story.29 Adolescents are already
immersed in a dense network of social relationships, and they are just
barely beginning to construct their life stories, so they don’t much need
either of these benefits. With age, however, one’s story begins to take
shape, and altruistic activities add depth and virtue to one’s character. In
old age, when social networks are thinned by the deaths of friends and
family, the social benefits of volunteering are strongest (and indeed, it is
--- END PAGE 186 ---

--- PAGE 187 ---
the most socially isolated elderly who benefit the most from
volunteering).30 Furthermore, in old age, generativity, relationship, and
spiritual strivings come to matter more, but achievement strivings seem
out of place,31 more appropriate for the middle chapters of a life story;
therefore, an activity that lets one “give something back” fits right into
the story and helps to craft a satisfying conclusion. 
THE FUTURE OF VIRTUE 
Scientific research supports the virtue hypothesis, even when it is
reduced to the claim that altruism is good for you. When it is evaluated
in the way that Ben Franklin meant it, as a claim about virtue more
broadly, it becomes so profoundly true that it raises the question of
whether cultural conservatives are correct in their critique of modern life
and its restricted, permissive morality. Should we in the West try to
return to a more virtue-based morality?
I believe that we have indeed lost something important—a richly
textured common ethos with widely shared virtues and values. Just
watch movies from the 1930s and 1940s and you’ll see people moving
around in a dense web of moral fibers: Characters are concerned about
their honor, their reputation, and the appearance of propriety. Children
are frequently disciplined by adults other than their parents. The good
guys always win, and crime never pays. It may sound stuffy and
constraining to us now, but that’s the point: Some constraint is good for
us; absolute freedom is not. Durkheim, the sociologist who found that
freedom from social ties is correlated with suicide32 also gave us the
word “anomie” (normlessness). Anomie is the condition of a society in
which there are no clear rules, norms, or standards of value. In an anomic
society, people can do as they please; but without any clear standards or
respected social institutions to enforce those standards, it is harder for
people to find things they want to do. Anomie breeds feelings of
rootlessness and anxiety and leads to an increase in amoral and antisocial
behavior. Modern sociological research strongly supports Durkheim:
One of the best predictors of the health of an American neighborhood is
the degree to which adults respond to the misdeeds of other people’s
--- END PAGE 187 ---

--- PAGE 188 ---
children.33 When community standards are enforced, there is constraint
and cooperation. When everyone minds his own business and looks the
other way, there is freedom and anomie.
My colleague at the University of Virginia, the sociologist James
Hunter, carries Durkheim’s ideas forward into the current debate about
character education. In his provocative book The Death of Character, 34
Hunter traces out how America lost its older ideas about virtue and
character. Before the Industrial Revolution, Americans honored the
virtues of “producers”—hard work, self-restraint, sacrifice for the future,
and sacrifice for the common good. But during the twentieth century, as
people became wealthier and the producer society turned gradually into
the mass consumption society, an alternative vision of the self arose—a
vision centered on the idea of individual preferences and personal
fulfillment. The intrinsically moral term “character” fell out of favor and
was replaced by the amoral term “personality.”
Hunter points to a second cause of character’s death: inclusiveness.
The first American colonists created enclaves of ethnic, religious, and
moral homogeneity, but the history of America ever since has been one
of increasing diversity. In response, educators have struggled to identify
the ever-shrinking set of moral ideas everyone could agree upon. This
shrinking reached its logical conclusion in the 1960s with the popular
“values clarification” movement, which taught no morality at all. Values
clarification taught children how to find their own values, and it urged
teachers to refrain from imposing values on anyone. Although the goal of
inclusiveness was laudable, it had unintended side effects: It cut children
off from the soil of tradition, history, and religion that nourished older
conceptions of virtue. You can grow vegetables hydroponically, but even
then you have to add nutrients to the water. Asking children to grow
virtues hydroponically, looking only within themselves for guidance, is
like asking each one to invent a personal language—a pointless and
isolating task if there is no community with whom to speak. (For a
sensitive analysis from a more liberal perspective of the need for
“cultural resources” for identity creation, see Anthony Appiah’s The
Ethics of Identity .)35
I believe Hunter’s analysis is correct, but I am not yet convinced that
we are worse off, overall, with our restricted modern morality. One thing
--- END PAGE 188 ---

--- PAGE 189 ---
that often distresses me in old movies and television programs, even up
through the 1960s, is how limited were the lives of women and African
Americans. We have paid a price for our inclusiveness, but we have
bought ourselves a more humane society, with greater opportunity for
racial minorities, women, gay people, the handicapped, and others—that
is, for most people. And even if some people think the price was too
steep, we can’t go back, either to a pre-consumer society or to ethnically
homogeneous enclaves. All we can do is search for ways that we might
reduce our anomie without excluding large classes of people.
Being neither a sociologist nor an expert in education policy, I will not
try to design a radical new approach to moral education. Instead, I will
present one finding from my own research on diversity. The word
“diversity” took on its current role in American discourse only after a
1978 Supreme Court ruling (U.C. Regents v. Bakke) that the use of racial
preferences to achieve racial quotas at universities was unconstitutional,
but that it was permissible to use racial preferences to increase diversity
in the student body. Since then, diversity has been widely celebrated, on
bumper stickers, in campus diversity days, and in advertisements. For
many liberals, diversity has become an unquestioned good—like justice,
freedom, and happiness, the more diversity, the better.
My research on morality, however, spurred me to question it. Given
how easy it is to divide people into hostile groups based on trivial
differences,36 I wondered whether celebrating diversity might also
encourage division, whereas celebrating commonality would help people
form cohesive groups and communities. I quickly realized that there are
two main kinds of diversity—demographic and moral. Demographic
diversity is about socio-demographic categories such as race, ethnicity,
sex, sexual orientation, age, and handicapped status. Calling for
demographic diversity is in large measure calling for justice, for the
inclusion of previously excluded groups. Moral diversity, on the other
hand, is essentially what Durkheim described as anomie: a lack of
consensus on moral norms and values. Once you make this distinction,
you see that nobody can coherently even want moral diversity. If you are
pro-choice on the issue of abortion, would you prefer that there be a
wide variety of opinions and no dominant one? Or would you prefer that
everyone agree with you and the laws of the land reflect that agreement?
--- END PAGE 189 ---

--- PAGE 190 ---
If you prefer diversity on an issue, the issue is not a moral issue for you;
it is a matter of personal taste.
With my students Holly Hom and Evan Rosenberg, I conducted a
study among several groups at the University of Virginia.37 We found
that there was strong support among students for increasing diversity for
demographic categories (such as race, religion, and social class), even
among students who described themselves as politically conservative.
Moral diversity (opinions about controversial political questions),
however, was much less appealing in most contexts, with the interesting
exception of seminar classes. Students wanted to be exposed to moral
diversity in class, but not in the people they live with and socialize with.
Our conclusion from this study is that diversity is like cholesterol:
There’s a good kind and a bad kind, and perhaps we should not be trying
to maximize both. Liberals are right to work for a society that is open to
people of every demographic group, but conservatives might be right in
believing that at the same time we should work much harder to create a
common, shared identity. Although I am a political liberal, I believe that
conservatives have a better understanding of moral development
(although not of moral psychology in general—they are too committed to
the myth of pure evil). Conservatives want schools to teach lessons that
will create a positive and uniquely American identity, including a heavy
dose of American history and civics, using English as the only national
language. Liberals are justifiably wary of jingoism, nationalism, and the
focus on books by “dead white males,” but I think everyone who cares
about education should remember that the American motto of e pluribus,
unum (from many, one) has two parts. The celebration of pluribus should
be balanced by policies that strengthen the unum. 
Maybe it’s too late. Maybe in the hostility of the current culture war,
no one can find any value in the ideas of the other side. Or maybe we can
turn for instruction to that great moral exemplar, Ben Franklin.
Reflecting upon the way history is driven forward by people and parties
fighting each other bitterly in pursuit of their self-interest, Franklin
proposed creating a “United Party for Virtue.” This party, composed of
people who had cultivated virtue in themselves, would act only “with a
view to the good of mankind.” Perhaps that was naive even in Franklin’s
day, and it seems unlikely that these “good and wise men” would find it
as easy to agree on a platform as Franklin supposed. Nonetheless,
--- END PAGE 190 ---

--- PAGE 191 ---
Franklin may be right that leadership on virtue can never come from the
major political actors; it will have to come from a movement of people,
such as the people of a town who come together and agree to create
moral coherence across the many areas of children’s lives. Such
movements are happening now. The developmental psychologist
William Damon38 calls them “youth charter” movements, for they
involve the cooperation of all parties to childrearing—parents, teachers,
coaches, religious leaders, and the children themselves—who come to
consensus on a “charter” describing the community’s shared
understandings, obligations, and values and committing all parties to
expect and uphold the same high standards of behavior in all settings.
Maybe youth charter communities can’t rival the moral richness of
ancient Athens, but they are doing something to reduce their own anomie
while far exceeding Athens in justice.
--- END PAGE 191 ---

--- PAGE 192 ---
9 
Divinity With or Without God 
We must not allow the ignoble to injure the noble, or the smaller to
injure the greater. Those who nourish the smaller parts will become
small men. Those who nourish the greater parts will become great men.
—MENG TZU,1 3RD CENT. BCE 
God created the angels from intellect without sensuality, the beasts from
sensuality without intellect, and humanity from both intellect and
sensuality. So when a person’s intellect overcomes his sensuality, he is
better than the angels, but when his sensuality overcomes his intellect,
he is worse than the beasts.
—MUHAMMAD2 
O UR LIFE IS THE CREATION of our minds, and we do much of that
creating with metaphor. We see new things in terms of things we already
understand: Life is a journey, an argument is a war, the mind is a rider on
an elephant. With the wrong metaphor we are deluded; with no metaphor
we are blind.
The metaphor that has most helped me to understand morality,
religion, and the human quest for meaning is Flatland, a charming little
book written in 1884 by the English novelist and mathematician Edwin
Abbot.3 Flatland is a two-dimensional world whose inhabitants are
geometric figures. The protagonist is a square. One day, the square is
visited by a sphere from a three-dimensional world called Spaceland.
When a sphere visits Flatland, however, all that is visible to Flatlanders
is the part of the sphere that lies in their plain—in other words, a circle.
The square is astonished that the circle is able to grow or shrink at will
--- END PAGE 192 ---

--- PAGE 193 ---
(by rising or sinking into the plane of Flatland) and even to disappear
and reappear in a different place (by leaving the plane, and then
reentering it). The sphere tries to explain the concept of the third
dimension to the two-dimensional square, but the square, though skilled
at two-dimensional geometry, doesn’t get it. He cannot understand what
it means to have thickness in addition to height and breadth, nor can he
understand that the circle came from up above him, where “up” does not
mean from the north. The sphere presents analogies and geometrical
demonstrations of how to move from one dimension to two, and then
from two to three, but the square still finds the idea of moving “up” out
of the plane of Flatland ridiculous.
In desperation, the sphere yanks the square up out of Flatland and into
the third dimension so that the square can look down on his world and
see it all at once. He can see the inside of all the houses and the guts
(insides) of all the inhabitants. The square recalls the experience:
An unspeakable horror seized me. There was darkness; then a
dizzy, sickening sensation of sight that was not like seeing; I saw
space that was not space: I was myself, and not myself. When I
could find voice, I shrieked aloud in agony, “Either this is
madness or it is Hell.” “It is neither,” calmly replied the voice of
the sphere, “it is Knowledge; it is Three Dimensions: open your
eye once again and try to look steadily.” I looked, and, behold, a
new world!
The square is awestruck. He prostrates himself before the sphere and
becomes the sphere’s disciple. Upon his return to Flatland, he struggles
to preach the “Gospel of Three Dimensions” to his fellow two-
dimensional creatures—but in vain.
We are all, in some way, the square before his enlightenment. We have
all encountered something we failed to understand, yet smugly believed
we understood because we couldn’t conceive of the dimension to which
we were blind. Then one day something happens that makes no sense in
our two-dimensional world, and we catch our first glimpse of another
dimension.
In all human cultures, the social world has two clear dimensions: a
horizontal dimension of closeness or liking, and a vertical one of
hierarchy or status. People naturally and effortlessly make distinctions
--- END PAGE 193 ---

--- PAGE 194 ---
along the horizontal dimension between close versus distant kin, and
between friends versus strangers. Many languages have one form of
address for those who are close ( tu, in French) and another for those who
are distant (vous). We also have a great deal of innate mental structure
that prepares us for hierarchical interactions. Even in hunter-gatherer
cultures that are in many ways egalitarian, equality is only maintained by
active suppression of ever-present tendencies toward hierarchy.4 Many
languages use the same verbal methods to mark hierarchy as they do to
mark closeness (in French, tu for subordinates as well as friends, vous for
superiors as well as strangers). Even in languages such as English that do
not have different verb forms for different social relationships, people
find a way to mark them anyway: We address people who are distant or
superior by using their titles and last names (Mr. Smith, Judge Brown),
and use first names for those who are intimate or subordinate.5 Our
minds automatically keep track of these two dimensions. Think how
awkward it was the last time someone you barely knew but greatly
revered invited you to call him by first name. Did the name stick in your
throat? Conversely, when a sales-person addresses you by first name
without having been invited to do so, do you feel slightly offended?
Now imagine yourself happily moving around your two-dimensional
social world, a flat land where the X axis is closeness and the Y axis is
hierarchy (see figure 9.1). Then one day, you see a person do something
extraordinary, or you have an overwhelming experience of natural
beauty, and you feel lifted “up.” But it’s not the “up” of hierarchy, it’s
some other kind of elevation. This chapter is about that vertical
movement. My claim is that the human mind perceives a third
dimension, a specifically moral dimension that I will call “divinity.” (See
the Z axis, coming up out of the plane of the page in figure 9.1). In
choosing the label “divinity,” I am not assuming that God exists and is
there to be perceived. (I myself am a Jewish atheist.) Rather, my research
on the moral emotions has led me to conclude that the human mind
simply does perceive divinity and sacredness, whether or not God exists.
In reaching this conclusion, I lost the smug contempt for religion that I
felt in my twenties.
--- END PAGE 194 ---

--- PAGE 195 ---
Fig. 9.1 The Three Dimensions of Social Space 
This chapter is about the ancient truth that devoutly religious people
grasp, and that secular thinkers often do not: that by our actions and our
thoughts, we move up and down on a vertical dimension. In the opening
epigraph of this chapter, Meng Tzu called it a dimension of noble versus
ignoble. Muhammad, like Christians and Jews before him, made it a
dimension of divinity, with angels above and beasts below. An
implication of this truth is that we are impoverished as human beings
when we lose sight of this dimension and let our world collapse into two
dimensions. But at the other extreme, the effort to create a three-
dimensional society and impose it on all residents is the hallmark of
religious fundamentalism. Fundamentalists, whether Christian, Jewish,
Hindu, or Muslim, want to live in nations whose laws are in harmony
with—or are taken from—a particular holy book. There are many
reasons for democratic Western societies to oppose such
fundamentalism, but I believe that the first step in such opposition must
be an honest and respectful understanding of its moral motives. I hope
that this chapter contributes to such understanding. 
ARE WE NOT ANIMALS? 
I first found divinity in disgust. When I began to study morality, I read
the moral codes of many cultures, and the first thing I learned is that
most cultures are very concerned about food, sex, menstruation, and the
handling of corpses. Because I had always thought morality was about
--- END PAGE 195 ---

--- PAGE 196 ---
how people treat each other, I dismissed all this stuff about “purity” and
“pollution” (as the anthropologists call it) as extraneous to real morality.
Why are women in many cultures forbidden to enter temples or touch
religious artifacts while they are menstruating, or for a few weeks after
giving birth?6 It must be some sort of sexist effort to control women.
Why is eating pork an abomination for Jews and Muslims? Must be a
health-related effort to avoid trichinosis. But as I read further, I began to
discern an underlying logic: the logic of disgust. According to the
leading theory of disgust in the 1980s, by Paul Rozin,7 disgust is largely
about animals and the products of animal bodies (few plants or inorganic
materials are disgusting), and disgusting things are contagious by touch.
Disgust therefore seemed somehow related to the concerns about
animals, body products (blood, excrement), washing, and touch that are
so clear in the Old Testament, the Koran, Hindu scriptures, and many
ethnographies of traditional societies. When I went to talk to Rozin about
the possible role of disgust in morality and religion, I found that he had
been thinking about the same question. With Professor Clark McCauley
of Bryn Mawr College, we began to study disgust and the role it plays in
social life.
Disgust has its evolutionary origins in helping people decide what to
eat.8 During the evolutionary transition in which our ancestors’ brains
expanded greatly, so did their production of tools and weapons, and so
did their consumption of meat.9 (Many scientists think these changes
were all interrelated, along with the greater interdependence of male and
female that I discussed in chapter 6). But when early humans went for
meat, including scavenging the carcasses left by other predators, they
exposed themselves to a galaxy of new microbes and parasites, most of
which are contagious in a way that plant toxins are not: If a poisonous
berry brushes up against your baked potato, it won’t make the potato
harmful or disgusting. Disgust was originally shaped by natural selection
as a guardian of the mouth: It gave an advantage to individuals who went
beyond the sensory properties of a potentially edible object (does it smell
good?) and thought about where it came from and what it had touched.
Animals that routinely eat or crawl on corpses, excrement, or garbage
piles (rats, maggots, vultures, cockroaches) trigger disgust in us: We
won’t eat them, and anything they have touched becomes contaminated.
We’re also disgusted by most of the body products of other people,
--- END PAGE 196 ---

--- PAGE 197 ---
particularly excrement, mucus, and blood, which may transmit diseases
among people. Disgust extinguishes desire (hunger) and motivates
purifying behaviors such as washing or, if it’s too late, vomiting.
But disgust doesn’t guard just the mouth; its elicitors expanded during
biological and cultural evolution so that now it guards the body more
generally. 10 Disgust plays a role in sexuality analogous to its role in
food selection by guiding people to the narrow class of culturally
acceptable sexual partners and sexual acts. Once again, disgust turns off
desire and motivates concerns about purification, separation, and
cleansing. Disgust also gives us a queasy feeling when we see people
with skin lesions, deformities, amputations, extreme obesity or thinness,
and other violations of the culturally ideal outer envelope of the human
body. It is the exterior that matters: Cancer in the lungs or a missing
kidney is not disgusting; a tumor on the face or a missing finger is.
This expansion, from guardian of the mouth to guardian of the body,
makes sense from a purely biological perspective: We humans have
always lived in larger, denser groups than most other primates, and we
lived on the ground, too, not in trees, so we were more exposed to the
ravages of microbes and parasites that spread by physical contact.
Disgust makes us careful about contact. But the most fascinating thing
about disgust is that it is recruited to support so many of the norms,
rituals, and beliefs that cultures use to define themselves.11 For example,
many cultures draw a sharp line between humans and animals, insisting
that people are somehow above, better than, or more god-like than other
animals. The human body is often thought of as a temple that houses
divinity within: “Or do you not know that your body is a temple of the
Holy Spirit within you, which you have from God, and that you are not
your own? . . . [T]herefore glorify God in your body” (1
CORINTHIANS 6:19-20).
Yet a culture that says that humans are not animals, or that the body is
a temple, faces a big problem: Our bodies do all the same things that
animal bodies do, including eating, defecating, copulating, bleeding, and
dying. The overwhelming evidence is that we are animals, and so a
culture that rejects our animality must go to great lengths to hide the
evidence. Biological processes must be carried out in the right way, and
disgust is a guardian of that rightness. Imagine visiting a town where
--- END PAGE 197 ---

--- PAGE 198 ---
people wear no clothes, never bathe, have sex “doggie-style” in public,
and eat raw meat by biting off pieces directly from the carcass. Okay,
perhaps you’d pay to see such a freak show, but as with all freak shows,
you would emerge degraded (literally: brought down ). You would feel
disgust at this “savage” behavior and know, viscerally, that there was
something wrong with these people. Disgust is the guardian of the
temple of the body. In this imaginary town, the guardians have been
murdered, and the temples have gone to the dogs.
The idea that the third dimension—divinity—runs from animals below
to god(s) above, with people in the middle, was perfectly captured by the
seventeenth-century New England Puritan Cotton Mather, who observed
a dog urinating at the same time he himself was urinating. Overwhelmed
with disgust at the vileness of his own urination, Mather wrote this
resolution in his diary: “Yet I will be a more noble creature; and at the
very time when my natural necessities debase me into the condition of
the beast, my spirit shall (I say at that very time!) rise and soar.”12
If the human body is a temple that sometimes gets dirty, it makes
sense that “ cleanliness is next to Godliness.”13 If you don’t perceive this
third dimension, then it is not clear why God would care about the
amount of dirt on your skin or in your home. But if you do live in a
three-dimensional world, then disgust is like Jacob’s ladder: It is rooted
in the earth, in our biological necessities, but it leads or guides people
toward heaven—or, at least, toward something felt to be, somehow, “up.” 
THE ETHIC OF DIVINITY 
After graduate school, I spent two years working with Richard Shweder,
a psychological anthropologist at the University of Chicago who is the
leading thinker in the field of cultural psychology. Shweder does much
of his research in the Indian city of Bhubaneswar, in the state of Orissa,
on the Bay of Bengal. Bhubaneswar is an ancient temple town—its old
city grew up around the gigantic and ornate Lingaraj temple, built in the
seventh century and still a major pilgrimage center for Hindus.
Shweder’s research on morality 14 in Bhubaneswar and elsewhere shows
that when people think about morality, their moral concepts cluster into
--- END PAGE 198 ---

--- PAGE 199 ---
three groups, which he calls the ethic of autonomy, the ethic of
community, and the ethic of divinity. When people think and act using
the ethic of autonomy, their goal is to protect individuals from harm and
grant them the maximum degree of autonomy, which they can use to
pursue their own goals. When people use the ethic of community, their
goal is to protect the integrity of groups, families, companies, or nations,
and they value virtues such as obedience, loyalty, and wise leadership.
When people use the ethic of divinity, their goal is to protect from
degradation the divinity that exists in each person, and they value living
in a pure and holy way, free from moral pollutants such as lust, greed,
and hatred. Cultures vary in their relative reliance on these three ethics,
which correspond, roughly, to the X, Y, and Z axes of figure 9.1. In my
dissertation research15 on moral judgment in Brazil and the United
States, I found that educated Americans of high social class relied
overwhelmingly on the ethic of autonomy in their moral discourse,
whereas Brazilians, and people of lower social class in both countries,
made much greater use of the ethics of community and divinity.
To learn more about the ethic of divinity, I went to Bhubaneswar for
three months in 1993, to interview priests, monks, and other experts on
Hindu worship and practice. To prepare, I read everything I could about
Hinduism and the anthropology of purity and pollution, including The
Laws of Manu, 16 a guidebook for Brahmin men (the priestly caste)
written in the first or second century. Manu tells Brahmins how to live,
eat, pray, and interact with other people while still attending to what
Cotton Mather called their “natural necessities.” In one passage, Manu
lists the times when a priest should “not even think about” reciting the
holy vedas (scriptures):
while expelling urine or excrement, when food is still left on his
mouth and hands, while eating at a ceremony for the dead, . . .
when one has eaten flesh or the food of a woman who has just
given birth, . . . when jackals howl, . . . in a cremation ground, . . .
while wearing a garment that he has worn in sexual union, while
accepting anything at a ceremony for the dead, when one has just
eaten or has not digested (his food) or has vomited or belched, . .
. when blood flows from one’s limbs or when one has been
wounded by a weapon.
--- END PAGE 199 ---

--- PAGE 200 ---
This passage is extraordinary because it lists every category of disgust
that Rozin, McCauley, and I had studied: food, body products, animals,
sex, death, body envelope violations, and hygiene. Manu is saying that
the presence in mind of the holy vedas is not compatible with
contamination of the body from any source of disgust.17 Divinity and
disgust must be kept separate at all times.
When I arrived in Bhubaneswar, I quickly found that the ethic of
divinity is not just ancient history. Even though Bhubaneswar is
physically flat, it has a highly variable spiritual topography with peaks at
each of its hundreds of temples. As a non-Hindu, I was allowed into the
courtyards of temple compounds; and if I removed my shoes and any
leather items (leather is polluting), I could usually enter the antechamber
of the temple building. I could look into the inner sanctum where the god
was housed, but had I crossed the threshold to join the Brahmin priest
within, I would have polluted it and offended everyone. At the highest
peak of divinity—the Lingaraj temple itself—I was not even allowed to
enter the compound, although foreigners were invited to look in from an
observation platform just outside the walls. It was not a matter of
secrecy; it was a matter of contamination by people such as me who had
not followed the proper procedures of bathing, diet, hygiene, and prayer
for maintaining religious purity.
Hindu homes in Bhubaneswar have the same concentric structure as
the temples: Leave your shoes at the door, socialize in the outer rooms,
but never go into the kitchen or the room or area where offerings are
made to deities. These two areas are maintained as zones of the highest
purity. Even the human body has peaks and valleys, the head and the
right hand being pure, the left hand and the feet being polluted. I had to
take extraordinary care to keep my feet from touching anyone and to
avoid handing something to another person with my left hand. As I
moved around Bhubaneswar, I felt like a square in Spaceland as I tried to
navigate a three-dimensional world with only the dimmest perception of
its third dimension.
The interviews I conducted helped me to see a little better. My goal
was to find out whether purity and pollution were really just about
keeping biological “necessities” separate from divinity, or whether these
practices had a deeper relationship to virtue and morality. I found a
variety of opinions. Some of the less-educated village priests saw the
--- END PAGE 200 ---

--- PAGE 201 ---
rituals related to purity and pollution as basic rules of the game, things
you simply must do because religious tradition demands it. But many of
the people I interviewed took a broader view and saw purity and
pollution practices as means to an end: spiritual and moral advancement,
or moving up on the third dimension. For example, when I asked why it
was important to guard one’s purity, the headmaster of a Sanskrit school
(a school that trains religious scholars) responded in this way:
We ourselves can be gods or demons. It depends on karma. If a
person behaves like a demon, for example he kills someone, then
that person is truly a demon. A person who behaves in a divine
manner, because a person has divinity in him, he is like a god. . . .
We should know that we are gods. If we think like gods we
become like gods, if we think like demons we become like
demons. What is wrong with being like a demon? What is going
on nowadays, it is demonic. Divine behavior means not cheating
people, not killing people. Complete character. You have divinity,
you are a god.
The headmaster, who of course had not read Shweder, gave a perfect
statement of the ethic of divinity. Purity is not just about the body, it is
about the soul. If you know that you have divinity in you, you will act
accordingly: You will treat people well, and you will treat your body as a
temple. In so doing, you will accumulate good karma, and you will come
back in your next life at a higher level—literally higher on the vertical
dimension of divinity. If you lose sight of your divinity, you will give in
to your baser motives. In so doing, you will accumulate bad karma, and
in your next incarnation you will return at a lower level as an animal or a
demon. This linkage of virtue, purity, and divinity is not uniquely Indian;
Ralph Waldo Emerson said exactly the same thing:
He who does a good deed is instantly ennobled. He who does a
mean deed is by the action itself contracted. He who puts off
impurity thereby puts on purity. If a man is at heart just, then in
so far is he God.18 
SACRED INTRUSIONS
--- END PAGE 201 ---

--- PAGE 202 ---
When I returned to Flatland (the United States), I didn’t have to think
about purity and pollution anymore. I didn’t have to think about the
second dimension—hierarchy—very much, either. American university
culture has only mild hierarchy (students often address professors by first
name) compared with most Indian settings. So in some ways my life was
reduced to one dimension—closeness, and my behavior was constrained
only by the ethic of autonomy, which allowed me to do whatever I
wanted, as long as I didn’t hurt anyone else.
Yet, once I had learned to see in three dimensions, I saw glimmers of
divinity scattered all about. I began to feel disgust for the American
practice of marching around one’s own house—even one’s bedroom—
wearing the same shoes that, minutes earlier, had walked through city
streets. I adopted the Indian practice of removing my shoes at my door,
and asking visitors to do likewise, which made my apartment feel more
like a sanctuary, a clean and peaceful space separated more fully than
before from the outside world. I noticed that it felt wrong to bring certain
books into the bathroom. I noticed that people often spoke about
morality using a language of “higher” and “lower.” I became aware of
my own subtle feelings upon witnessing people behaving in sleazy or
“degraded” ways, feelings that were more than just disapproval; they
were feelings of having been brought “down” in some way myself.
In my academic work, I discovered that the ethic of divinity had been
central to public discourse in the United States until the time of the
World War I, after which it began to fade (except in a few places, such as
the American South—which also maintained racial segregation practices
based on notions of physical purity). For example, advice aimed at
young people in the Victorian era routinely spoke of purity and pollution.
In a widely reprinted book from 1897 titled What a Young Man Ought to
Know, 19 Sylvanus Stall devoted an entire chapter to “personal purity” in
which he noted that
God has made no mistake in giving man a strong sexual nature,
but any young man makes a fatal mistake if he allows the sexual
to dominate, to degrade, and to destroy that which is highest and
noblest in his nature.
To guard their purity, Stall advised young men to avoid eating pork,
masturbating, and reading novels. By the 1936 edition, this entire chapter
--- END PAGE 202 ---

--- PAGE 203 ---
had been removed.
The vertical dimension of divinity was so obvious to people in the
Victorian age that even scientists referred to it. In a chemistry textbook
from 1867, after describing methods of synthesizing ethyl alcohol, the
author felt compelled to warn his young readers that alcohol has the
effect of “dulling the intellectual operations and moral instincts; seeming
to pervert and destroy all that is pure and holy in man, while it robs him
of his highest attribute—reason.”20 In his 1892 book promoting
Darwin’s theory of evolution, Joseph Le Conte, a professor of geology at
the University of California at Berkeley, practically quoted Meng Tzu
and Muhammad: “Man is possessed of two natures—a lower, in common
with animals, and a higher, peculiar to himself. The whole meaning of
sin is the humiliating bondage of the higher to the lower.”21
But as science, technology, and the industrial age progressed, the
Western world became “desacralized.” At least that’s the argument made
by the great historian of religion Mircea Eliade. In The Sacred and the
Profane, 22 Eliade shows that the perception of sacredness is a human
universal. Regardless of their differences, all religions have places
(temples, shrines, holy trees), times (holy days, sunrise, solstices), and
activities (prayer, special dancing) that allow for contact or
communication with something otherworldly and pure. To mark off
sacredness, all other times, places, and activities are defined as profane
(ordinary, not sacred). The borders between the sacred and the profane
must be carefully guarded, and that’s what rules of purity and pollution
are all about. Eliade says that the modern West is the first culture in
human history that has managed to strip time and space of all sacredness
and to produce a fully practical, efficient, and profane world. This is the
world that religious fundamentalists find unbearable and are sometimes
willing to use force to fight against.
Eliade’s most compelling point, for me, is that sacredness is so
irrepressible that it intrudes repeatedly into the modern profane world in
the form of “crypto-religious” behavior. Eliade noted that even a person
committed to a profane existence has
privileged places, qualitatively different from all others—a man’s
birth-place, or the scenes of his first love, or certain places in the
first foreign city he visited in his youth. Even for the most frankly
--- END PAGE 203 ---

--- PAGE 204 ---
nonreligious man, all these places still retain an exceptional, a
unique quality; they are the “holy places” of his private universe,
as if it were in such spots that he had received the revelation of a
reality other than that in which he participates through his
ordinary daily life.
When I read this, I gasped. Eliade had perfectly pegged my feeble
spirituality, limited as it is to places, books, people, and events that have
given me moments of uplift and enlightenment. Even atheists have
intimations of sacredness, particularly when in love or in nature. We just
don’t infer that God caused those feelings. 
ELEVATION AND AGAPE 
My time in India did not make me religious, but it did lead to an
intellectual awakening. Shortly after moving to the University of
Virginia in 1995, I was writing yet another article about how social
disgust is triggered when we see people moving “down” on the vertical
dimension of divinity. Suddenly it occurred to me that I had never really
thought about the emotional reaction to seeing people move “up.” I had
referred in passing to the feeling of being “uplifted,” but had never even
wondered whether “uplift” is a real, honest-to-goodness emotion. I began
to interrogate friends, family, and students: “When you see someone do a
really good deed, do you feel something? What exactly? Where in your
body do you feel it? Does it make you want to do anything?” I found that
most people had the same feelings I did, and the same difficulty
articulating exactly what they were. People talked about an open, warm,
or glowing feeling. Some specifically mentioned the heart; others
claimed they could not say where in their bodies they felt it, yet even as
they were denying a specific location, their hands sometimes made a
circular motion in front of the chest, fingers pointing inward as if to
indicate something moving in the heart. Some people mentioned feelings
of chills, or of choking up. Most said this feeling made them want to
perform good deeds or become better in some way. Whatever this feeling
was, it was beginning to look like an emotion worthy of study. Yet there
was no research of any kind on this emotion in the psychological
literature, which was focused at the time on the six “basic” emotions23
--- END PAGE 204 ---

--- PAGE 205 ---
known to have distinctive facial expressions: joy, sadness, fear, anger,
disgust, and surprise.
If I believed in God, I would believe that he sent me to the University
of Virginia for a reason. At UVA, a great deal of crypto-religious activity
centers around Thomas Jefferson, our founder, whose home sits like a
temple on a small mountaintop (Monticello) a few miles away. Jefferson
wrote the holiest text of American history—the Declaration of
Independence. He also wrote thousands of letters, many of which reveal
his views on psychology, education, and religion. After arriving at UVA,
having an Eliade-style crypto-religious experience at Monticello, and
committing myself to the cult of Jefferson, I read a collection of his
letters. There I found a full and perfect description of the emotion I had
just begun thinking about.
In 1771, Jefferson’s relative Robert Skipwith asked him for advice on
what books to buy for the personal library he hoped to build. Jefferson,
who loved giving advice almost as much as he loved books, happily
obliged. Jefferson sent along a catalogue of serious works of history and
philosophy, but he also recommended the purchase of fiction. In his day
(as in Sylvanus Stall’s), plays and novels were not regarded as worthy of
a dignified man’s time, but Jefferson justified his unorthodox advice by
pointing out that great writing can trigger beneficial emotions:
When any . . . act of charity or of gratitude, for instance, is
presented either to our sight or imagination, we are deeply
impressed with its beauty and feel a strong desire in ourselves of
doing charitable and grateful acts also. On the contrary, when we
see or read of any atrocious deed, we are disgusted with its
deformity, and conceive an abhorrence of vice. Now every
emotion of this kind is an exercise of our virtuous dispositions,
and dispositions of the mind, like limbs of the body, acquire
strength by exercise.24
Jefferson went on to say that the physical feelings and motivational
effects caused by great literature are as powerful as those caused by real
events. He considered the example of a contemporary French play,
asking whether the fidelity and generosity of its hero does not
dilate [the reader’s] breast and elevate his sentiments as much as
any similar incident which real history can furnish? Does [the
--- END PAGE 205 ---

--- PAGE 206 ---
reader] not in fact feel himself a better man while reading them,
and privately covenant to copy the fair example?
This extraordinary statement is more than just a poetic description of
the joys of reading. It is also a precise scientific definition of an emotion.
In emotion research, we generally study emotions by specifying their
components, and Jefferson gives us most of the major components: an
eliciting or triggering condition (displays of charity, gratitude, or other
virtues); physical changes in the body (“dilation” in the chest); a
motivation (a desire of “doing charitable and grateful acts also”); and a
characteristic feeling beyond bodily sensations (elevated sentiments).
Jefferson had described exactly the emotion I had just “discovered.” He
even said that it was the opposite of disgust. As an act of crypto-religious
glorification, I considered calling this emotion “Jefferson’s emotion,” but
thought better of it, and chose the word “elevation,” which Jefferson
himself had used to capture the sense of rising on a vertical dimension,
away from disgust.
For the past seven years I have been studying elevation in the lab. My
students and I have used a variety of means to induce elevation and have
found that video clips from documentaries about heroes and altruists, and
selections from the Oprah Winfrey show, work well. In most of our
studies, we show people in one group an elevating video, while people in
the control condition see a video designed to amuse them, such as a Jerry
Seinfeld monologue. We know (from Alice Isen’s coins and cookies
studies)25 that feeling happy brings a variety of positive effects, so in
our research we always try to show that elevation is not just a form of
happiness. In our most comprehensive study,26 Sara Algoe and I showed
videos to research subjects in the lab and had them fill out a recording
sheet about what they felt and what they wanted to do. Sara then gave
them a stack of blank recording sheets and told them to keep an eye out,
for the next three weeks, for instances of someone doing something good
for someone else (in the elevation condition) or for times when they saw
someone else tell a joke (in the amusement/control condition). We also
added a third condition to study nonmoral admiration: People in this
condition watched a video about the superhuman abilities of the
basketball star Michael Jordan, and were then asked to record times
when they witnessed someone doing something unusually skillful.
--- END PAGE 206 ---

--- PAGE 207 ---
Both parts of Sara’s study show that Jefferson got it exactly right.
People really do respond emotionally to acts of moral beauty, and these
emotional reactions involve warm or pleasant feelings in the chest and
conscious desires to help others or become a better person oneself. A
new discovery in Sara’s study is that moral elevation appears to be
different from admiration for nonmoral excellence. Subjects in the
admiration condition were more likely to report feeling chills or tingles
on their skin, and to report feeling energized or “psyched up.”
Witnessing extraordinarily skillful actions gives people the drive and
energy to try to copy those actions.27 Elevation, in contrast, is a calmer
feeling, not associated with signs of physiological arousal. This
distinction might help explain a puzzle about elevation. Although people
say, in all our studies, that they want to do good deeds, in two studies
where we gave them the opportunity to sign up for volunteer work or to
help an experimenter pick up a stack of papers she had dropped, we did
not find that elevation made people behave much differently.
What’s going on here? How could an emotion that makes people rise
on the dimension of divinity not make them behave more altruistically?
It’s too soon to know for sure, but a recent finding suggests that love
could be the answer. Three undergraduate honors students have worked
with me on the physiology of elevation—Chris Oveis, Gary Sherman,
and Jen Silvers. We’ve all been intrigued by the frequency with which
people who are feeling elevation point to the heart. We believe they’re
not just speaking metaphorically. Chris and Gary have found hints that
the vagus nerve might be activated during elevation. The vagus nerve is
the main nerve of the parasympathetic nervous system, which calms
people down, and undoes the arousal caused by the sympathetic (fight-
or-flight) system. The vagus nerve is the main nerve that controls heart
rate, and it has a variety of other effects on the heart and lungs, so if
people feel something in the chest, the vagus nerve is the main suspect,
and it has already been implicated in research on feelings of gratitude
and “appreciation.”28 But it’s difficult to measure the activity of the
vagus nerve directly, and so far Chris and Gary have found only hints,
not conclusive proof.
Nerves have accomplices, however; they sometimes work with
hormones to produce long-lasting effects, and the vagus nerve works
with the hormone oxytocin to create feelings of calmness, love, and
--- END PAGE 207 ---

--- PAGE 208 ---
desire for contact that encourage bonding and attachment.29 Jen Silvers
was interested in the possible role of oxytocin in elevation, but because
we did not have the resources to draw blood from subjects before and
after watching an elevating video (which we’d have to do to detect a
change in oxytocin levels), I told Jen to scour the research literature to
find an indirect measure—something oxytocin does to people that we
could measure without a hypodermic needle. Jen found one: lactation.
One of oxytocin’s many jobs in regulating the attachment of mothers and
children is to trigger the release of milk in mothers who breast-feed.
In one of the boldest undergraduate honors theses ever done in the
UVA psychology department, Jen brought forty-five lactating women
into our lab (one at a time), with their babies, and asked them to insert
nursing pads into their bras. Half the women then watched an elevating
clip from an Oprah Winfrey show (about a musician who, after
expressing his gratitude to the music teacher who had saved him from a
life of gang violence, finds out that Oprah has brought in some of his
own students to express their gratitude to him). The other mothers saw a
video clip featuring several comedians. The women watched the videos
in a private screening room, and a video camera (not hidden) recorded
their behavior. When the videos were over, the mothers were left alone
with their children for five minutes. At the end of the study, Jen weighed
the nursing pads to measure milk release, and later coded the videos for
whether the mothers nursed their babies or played warmly with them.
The effect was one of the biggest I have ever found in any study: Nearly
half of the mothers in the elevation condition either leaked milk or
nursed their babies; only a few of the mothers in the comedy condition
leaked or nursed. Furthermore, the elevated mothers showed more
warmth in the way they touched and cuddled their babies. All of this
suggests that oxytocin might be released during moments of elevation.
And if this is true, then perhaps it was naive of me to expect that
elevation would actually cause people to help strangers (even though
they often say they want to do so). Oxytocin causes bonding, not action.
Elevation may fill people with feelings of love, trust,30 and openness,
making them more receptive to new relationships; yet, given their
feelings of relaxation and passivity, they might be less likely to engage in
active altruism toward strangers.
--- END PAGE 208 ---

--- PAGE 209 ---
The relationship of elevation to love and trust was beautifully
expressed in a letter I once received from a man in Massachusetts, David
Whitford, who had read about my work on elevation. Whitford’s
Unitarian church had asked each of its members to write a spiritual
autobiography—an account of how each had become the spiritual person
he or she is now. In one section of his autobiography, Whitford puzzled
over why he was so often moved to tears during church services. He
noticed that he shed two kinds of tears in church. The first he called
“tears of compassion,” such as the time he cried during a sermon on
Mothers’ Day on the subject of children who were abandoned or
neglected. These cases felt to him like “being pricked in the soul,” after
which “love pours out” for those who are suffering. But he called the
second kind “tears of celebration”; he could just as well have called them
tears of elevation:
There’s another kind of tear. This one’s less about giving love and
more about the joy of receiving love, or maybe just detecting love
(whether it’s directed at me or at someone else). It’s the kind of
tear that flows in response to expressions of courage, or
compassion, or kindness by others. A few weeks after Mother’s
Day, we met here in the sanctuary after the service and
considered whether to become a Welcoming Congregation [a
congregation that welcomes gay people]. When John stood in
support of the resolution, and spoke of how, as far as he knew, he
was the first gay man to come out at First Parish, in the early
1970s, I cried for his courage. Later, when all hands went up and
the resolution passed unanimously, I cried for the love expressed
by our congregation in that act. That was a tear of celebration, a
tear of receptiveness to what is good in the world, a tear that says
it’s okay, relax, let down your guard, there are good people in the
world, there is good in people, love is real, it’s in our nature. That
kind of tear is also like being pricked, only now the love pours
in.31
Growing up Jewish in a devoutly Christian country, I was frequently
puzzled by references to Christ’s love and love through Christ. Now that
I understand elevation and the third dimension, I think I’m beginning to
get it. For many people, one of the pleasures of going to church is the
experience of collective elevation. People step out of their everyday
--- END PAGE 209 ---

--- PAGE 210 ---
profane existence, which offers only occasional opportunities for
movement on the third dimension, and come together with a community
of like-hearted people who are also hoping to feel a “lift” from stories
about Christ, virtuous people in the Bible, saints, or exemplary members
of their own community. When this happens, people find themselves
overflowing with love, but it is not exactly the love that grows out of
attachment relationships.32 That love has a specific object, and it turns
to pain when the object is gone. This love has no specific object; it is 
agape. It feels like a love of all humankind, and because humans find it
hard to believe that something comes from nothing, it seems natural to
attribute the love to Christ, or to the Holy Spirit moving within one’s
own heart. Such experiences give direct and subjectively compelling
evidence that God resides within each person. And once a person knows
this “truth,” the ethic of divinity becomes self-evident. Some ways of
living are compatible with divinity—they bring out the higher, nobler
self; others do not. The split between the Christian left and the Christian
right could be, in part, that some people see tolerance and acceptance as
part of their nobler selves; others feel that they can best honor God by
working to change society and its laws to conform to the ethic of
divinity, even if that means imposing religious laws on people of other
faiths. 
A WE AND TRANSCENDENCE 
Virtue is not the only cause of movement on the third dimension. The
vastness and beauty of nature similarly stirs the soul. Immanuel Kant
explicitly linked morality and nature when he declared that the two
causes of genuine awe are “the starry sky above and the moral law
within.”33 Darwin felt spiritually uplifted while exploring South
America:
In my journal I wrote that whilst standing in midst of the
grandeur of a Brazilian forest, “it is not possible to give an
adequate idea of the higher feelings of wonder, admiration, and
devotion which fill and elevate the mind.” I well remember my
conviction that there is more in man than the breath of his
body.34
--- END PAGE 210 ---

--- PAGE 211 ---
The New England transcendentalist movement was based directly on
the idea that God is to be found in each person and in nature, so spending
time alone in the woods is a way of knowing and worshiping God. Ralph
Waldo Emerson, a founder of the movement, wrote:
Standing on the bare ground—my head bathed by the blithe air
and uplifted into infinite space—all mean egotism vanishes. I
become a transparent eyeball; I am nothing; I see all; the currents
of the Universal Being circulate through me; I am part or parcel
of God. The name of the nearest friend sounds then foreign and
accidental; to be brothers, to be acquaintances, master or servant,
is then a trifle and a disturbance. I am the lover of uncontained
and immortal beauty.35
Something about the vastness and beauty of nature makes the self feel
small and insignificant, and anything that shrinks the self creates an
opportunity for spiritual experience. In chapter 1, I wrote about the
divided self—the many ways in which people feel as though they have
multiple selves or intelligences that sometimes conflict. This division is
often explained by positing a soul—a higher, noble, spiritual self, which
is tied down to a body—a lower, base, carnal self. The soul escapes the
body only at death; but before then, spiritual practices, great sermons,
and awe at nature can give the soul a taste of the freedom to come.
There are many other ways of getting such a foretaste. People often
refer to viewing great art, hearing a symphony, or listening to an
inspiring speaker as (crypto) religious experiences. And some things give
more than a taste: They give a full-blown, though temporary, escape.
When the hallucinogenic drugs LSD and psilocybin became widely
known in the West, medical researchers called these drugs “psychoto-
mimetic” because they mimicked some of the symptoms of psychotic
disorders such as schizophrenia. But those who tried the drugs generally
rejected that label and made up terms such as “psychedelic” (manifesting
the mind) and “entheogen” (generating God from within). The Aztec
word for the psilocybin mushroom was teonanacatl, which means
literally “god’s flesh”; when it was eaten in religious ceremonies, it gave
many the experience of a direct encounter with God.36
Drugs that create an altered mental state have an obvious usefulness in
marking off sacred experiences from profane, and therefore many drugs,
--- END PAGE 211 ---

--- PAGE 212 ---
including alcohol and marijuana, play a role in religious rites in some
cultures. But there is something special about the phenethylamines—the
drug class that includes LSD and psilocybin. Drugs in this class, whether
naturally occurring (as in psilocybin, mescaline, or yage) or synthesized
by a chemist (LSD, ecstasy, DMT) are unmatched in their ability to
induce massive alterations of perception and emotion that sometimes
feel, even to secular users, like contact with divinity, and that cause
people to feel afterwards that they’ve been transformed.37 The effects of
these drugs depend greatly on what Timothy Leary and the other early
psychedelic explorers called “set and setting,” referring to the user’s
mental set, and to the setting in which the drugs are taken. When people
bring a reverential mindset and take the drugs in a safe and supportive
setting, as is done in the initiation rites of some traditional cultures,38
these drugs can be catalysts for spiritual and personal growth.
In the most direct test of this catalyst hypothesis, Walter Pahnke,39 a
physician working on a dissertation in theology, brought twenty graduate
students in theology into a room below the chapel at Boston University
on Good Friday 1962. He gave ten of the students 30 milligrams of
psilocybin; the other ten were given identical-looking pills containing
vitamin B5 (nicotinic acid), which creates feelings of tingles and
flushing on the skin. The vitamin B5 is what’s known as an active
placebo: It creates real bodily feelings, so if the beneficial effects of
psilocybin were just placebo effects, the control group would have good
reason to show them. Over the next few hours, the whole group listened
(via speakers) to the Good Friday service going on in the chapel upstairs.
Nobody, not even Pahnke, knew who had taken which pill. But two
hours after the pills were taken, there could be no doubt. Those who had
taken the placebo were the first to feel something happening, and they
assumed they had gotten the psilocybin. But nothing else happened. Half
an hour later, the other students began an experience that many later
described as one of the most important in their lives. Pahnke interviewed
them after the drug wore off, and again a week later, and again six
months later. He found that most of the people in the psilocybin group
reported most of the nine features of mystical experience he had set out
to measure. The strongest and most consistent effects included feelings
of unity with the universe, transcendence of time and space, joy, a
difficulty putting the experience into words, and a feeling of having been
--- END PAGE 212 ---

--- PAGE 213 ---
changed for the better. Many reported seeing beautiful colors and
patterns and having profound feelings of ecstasy, fear, and awe.
Awe is the emotion of self-transcendence. My friend Dacher Keltner,
an expert on emotion at the University of California at Berkeley,
proposed to me a few years ago that we review the literature on awe and
try to make sense of it ourselves. We found40 that scientific psychology
had almost nothing to say about awe. It can’t be studied in other animals
or created easily in the lab, so it doesn’t lend itself to experimental
research. But philosophers, sociologists, and theologians had a great deal
to say about it. As we traced the word “awe” back in history, we
discovered that it has always had a link to fear and submission in the
presence of something much greater than the self. It’s only in very
modern times—in our de-sacralized world, perhaps—that awe has been
reduced to surprise plus approval, and the word “awesome,” much used
by American teenagers, has come to mean little more than “double-plus
good” (to use George Orwell’s term from 1984 ). Keltner and I concluded
that the emotion of awe happens when two conditions are met: a person
perceives something vast (usually physically vast, but sometimes
conceptually vast, such as a grand theory; or socially vast, such as great
fame or power); and the vast thing cannot be accommodated by the
person’s existing mental structures. Something enormous can’t be
processed, and when people are stumped, stopped in their cognitive
tracks while in the presence of something vast, they feel small,
powerless, passive, and receptive. They often (though not always) feel
fear, admiration, elevation, or a sense of beauty as well. By stopping
people and making them receptive, awe creates an opening for change,
and this is why awe plays a role in most stories of religious conversion.
We found a prototype of awe—a perfect but extreme case—in the
dramatic climax of the Bhagavad Gita . The Gita is an episode within the
much longer story of the Mahabharata, an epic work about a war
between two branches of an Indian royal family. As the hero of the story,
Arjuna, is about to lead his troops into battle, he loses his nerve and
refuses to fight. He does not want to lead his kinsmen into slaughter
against his kinsmen. The Gita is the story of how Krishna (a form of the
god Vishnu) persuades Arjuna that he must lead his troops into battle. In
the middle of the battlefield, with troops arrayed on both sides, Krishna
gives a detailed and abstract theological lecture on the topic of dharma—
--- END PAGE 213 ---

--- PAGE 214 ---
the moral law of the universe. Arjuna’s dharma requires that he fight and
win this war. Not surprisingly (given the weakness of reason when it
comes to motivating action), Arjuna is unmoved. Arjuna asks Krishna to
show him this universe of which he speaks. Krishna grants Arjuna’s
request and gives him a cosmic eye that allows him to see God and the
universe as they really are. Arjuna then has an experience that sounds to
modern readers like an LSD trip. He sees suns, gods, and infinite time.
He is filled with amazement. His hair stands on end. He is disoriented
and confused, unable to comprehend the wonders he is seeing. I don’t
know whether Edwin Abbot read the Bhagavad Gita , but the square’s
experience in Spaceland is exactly like Arjuna’s. Arjuna is clearly in a
state of awe when he says, “Things never before seen have I seen, and
ecstatic is my joy; yet fear-and-trembling perturb my mind.”41 When the
cosmic eye is removed and Arjuna comes “down” from his trip, he does
just what the square did: He prostrates himself before the God who
enlightened him, and he begs to serve. Krishna commands Arjuna to be
loyal to him, and to cut off all other attachments. Arjuna gladly obeys,
and, from then on, he honors Krishna’s commands.
Arjuna’s experience is extreme—the stuff of scripture; yet many
people have had a spiritually transformative experience that included
many of the same elements. In what is still the greatest work on the
psychology of religion, William James analyzed the “varieties of
religious experience,”42 including rapid and gradual religious
conversions and experiences with drugs and nature. James found such
extraordinary similarity in the reports of these experiences that he
thought they revealed deep psychological truths. One of the deepest
truths, James said, was that we experience life as a divided self, torn by
conflicting desires. Religious experiences are real and common, whether
or not God exists, and these experiences often make people feel whole
and at peace. In the rapid type of conversion experience (such as those of
Arjuna and the square), the old self, full of petty concerns, doubts, and
grasping attachments, is washed away in an instant, usually an instant of
profound awe. People feel reborn and often remember the exact time and
place of this rebirth, the moment they surrendered their will to a higher
power and were granted direct experience of deeper truth. After such
rebirth, fear and worry are greatly diminished and the world seems clean,
--- END PAGE 214 ---

--- PAGE 215 ---
new, and bright. The self is changed in ways that any priest, rabbi, or
psychotherapist would call miraculous. James described these changes:
The man who lives in his religious centre of personal energy, and
is actuated by spiritual enthusiasms, differs from his previous
carnal self in perfectly definite ways. The new ardor which burns
in his breast consumes in its glow the lower “noes” which
formerly beset him, and keeps him immune against infection
from the entire groveling portion of his nature. Magnanimities
once impossible are now easy; paltry conventionalities and mean
incentives once tyrannical hold no sway. The stone wall inside of
him has fallen, the hardness in his heart has broken down. The
rest of us can, I think, imagine this by recalling our state of
feeling in those temporary “melting moods” into which either the
trials of real life, or the theatre, or a novel sometimes throw us.
Especially if we weep! For it is then as if our tears broke through
an inveterate inner dam, and let all sorts of ancient peccancies
and moral stagnancies drain away, leaving us now washed and
soft of heart and open to every nobler leading.43
James’s “melting moods” are strikingly similar to the feelings of
elevation described by Jefferson and by David Whitford.
Atheists may protest that they, too, can have many of the same
experiences without God. The psychologist who took such secular
experiences seriously was Abraham Maslow, Harry Harlow’s first
graduate student and a founder of humanistic psychology. Maslow
collected reports of what he called “peak experiences”—those
extraordinary self-transcendent moments that feel qualitatively different
from ordinary life. In a small gem of a book, Religions, Values, and Peak
Experiences, 44 Maslow listed twenty-five common features of peak
experiences, nearly all of which can be found somewhere in William
James. Here are some: The universe is perceived as a unified whole
where everything is accepted and nothing is judged or ranked;
egocentrism and goal-striving disappear as a person feels merged with
the universe (and often with God); perceptions of time and space are
altered; and the person is flooded with feelings of wonder, awe, joy, love,
and gratitude.
--- END PAGE 215 ---

--- PAGE 216 ---
Maslow’s goal was to demonstrate that spiritual life has a naturalistic
meaning, that peak experiences are a basic fact about the human mind. In
all eras and all cultures, many people have had these experiences, and
Maslow suggested that all religions are based on the insights of
somebody’s peak experience. Peak experiences make people nobler, just
as James had said, and religions were created as methods of promoting
peak experiences and then maximizing their ennobling powers. Religions
sometimes lose touch with their origins, however; they are sometimes
taken over by people who have not had peak experiences—the
bureaucrats and company men who want to routinize procedures and
guard orthodoxy for orthodoxy’s sake. This, Maslow said, is why many
young people became disenchanted with organized religion in the mid-
twentieth-century, searching instead for peak experiences in psychedelic
drugs, Eastern religions, and new forms of Christian worship.
Maslow’s analysis probably does not shock you. It makes sense as a
secular psychological explanation of religion. But what is most
surprising in Religions, Values, and Peak Experiences is Maslow’s attack
on science for becoming as sterile as organized religion. The historians
of science Lorraine Daston and Katherine Park45 later documented this
change. They showed that scientists and philosophers had traditionally
held an attitude of wonder toward the natural world and the objects of
their inquiry. But in the late sixteenth century, European scientists began
to look down on wonder; they began to see it as the mark of a childish
mind, whereas the mature scientist went about coolly cataloging the laws
of the world. Scientists may tell us in their memoirs about their private
sense of wonder, but the everyday world of the scientist is one that
rigidly separates facts from values and emotions. Maslow echoed Eliade
in claiming that science has helped to de-sacralize the world, that it is
devoted to documenting only what is, rather than what is good or what is 
beautiful. One might object that there is an academic division of labor;
the good and the beautiful are the province of the humanities, not of the
sciences. Maslow charged, however, that the humanities had abdicated
their responsibility with their retreat to relativism, their skepticism about
the possibility of truth, and their preference for novelty and iconoclasm
over beauty. He founded humanistic psychology in part to feed the
widespread hunger for knowledge about values and to investigate the
sort of truth people glimpse in peak experiences. Maslow did not believe
religions were literally true (as actual accounts of God and creation), but
--- END PAGE 216 ---

--- PAGE 217 ---
he thought they were based on the most important truths of life, and he
wanted to unite those truths with the truths of science. His goal was
nothing less than the reformation of education and, therefore, of society:
“Education must be seen as at least partially an effort to produce the
good human being, to foster the good life and the good society.”46 
THE SATANIC SELF 
The self is one of the great paradoxes of human evolution. Like the fire
stolen by Prometheus, it made us powerful but exacted a cost. In The
Curse of the Self, 47 the social psychologist Mark Leary points out that
many other animals can think, but none, so far as we know, spend much
time thinking about themselves. Only a few other primates (and perhaps
dolphins) can even learn that the image in a mirror belongs to them.48
Only a creature with language ability has the mental apparatus to focus
attention on the self, to think about the self’s invisible attributes and long
term goals, to create a narrative about that self, and then to react
emotionally to thoughts about that narrative. Leary suggests that this
ability to create a self gave our ancestors many useful skills, such as
long-term planning, conscious decision making and self-control, and the
ability to see other people’s perspectives. Because these skills are all
important for enabling human beings to work closely together on large
projects, the development of the self may have been crucial to the
development of human ultrasociality. But by giving each one of us an
inner world, a world full of simulations, social comparisons, and
reputational concerns, the self also gave each one of us a personal
tormenter. We all now live amid a whirlpool of inner chatter, much of
which is negative (threats loom larger than opportunities), and most of
which is useless. It is important to note that the self is not exactly the
rider—much of the self is unconscious and automatic—but because the
self emerges from conscious verbal thinking and storytelling, it can be
constructed only by the rider.
Leary’s analysis shows why the self is a problem for all major
religions: The self is the main obstacle to spiritual advancement, in three
ways. First, the constant stream of trivial concerns and egocentric
thoughts keeps people locked in the material and profane world, unable
--- END PAGE 217 ---

--- PAGE 218 ---
to perceive sacredness and divinity. This is why Eastern religions rely
heavily on meditation, an effective means of quieting the chatter of the
self. Second, spiritual transformation is essentially the transformation of
the self, weakening it, pruning it back—in some sense, killing it—and
often the self objects. Give up my possessions and the prestige they
bring? No way! Love my enemies, after what they did to me? Forget
about it. And third, following a spiritual path is invariably hard work,
requiring years of meditation, prayer, self-control, and sometimes self-
denial. The self does not like to be denied, and it is adept at finding
reasons to bend the rules or cheat. Many religions teach that egoistic
attachments to pleasure and reputation are constant temptations to leave
the path of virtue. In a sense, the self is Satan, or, at least, Satan’s portal.
For all these reasons, the self is a problem for the ethic of divinity. The
big greedy self is like a brick holding down the soul. Only by seeing the
self in this way, I believe, can one understand and even respect the moral
motivations of those who want to make their society conform more
closely to the particular religion they follow. 
FLATLAND AND THE CULTURE WAR 
Humor helps people cope with adversity, and after George W. Bush
received a majority of the votes in the U.S. presidential election of 2004,
49 percent of Americans had a lot of coping to do. Many people in the
“blue states” (those where a majority voted for John Kerry, shown on all
electoral maps in blue) could not understand why people in the “red
states” supported Bush and his policies. Liberals posted maps of the
United States on the Internet that showed the blue states (all in the
Northeast, the upper Midwest, and along the West coast) labeled “United
States of America”; the red states (almost the whole interior and south of
the nation) were labeled “Jesusland.” Conservatives countered with their
own map in which the blue states were labeled “New France,” but I think
a more accurate parody, from the right’s point of view, might have been
to call the blue states “Selfland.”
I am not suggesting that people who voted for John Kerry are any
more selfish than those who voted for George Bush—indeed, the
taxation and social policies of the two candidates suggest just the
--- END PAGE 218 ---

--- PAGE 219 ---
opposite. But I am trying to understand the mutual incomprehension of
the two sides in the culture war, and I believe that Shweder’s three ethics
—particularly the ethic of divinity—are the key to it.
Which of the following quotations inspires you more: (1) “Self-esteem
is the basis of any democracy”; (2) “It’s not all about you.” The first is
attributed to Gloria Steinem,49 a founder of the feminist movement in
the 1970s. It claims that sexism, racism, and oppression make particular
groups of people feel unworthy and therefore undermine their
participation in democracy. This quote also reflects the core idea of the
ethic of autonomy: Individuals are what really matter in life, so the ideal
society protects all individuals from harm and respects their autonomy
and freedom of choice. The ethic of autonomy is well suited to helping
people with different backgrounds and values get along with each other
because it allows each person to pursue the life she chooses, as long as
those choices don’t interfere with the rights of others.
The second quote is the opening line of the world’s biggest-selling
book in 2003 and 2004, The Purpose Driven Life by Rick Warren,50 a
guide for finding purpose and meaning through faith in Jesus Christ and
the revelation of the Bible. From Warren’s perspective, the self is the
cause of our problems and therefore efforts to raise children’s self-
esteem directly with awards, praise, and exercises to make them feel
“special” are positively evil. The core idea of the ethic of divinity is that
each person has divinity inside, so the ideal society helps people live in a
way consistent with that divinity. What an individual desires is not
particularly important—many desires come from the carnal self. Schools,
families, and the media should all work together to help children
overcome their sense of self and entitlement and live instead in the way
Christ intended.
Many of the key battles in the American culture war are essentially
about whether some aspect of life should be structured by the ethic of
autonomy or by the ethic of divinity.51 (The ethic of community, which
stresses the importance of the group over that of the individual, tends to
be allied with the ethic of divinity). Should there be prayer in schools?
Should the Ten Commandments be posted in schools and courthouses?
Should the phrase “under God” be struck from the American pledge of
allegiance? Liberals usually want to keep religion out of public life so
--- END PAGE 219 ---

--- PAGE 220 ---
that people cannot be forced to participate against their will, but religious
conservatives want schools and courthouses re-sacralized. They want
their children to live in a (particular) three-dimensional world, and if the
schools won’t provide it, they sometimes turn to home-schooling instead.
Should people be allowed to use birth control, abortion, reproductive
technologies, and assisted suicide as they please? It depends on whether
your goal is to empower people to manage some of the most important
choices of their lives, or whether you think all such decisions must be
made by God. If the book title Our Bodies, Ourselves sounds like a noble
act of defiance to you, you will support people’s rights to choose their
own sexual activities and to modify their bodies as they please. But if
you believe that “God prescribed every single detail of your body,”52 as
Warren writes in The Purpose Driven Life, you will probably be
offended by sexual diversity and by body modifications such as piercings
and plastic surgery. My students and I have interviewed political liberals
and conservatives about sexual morality,53 and about body
modifications,54 and in both studies we found that liberals were much
more permissive and relied overwhelmingly on the ethic of autonomy;
conservatives, much more critical, used all three ethics in their discourse.
For example, one conservative man justified his condemnation of a story
about an unusual form of masturbation:
It’s a sin because it distances ourselves from God. It’s a pleasure
that God did not design for us to enjoy because sexual pleasures,
through, you know, a married heterosexual couple, were designed
by God in order to reproduce.55
On issue after issue, liberals want to maximize autonomy by removing
limits, barriers, and restrictions. The religious right, on the other hand,
wants to structure personal, social, and political relationships in three
dimensions and so create a landscape of purity and pollution where
restrictions maintain the separation of the sacred and the profane. For the
religious right, hell on earth is a flat land of unlimited freedom where
selves roam around with no higher purpose than expressing and
developing themselves.
--- END PAGE 220 ---

--- PAGE 221 ---
As a liberal, I value tolerance and openness to new ideas. I have done my
best, in this chapter, to be tolerant toward those whose politics I oppose
and to find merit in religious ideas I do not hold. But although I have
begun to see the richness that divinity adds to human experience, I do not
entirely lament the “flattening” of life in the West over the last few
hundred years. An unfortunate tendency of three-dimensional societies is
that they often include one or more groups that get pushed down on the
third dimension and then treated badly, or worse. Look at the conditions
of “untouchables” in India until recently, or at the plight of Jews in
medieval Europe and in purity-obsessed Nazi Germany, or at the
humiliation of African Americans in the segregated South. The
American religious right now seems to be trying to push homosexuals
down in a similar way. Liberalism and the ethic of autonomy are great
protectors against such injustices. I believe it is dangerous for the ethic
of divinity to supersede the ethic of autonomy in the governance of a
diverse modern democracy. However, I also believe that life in a society
that entirely ignored the ethic of divinity would be ugly and unsatisfying.
Because the culture war is ideological, both sides use the myth of pure
evil. To acknowledge that the other side might be right about anything is
an act of treason. My research on the third dimension, however, has freed
me from the myth and made it easy for me to think treasonous thoughts.
Here’s one: If the third dimension and perceptions of sacredness are an
important part of human nature, then the scientific community should
accept religiosity as a normal and healthy aspect of human nature—an
aspect that is as deep, important, and interesting as sexuality or language
(which we study intensely). Here’s another treasonous thought: If
religious people are right in believing that religion is the source of their
greatest happiness, then maybe the rest of us who are looking for
happiness and meaning can learn something from them, whether or not
we believe in God. That’s the topic of the final chapter.
--- END PAGE 221 ---

--- PAGE 222 ---
10 
Happiness Comes from Between 
Who sees all beings in his own Self, and his own Self in all beings, loses
all fear. . . . When a sage sees this great Unity and his Self has become
all beings, what delusion and what sorrow can ever be near him?
—UPANISHADS1 
I was entirely happy. Perhaps we feel like that when we die and become
a part of something entire, whether it is sun and air, or goodness and
knowledge. At any rate, that is happiness: to be dissolved into something
complete and great.
—WILLA CATHER2 
P ROVERBS, SAYINGS, AND WORDS of wisdom dignify events, so
we often use them to mark important transitions in life. For the
graduating class of 1981 at Scarsdale High School, in Scarsdale, New
York, choosing a quotation was a rite of passage, an opportunity to
reflect on one’s emerging identity and express some aspect of it. As I
look through the yearbook from that class, at the quotations underneath
each photo, I see two main kinds. Many are tributes to love and
friendship, appropriate for a time of parting from friends (“You never
really leave the friends you love. Part of them you take with you, leaving
a part of you behind.” [ANONYMOUS]). The other kind expresses
optimism, sometimes mixed with trepidation, about the road ahead.
Indeed, it is difficult to think about graduating from high school without
using the metaphor that life is a journey. For example, four students
quoted the Cat Stevens song “On the Road to Find Out.”3 Two quoted
George Washington: “I am embarked on a wide ocean, boundless in its
--- END PAGE 222 ---

--- PAGE 223 ---
prospect and, in which, perhaps, no safe harbor is to be found.”4 And
one student quoted this line from Bruce Springsteen: “Well I got some
beer and the highway’s free / and I got you, and baby you’ve got me.”5
But nestled among these affirmations of life’s limitless possibilities is
one with a darker tone: “Whosoever shall not fall by the sword or by
famine, shall fall by pestilence so why bother shaving?” (WOODY
ALLEN).6 Above those words is a photograph of me.
I was only partly kidding. During the previous year, I had written a
paper examining the play Waiting for Godot, Samuel Beckett’s
existentialist meditation on the absurdity of life in a world with no God,
and it got me thinking. I was already an atheist, and by my senior year I
had became obsessed with the question “What is the meaning of life?” I
wrote my personal statement for college admissions on the
meaninglessness of life. I spent the winter of my senior year in a kind of
philosophical depression—not a clinical depression, just a pervasive
sense that everything was pointless. In the grand scheme of things, I
thought, it really didn’t matter whether I got into college, or whether the
Earth was destroyed by an asteroid or by nuclear war.
My despair was particularly strange because, for the first time since
the age of four, my life was perfect. I had a wonderful girlfriend, great
friends, and loving parents. I was captain of the track team, and, perhaps
most important for a seventeen-year-old boy, I got to drive around in my
father’s 1966 Thunderbird convertible. Yet I kept wondering why any of
it mattered. Like the author of Ecclesiastes, I thought that “all is vanity
and a chasing after wind” (ECCLESIASTES 1:14) .
I finally escaped when, after a week of thinking about suicide (in the
abstract, not as a plan), I turned the problem inside out. There is no God
and no externally given meaning to life, I thought, so from one
perspective it really wouldn’t matter if I killed myself tomorrow. Very
well, then everything beyond tomorrow is a gift with no strings and no
expectations. There is no test to hand in at the end of life, so there is no
way to fail. If this really is all there is, why not embrace it, rather than
throw it away? I don’t know whether this realization lifted my mood or
whether an improving mood helped me to reframe the problem with
hope; but my existential depression lifted and I enjoyed the last months
of high school.
--- END PAGE 223 ---

--- PAGE 224 ---
My interest in the meaning of life continued, however, so in college I
majored in philosophy, where I found few answers. Modern philosophers
specialize in analyzing the meaning of words, but, aside from the
existentialists (who caused the problem for me in the first place), they
had little to say about the meaning of life. It was only after I entered
graduate school in psychology that I realized why modern philosophy
seemed sterile: It lacked a deep understanding of human nature. The
ancient philosophers were often good psychologists, as I have shown in
this book, but when modern philosophy began to devote itself to the
study of logic and rationality, it gradually lost interest in psychology and
lost touch with the passionate, contextualized nature of human life. It is
impossible to analyze “the meaning of life” in the abstract, or in general,
or for some mythical and perfectly rational being.7 Only by knowing the
kinds of beings that we actually are, with the complex mental and
emotional architecture that we happen to possess, can anyone even begin
to ask about what would count as a meaningful life. (Philosophy has, to
its credit, become more psychological and more passionate in recent
years.)8
As I went on in psychology and in my own research on morality, I
discovered that psychology and related sciences have revealed so much
about human nature that an answer is now possible. In fact, we’ve known
most of the answer for a hundred years, and many of the remaining
pieces have fallen into place over the last ten. This chapter is my version
of psychology’s answer to the ultimate question. 
WHAT WAS THE QUESTION? 
The question “What is the meaning of life” might be called the Holy
Question, in analogy to the Holy Grail: Its pursuit is noble and everyone
should want to find an answer, yet few people expect that one can be
found. That’s why books and movies that purport to tell us the answer to
the Holy Question often do so only in jest. In The Hitchhiker’s Guide to
the Galaxy, a gigantic computer built to answer the Holy Question spits
out its solution after 7.5 million years of computation: “forty-two.”9 In
the closing scene of the movie Monty Python’s The Meaning of Life, the
answer to the Holy Question is handed to the actor Michael Palin (in
--- END PAGE 224 ---

--- PAGE 225 ---
drag), who reads it aloud: “Try to be nice to people, avoid eating fat, read
a good book every now and then, get some walking in, and try to live in
harmony with people of all creeds and nations.”10 These answers are
funny precisely because they take the form of good answers, yet their 
content is empty or mundane. These parodies invite us to laugh at
ourselves and ask: What was I expecting? What kind of answer could 
have satisfied me?
One thing philosophy did teach me is how to analyze questions, how
to clarify exactly what is being asked before giving an answer. The Holy
Question cries out for clarification. Whenever we ask “What is the
meaning of X?” what kind of answer could possibly satisfy us?
The most common kind of meaning is definitional. “What is the
meaning of ‘ananym’?” means “Define the word ‘ananym’ for me so that
I can understand it when I read it.” I go to a dictionary,11 look it up, and
find that it means “a pseudonym consisting of the real name written
backwards.” Very well, what is the meaning of “life”? I go back to the
dictionary and find that life has twenty-one meanings, including “the
quality that distinguishes a vital and functional being from a dead body
or purely chemical matter” and “the period from birth to death.” Dead
end. This is not at all the right kind of answer. We are not asking about
the word “life,” we’re asking about life itself.
A second kind of meaning is about symbolism or substitution. If you
dream about exploring a basement and finding a trap door to a
subbasement, you might ask, “What is the meaning of the subbasement?”
The psychologist Carl Jung had such a dream12 and concluded that the
meaning of the subbasement—the thing it symbolized or stood for—was
the collective unconscious, a deep set of ideas shared by all people. But
this is another dead end. Life does not symbolize, stand for, or point to
anything. It is life itself that we want to understand.
A third way in which we ask about meaning is as a plea for help in
making sense of something, usually with reference to people’s intentions
and beliefs. Suppose you walk into a movie half an hour late and have to
leave half an hour before the end. Later that night you are talking with a
friend who saw the whole film and you ask, “What did it mean when the
guy with the curly hair winked at that kid?” You are aware that the act
had some significance for the plot of the movie, and you suspect that you
--- END PAGE 225 ---

--- PAGE 226 ---
need to know certain facts to understand that act. Perhaps a prior
relationship between the two characters had been revealed in the opening
scenes? To ask, “What was the meaning of the wink?” really means,
“What do I need to know to understand that wink?” Now we’re making
progress, for life is much like a movie we walk into well after its opening
scene, and we will have to step out long before most of the story lines
reach their conclusions. We are acutely aware that we need to know a
great deal if we are to understand the few confusing minutes that we do
watch. Of course, we don’t know exactly what it is that we don’t know,
so we can’t frame the question well. We ask, “What is the meaning of
life?” not expecting a direct answer (such as “forty-two”), but rather
hoping for some enlightenment, something to give us an “aha!”
experience in which, suddenly, things that we had not before understood
or recognized as important begin to make sense (as they did for the
square taken to the third dimension).
Once the Holy Question has been re-framed to mean “Tell me
something enlightening about life,” the answer must involve the kinds of
revelations that human beings find enlightening. There appear to be two
specific sub-questions to which people want answers, and for which they
find answers enlightening. The first can be called the question of the
purpose of life: “What is the purpose for which human beings were
placed on Earth? Why are we here?” There are two major classes of
answers to this question: Either you believe in a god/spirit/intelligence
who had some idea, desire, or intention in creating the world or you
believe in a purely material world in which it and you were not created 
for any reason; it all just happened as matter and energy interacted
according to the laws of nature (which, once life got started, included the
principles of Darwinian evolution). Religion is often seen as an answer
to the Holy Question because many religions offer such clear answers to
the sub-question of the purpose of life. Science and religion are often
seen as antagonists, and, indeed, they battle over the teaching of
evolution in the United States precisely because they offer conflicting
answers.
The second sub-question is the question of purpose within life: “How
ought I to live? What should I do to have a good, happy, fulfilling, and 
meaningful life?” When people ask the Holy Question, one of the things
they are hoping for is a set of principles or goals that can guide their
--- END PAGE 226 ---

--- PAGE 227 ---
actions and give their choices meaning or value. (That is why the form of
the answer in the Monty Python movie is correct: “Try to be nice to
people, avoid eating fat . . . ”). Aristotle asked about aretē 
(excellence/virtue) and telos (purpose/goal), and he used the metaphor
that people are like archers, who need a clear target at which to aim.13
Without a target or goal, one is left with the animal default: Just let the
elephant graze or roam where he pleases. And because elephants live in
herds, one ends up doing what everyone else is doing. Yet the human
mind has a rider, and as the rider begins to think more abstractly in
adolescence, there may come a time when he looks around, past the
edges of the herd, and asks: Where are we all going? And why? This is
what happened to me my senior year of high school.
In my adolescent existentialism, I conflated the two sub-questions.
Because I embraced the scientific answer to the question of the purpose 
of life, I thought it precluded finding purpose within life. It was an easy
mistake to make because many religions teach that the two questions are
inseparable. If you believe that God created you as part of His plan, then
you can figure out how you ought to live if you are going to play your
part properly. The Purpose Driven Life 14 is a forty-day course that
teaches readers how to find purpose within life from the theological
answer to the question of the purpose of life.
The two questions can, however, be separated. The first asks about life
from the outside; it looks at people, the Earth, and the stars as objects 
—“Why do they all exist?”—and is properly addressed by theologians,
physicists, and biologists. The second question is about life from the
inside, as a subject —“How can I find a sense of meaning and
purpose?”—and is properly addressed by theologians, philosophers, and
psychologists. The second question is really empirical—a question of
fact that can be examined by scientific means. Why do some people live
lives full of zest, commitment, and meaning, but others feel that their
lives are empty and pointless? For the rest of this chapter I will ignore
the purpose of life and search for the factors that give rise to a sense of
purpose within life. 
LOVE AND WORK
--- END PAGE 227 ---

--- PAGE 228 ---
When a computer breaks, it doesn’t fix itself. You have to open it up and
do something to it, or bring it to a specialist for repair. The computer
metaphor has so pervaded our thought that we sometimes think about
people as computers, and about psychotherapy as the repair shop or a
kind of reprogramming. But people are not computers, and they usually
recover on their own from almost anything that happens to them.15 I
think a better metaphor is that people are like plants. During graduate
school, I had a small garden in front of my house in Philadelphia. I was
not a very good gardener, and I traveled a lot in the summers, so
sometimes my plants withered and nearly died. But the amazing thing I
learned about plants is that as long as they are not completely dead, they
will spring back to full and glorious life if you just get the conditions
right. You can’t fix a plant; you can only give it the right conditions—
water, sun, and soil—and then wait. It will do the rest.
If people are like plants, what are the conditions we need to flourish?
In the happiness formula from chapter 5, H(appiness) = S(etpoint) +
C(onditions) + V(oluntary activities), what exactly is C? The biggest part
of C, as I said in chapter 6, is love. No man, woman, or child is an island.
We are ultrasocial creatures, and we can’t be happy without having
friends and secure attachments to other people. The second most
important part of C is having and pursuing the right goals, in order to
create states of flow and engagement. In the modern world, people can
find goals and flow in many settings, but most people find most of their
flow at work.16 (I define work broadly to include anyone’s answer to the
question “So, what do you do?” “Student” and “full-time parent” are
both good answers). Love and work are, for people, obvious analogues to
water and sunshine for plants.17 When Freud was asked what a normal
person should be able to do well, he is reputed to have said, “Love and
work.”18 If therapy can help a person do those two things well, it has
succeeded. In Maslow’s famous hierarchy of needs, once people have
satisfied their physical needs (such as food and safety), they move on to
needs for love and then esteem, which is earned mostly through one’s
work. Even before Freud, Leo Tolstoy wrote: “One can live
magnificently in this world, if one knows how to work and how to love,
to work for the person one loves and to love one’s work.”19 Having
--- END PAGE 228 ---

--- PAGE 229 ---
earlier said everything I want to say about love, I will say no more here.
But I must say much more about work.
When Harry Harlow took his students to the zoo, they were surprised
to find that apes and monkeys would solve problems just for the fun of it.
Behaviorism had no way to explain such unreinforced behavior. In 1959,
the Harvard psychologist Robert White20 concluded, after surveying
research in behaviorism and psychoanalysis, that both theories had
missed what Harlow had noticed: the overwhelming evidence that people
and many other mammals have a basic drive to make things happen. You
can see it in the joy infants take with “busy boxes,” the activity centers
that allow them to convert flailing arm movements into ringing bells and
spinning wheels. You can see it in the toys to which older children
gravitate. The ones I most intensely longed for as a boy were those that
caused movement or action at a distance: remote-controlled cars, guns
that shot plastic pellets, and rockets or airplanes of any kind. And you
can see it in the lethargy that often overtakes people who stop working,
whether from retirement, being fired, or winning a lottery. Psychologists
have referred to this basic need as a need for competence, industry, or
mastery. White called it the “effectance motive,” which he defined as the
need or drive to develop competence through interacting with and
controlling one’s environment. Effectance is almost as basic a need as
food and water, yet it is not a deficit need, like hunger, that is satisfied
and then disappears for a few hours. Rather, White said, effectance is a
constant presence in our lives:
Dealing with the environment means carrying on a continuing
transaction which gradually changes one’s relation to the
environment. Because there is no consummatory climax,
satisfaction has to be seen as lying in a considerable series of
transactions, in a trend of behavior rather than a goal that is
achieved.21
The effectance motive helps explain the progress principle: We get
more pleasure from making progress toward our goals than we do from
achieving them because, as Shakespeare said, “Joy’s soul lies in the
doing.”22
--- END PAGE 229 ---

--- PAGE 230 ---
Now we can look at the conditions of modern work. Karl Marx’s
criticism of capitalism23 was based in part on his justified claim that the
Industrial Revolution had destroyed the historical relationship between
craftsmen and the goods they produced. Assembly-line work turned
people into cogs in a giant machine, and the machine didn’t care about
workers’ need for effectance. Later research on job satisfaction
supported Marx’s critique, but added nuance. In 1964, the sociologists
Melvin Kohn and Carmi Schooler24 surveyed 3,100 American men
about their jobs and found that the key to understanding which jobs were
satisfying was what they called “occupational self direction.” Men who
were closely supervised in jobs of low complexity and much routine
showed the highest degree of alienation (feeling powerless, dissatisfied,
and separated from the work). Men who had more latitude in deciding
how they approached work that was varied and challenging tended to
enjoy their work much more. When workers had occupational self-
direction, their work was often satisfying.
More recent research finds that most people approach their work in
one of three ways: as a job, a career, or a calling.25 If you see your work
as a job, you do it only for the money, you look at the clock frequently
while dreaming about the weekend ahead, and you probably pursue
hobbies, which satisfy your effectance needs more thoroughly than does
your work. If you see your work as a career, you have larger goals of
advancement, promotion, and prestige. The pursuit of these goals often
energizes you, and you sometimes take work home with you because you
want to get the job done properly. Yet, at times, you wonder why you
work so hard. You might occasionally see your work as a rat race where
people are competing for the sake of competing. If you see your work as
a calling, however, you find your work intrinsically fulfilling—you are
not doing it to achieve something else. You see your work as
contributing to the greater good or as playing a role in some larger
enterprise the worth of which seems obvious to you. You have frequent
experiences of flow during the work day, and you neither look forward to
“quitting time” nor feel the desire to shout, “Thank God it’s Friday!” You
would continue to work, perhaps even without pay, if you suddenly
became very wealthy.
You might think that blue-collar workers have jobs, managers have
careers, and the more respected professionals (doctors, scientists, clergy)
--- END PAGE 230 ---

--- PAGE 231 ---
have callings. Although there is some truth to that expectation, we can
nonetheless paraphrase Marcus Aurelius and say, “Work itself is but
what you deem it.” Amy Wrzesniewski, a psychologist at New York
University, finds all three orientations represented in almost every
occupation she has examined.26 In a study of hospital workers, for
example, she found that the janitors who cleaned bed pans and mopped
up vomit—perhaps the lowest-ranking job in a hospital—sometimes saw
themselves as part of a team whose goal was to heal people. They went
beyond the minimum requirements of their job description, for example,
by trying to brighten up the rooms of very sick patients or anticipating
the needs of the doctors and nurses rather than waiting for orders. In so
doing, they increased their own occupational self-direction and created
for themselves jobs that satisfied their effectance needs. Those janitors
who worked this way saw their work as a calling and enjoyed it far more
than those who saw it as a job.
The optimistic conclusion coming out of research in positive
psychology is that most people can get more satisfaction from their
work. The first step is to know your strengths. Take the strengths test27
and then choose work that allows you to use your strengths every day,
thereby giving yourself at least scattered moments of flow. If you are
stuck in a job that doesn’t match your strengths, recast and reframe your
job so that it does. Maybe you’ll have to do some extra work for a while,
like the hospital janitors who were acting on strengths of kindness,
loving, emotional intelligence, or citizenship. If you can engage your
strengths, you’ll find more gratification in work; if you find gratification,
you’ll shift into a more positive, approach-oriented mindset; and in such
a mindset it will be easier for you to see the bigger picture28—the
contribution you are making to a larger enterprise—within which your
job might turn into a calling.
Work at its best, then, is about connection, engagement, and
commitment. As the poet Kahlil Gibran said, “Work is love made
visible.” Echoing Tolstoy, he gave examples of work done with love: 
It is to weave the cloth with threads drawn from your heart,
even as if your beloved were to wear that cloth.
It is to build a house with affection,
even as if your beloved were to dwell in that house.
--- END PAGE 231 ---

--- PAGE 232 ---
It is to sow seeds with tenderness and reap the harvest with joy,
even as if your beloved were to eat the fruit.29 
Love and work are crucial for human happiness because, when done
well, they draw us out of ourselves and into connection with people and
projects beyond ourselves. Happiness comes from getting these
connections right. Happiness comes not just from within, as Buddha and
Epictetus supposed, or even from a combination of internal and external
factors (as I suggested as a temporary fix at the end of chapter 5). The
correct version of the happiness hypothesis, as I’ll illustrate below, is that
happiness comes from between. 
VITAL ENGAGEMENT 
Plants thrive under particular conditions, and biologists can now tell us
how sunlight and water get converted into plant growth. People thrive
under particular conditions, and psychologists can now tell us how love
and work get converted into happiness and a sense of meaning.
The man who found flow, Mihalyi Csikszentmihalyi, thinks big. Not
content to study moments of flow (by beeping people several times a
day), he wanted to know what role flow plays in life as a whole,
particularly in the lives of creative people. So he turned to the experts:
paragons of success in the arts and sciences. He and his students have
interviewed hundreds of successful painters, dancers, poets, novelists,
physicists, biologists, and psychologists—all people who seem to have
crafted lives for themselves built around a consuming passion. These are
admirable lives, desirable lives, the sort that many young people dream
of having when they look to these people as role models.
Csikszentmihalyi wanted to know how such lives happened. How does a
person come to make such a commitment to a field and then become so
extraordinarily creative?
His interviews showed that every path is unique, yet most of them led
in the same direction: from initial interest and enjoyment, with moments
of flow, through a relationship to people, practices, and values that
deepened over many years, thereby enabling even longer periods of flow.
Csikszentmihalyi and his students, particularly Jeanne Nakamura, have
--- END PAGE 232 ---

--- PAGE 233 ---
studied the end state of this deepening process and called it “vital
engagement,” which they define as “a relationship to the world that is
characterized both by experiences of flow (enjoyed absorption) and by
meaning (subjective significance).” 30 Vital engagement is another way
of saying that work has become “love made visible”; Nakamura and
Csikszentmihalyi even describe vital engagement in words that could
almost have been taken from a romance novel: “There is a strong felt
connection between self and object; a writer is ‘swept away’ by a
project, a scientist is ‘mesmerized by the stars.’ The relationship has
subjective meaning; work is a ‘calling.’”31
Vital engagement is a subtle concept, and the first time I taught a
course on positive psychology, the students weren’t getting it. I thought
that an example would help, so I called on a woman who had been quiet
in class, but who had once mentioned her interest in horses. I asked
Katherine to tell us how she got involved in riding. She described her
childhood love of animals, and her interest in horses in particular. At the
age of ten she begged her parents to let her take riding lessons, and they
agreed. She rode for fun at first, but soon began riding in competitions.
When it came time to choose a college, she chose the University of
Virginia in part because it had an excellent riding team.
Katherine was shy, and, after narrating these basic facts, she stopped
talking. She had told us about her increasing commitment to riding, but
vital engagement is more than just commitment. I probed further. I asked
whether she could tell us the names of specific horses from previous
centuries. She smiled and said, almost as if admitting a secret, that she
had begun to read about horses when she began to ride, and that she
knew a great deal about the history of horses and about famous horses in
history. I asked whether she had made friends through riding, and she
told us that most of her close friends were “horse friends,” people she
knew from horse shows and from riding together. As she talked, she
grew more animated and confident. It was as clear from her demeanor as
from her words that Katherine had found vital engagement in riding. Just
as Nakamura and Csikszentmihalyi had said, her initial interest grew into
an ever-deepening relationship, an ever-thickening web connecting her to
an activity, a tradition, and a community. Riding for Katherine had
become a source of flow, joy, identity, effectance, and relatedness. It was
part of her answer to the question of purpose within life.
--- END PAGE 233 ---

--- PAGE 234 ---
Vital engagement does not reside in the person or in the environment;
it exists in the relationship between the two. The web of meaning that
engulfed Katherine grew and thickened gradually and organically, over
many years. Vital engagement is what I was missing during my senior
year of high school. I had love, and I had work (in the form of
reasonably challenging high school classes), but my work was not part of
a larger project beyond getting into college. In fact, it was precisely
when the college project was ending—when I had sent off my college
applications and was in limbo, not knowing where I would go next—that
I became paralyzed by the Holy Question.
Getting the right relationship between you and your work is not
entirely up to you. Some occupations come ready-made for vital
engagement; others make it difficult. As market forces were reshaping
many professions in the United States during the 1990s—medicine,
journalism, science, education, and the arts—people in those fields began
to complain that the quality of work and the quality of life were
sometimes compromised by the relentless drive to increase profits.
Csikszentmihalyi teamed up with two other leading psychologists—
Howard Gardner at Harvard, and William Damon at Stanford—to study
these changes, and to see why some professions seemed healthy while
others were growing sick. Picking the fields of genetics and journalism
as case studies, they conducted dozens of interviews with people in each
field. Their conclusion32 is as profound as it is simple: It’s a matter of
alignment. When doing good (doing high-quality work that produces
something of use to others) matches up with doing well (achieving
wealth and professional advancement), a field is healthy. Genetics, for
example, is a healthy field because all parties involved respect and
reward the very best science. Even though pharmaceutical companies
and market forces were beginning to inject vast amounts of money into
university research labs in the 1990s, the scientists whom
Csikszentmihalyi, Gardner, and Damon interviewed did not believe they
were being asked to lower their standards, cheat, lie, or sell their souls.
Geneticists believed that their field was in a golden age in which
excellent work brought great benefits to the general public, the
pharmaceutical companies, the universities, and the scientists
themselves.
--- END PAGE 234 ---

--- PAGE 235 ---
Journalists, on the other hand, were in trouble. Most of them had gone
into journalism with high ideals—respect for the truth, a desire to make a
difference in the world, and a firm belief that a free press is a crucial
support of democracy. But by the 1990s, the decline of family-run
newspapers and the rise of corporate media empires had converted
American journalism into just another profit center where the only thing
that mattered was will it sell, and will it outsell our competitors? Good
journalism was sometimes bad for business. Scare stories, exaggeration,
trumped up conflict, and sexual scandal, all cut up into tiny digestible
pieces, were often more profitable. Many journalists who worked for
these empires confessed to having a sense of being forced to sell out and
violate their own moral standards. Their world was unaligned, and they
could not become vitally engaged in the larger but ignoble mission of
gaining market share at any cost. 
CROSS-LEVEL COHERENCE 
The word “coherence” literally means holding or sticking together, but it
is usually used to refer to a system, an idea, or a worldview whose parts
fit together in a consistent and efficient way. Coherent things work well:
A coherent worldview can explain almost anything, while an incoherent
worldview is hobbled by internal contradictions. A coherent profession,
such as genetics, can get on with the business of genetics, while an
incoherent profession, like journalism, spends a lot of time on self-
analysis and self-criticism.33 Most people know there’s a problem, but
they can’t agree on what to do about it.
Whenever a system can be analyzed at multiple levels, a special kind
of coherence occurs when the levels mesh and mutually interlock. We
saw this cross-level coherence in the analysis of personality: If your
lower-level traits match up with your coping mechanisms, which in turn
are consistent with your life story, your personality is well integrated and
you can get on with the business of living. When these levels do not
cohere, you are likely to be torn by internal contradictions and neurotic
conflicts.34 You might need adversity to knock yourself into alignment.
And if you do achieve coherence, the moment when things come
together may be one of the most profound of your life. Like the
--- END PAGE 235 ---

--- PAGE 236 ---
moviegoer who later finds out what she missed in the first half hour,
your life will suddenly make more sense. Finding coherence across
levels feels like enlightenment,35 and it is crucial for answering the
question of purpose within life.
People are multilevel systems in another way: We are physical objects
(bodies and brains) from which minds somehow emerge; and from our
minds, somehow societies and cultures form.36 To understand ourselves
fully we must study all three levels—physical, psychological, and
sociocultural. There has long been a division of academic labor:
Biologists studied the brain as a physical object, psychologists studied
the mind, and sociologists and anthropologists studied the socially
constructed environments within which minds develop and function. But
a division of labor is productive only when the tasks are coherent—when
all lines of work eventually combine to make something greater than the
sum of its parts. For much of the twentieth century that didn’t happen—
each field ignored the others and focused on its own questions. But
nowadays cross-disciplinary work is flourishing, spreading out from the
middle level (psychology) along bridges (or perhaps ladders) down to the
physical level (for example, the field of cognitive neuroscience) and up
to the sociocultural level (for example, cultural psychology). The
sciences are linking up, generating cross-level coherence, and, like
magic, big new ideas are beginning to emerge.
Here is one of the most profound ideas to come from the ongoing
synthesis: People gain a sense of meaning when their lives cohere across
the three levels of their existence. 37 The best way I can illustrate this
idea is to take you back to Bhubaneswar, India. I have already explained
the logic of purity and pollution, so you understand why Hindus bathe
before making an offering to God, and why they are careful about what
they touch on the way to the temple. You understand why contact with a
dog, a menstruating woman, or a person of low caste can render a person
of high caste temporarily impure and unfit to make an offering. But you
understand all this only at the psychological level and, even then, only as
a set of propositions grasped by the rider and stored away as explicit
knowledge. You do not feel polluted after touching the arm of a woman
you know to be menstruating; you do not even know what it would feel
like to feel polluted in that way.
--- END PAGE 236 ---

--- PAGE 237 ---
Suppose, however, that you grow up as a Brahmin in Bhubaneswar.
Every day of your life you have to respect the invisible lines separating
pure from profane spaces, and you have to keep track of people’s
fluctuating levels of purity before you can touch them or take anything
from their hands. You bathe several times a day—short baths or brief
immersions in sacred water—always before making a religious offering.
And your offerings are not just words: You actually give some food to
God (the priest touches your offering to the image, icon, or object in the
inner sanctum), which is returned to you so that you may eat what God
left over. Eating someone’s leftovers shows a willingness to take in that
person’s saliva, which demonstrates both intimacy and subordination in
Bhubaneswar. Eating God’s leftovers is an act of intimacy, and
subordination, too. After twenty years of these practices, your
understanding of Hindu rituals is visceral. Your explicit understanding is
supported by a hundred physical feelings: shivering during the morning
bath at sunrise; the pleasure of washing off dust and putting on clean
clothes after a bath on a hot afternoon; the feeling of bare feet on cool
stone floors as you approach the inner sanctum; the smell of incense; the
sound of mumbled prayers in Sanskrit, the bland (pure) taste of rice that
has been returned to you from God. In all these ways, your
understanding at the psychological level has spread down to your
physical embodiment, and when the conceptual and visceral levels
connect, the rituals feel right to you.
Your understanding of ritual spreads up to the sociocultural level, too.
You are immersed in a 4,000-year-old religious tradition that provided
most of the stories you heard as a child, many of which involved plot
elements of purity and pollution. Hinduism structures your social space
through a caste system based on the purity and pollution of various
occupations, and it structures your physical space with the topography of
purity and pollution that keeps temples, kitchens, and right hands pure.
Hinduism also gives you a cosmology in which souls reincarnate by
moving up or down on the vertical dimension of divinity. So every time
you make an offering to God, the three levels of your existence are all
aligned and mutually interlocking. Your physical feelings and conscious
thoughts cohere with your actions, and all of it makes perfect sense
within the larger culture of which you are a part. As you make an
offering to God, you don’t think, “What does this all mean? Why am I
doing this?” The experience of meaningfulness just happens. It emerges
--- END PAGE 237 ---

--- PAGE 238 ---
automatically from cross-level coherence. Once again, happiness—or a
sense of meaningfulness that imparts richness to experience—comes
from between.
In contrast, think about the last empty ritual you took part in. Maybe
you were asked to join hands and chant with a group of strangers while
attending a wedding ceremony for a friend who is of a different religion.
Perhaps you took part in a new age ceremony that borrowed elements
from Native Americans, ancient Celts, and Tibetan Buddhists. You
probably understood the symbolism of the ritual—understood it
consciously and explicitly in the way that the rider is so good at doing.
Yet you felt self-conscious, maybe even silly, while doing it. Something
was missing.
You can’t just invent a good ritual through reasoning about
symbolism. You need a tradition within which the symbols are
embedded, and you need to invoke bodily feelings that have some
appropriate associations. Then you need a community to endorse and
practice it over time. To the extent that a community has many rituals
that cohere across the three levels, people in the community are likely to
feel themselves connected to the community and its traditions. If the
community also offers guidance on how to live and what is of value, then
people are unlikely to wonder about the question of purpose within life.
Meaning and purpose simply emerge from the coherence, and people can
get on with the business of living. But conflict, paralysis, and anomie are
likely when a community fails to provide coherence, or, worse, when its
practices contradict people’s gut feelings or their shared mythology and
ideology. (Martin Luther King, Jr., forced Americans to confront
contradictions between practices of racial segregation and ideals about
equality and freedom. Many people didn’t like that.) People don’t
necessarily need to find meaning in their national identity—indeed, in
large and diverse nations such as the United States, Russia, and India,
religion might hold greater promise for cross-level coherence and
purpose within life. Religions do such a good job of creating coherence,
in fact, that some scholars38 believe they were designed for that purpose. 
GOD GIVES US HIVES
--- END PAGE 238 ---

--- PAGE 239 ---
When I first began to study morality as a philosophy major in college,
my father said, “Why aren’t you studying religion, too? How could
people have morality without God?” As a young atheist with a strong
sense of morality (well over the border into self-righteousness), I was
insulted by my father’s suggestion. Morality, I thought, was about
relationships among people; it was about a commitment to doing the
right thing, even when it goes against your self-interest. Religion, I
thought, was a bunch of rules that made no sense and stories that could
never have happened, written down by people and then falsely attributed
to a supernatural entity.
I now believe my father was right—morality has its origins in religion
—but not for the reasons he believed. Morality and religion both occur in
some form in all human cultures39 and are almost always both
intertwined with the values, identity, and daily life of the culture. Anyone
who wants a full, cross-level account of human nature, and of how
human beings find purpose and meaning in their lives, must make that
account cohere with what is known about morality and religion.
From an evolutionary perspective, morality is a problem. If evolution
is all about survival of the fittest, then why do people help each other so
much? Why do they give to charity, risk their lives to save strangers, and
volunteer to fight in wars? Darwin thought the answer was easy:
Altruism evolves for the good of the group:
There can be no doubt that a tribe including many members who,
from possessing in a high degree the spirit of patriotism, fidelity,
obedience, courage, and sympathy, were always ready to aid one
another, and to sacrifice themselves for the common good would
be victorious over most other tribes, and this would be natural
selection.40
Darwin proposed that groups compete, just like individuals, and
therefore psychological features that make groups successful—such as
patriotism, courage, and altruism toward fellow group members—should
spread like any other trait. But once evolutionary theorists began testing
predictions rigorously, using computers to model the interactions of
individuals who use various strategies (such as pure selfishness versus tit
for tat), they quickly came to appreciate the seriousness of the “free-rider
problem.” In groups in which people make sacrifices for the common
--- END PAGE 239 ---

--- PAGE 240 ---
good, an individual who makes no such sacrifices—who in effect takes a
free ride on the backs of the altruists—comes out ahead. In the cold logic
of these computer simulations, whoever accumulates the most resources
in one generation goes on to produce more children in the next, so
selfishness is adaptive but altruism is not. The only solution to the free-
rider problem is to make altruism pay, and two back-to-back
breakthroughs in evolutionary thinking showed how to do that. In
chapter 3 I presented kin altruism (be nice to those who share your
genes) and reciprocal altruism (be nice to those who might reciprocate in
the future) as two steps on the way to ultrasociality. Once these two
solutions to the free-rider problem were published (in 1966 and 1971,
respectively),41 most evolutionary theorists considered the problem of
altruism solved and essentially declared group selection illegal. Altruism
could be explained away as a special kind of selfishness, and anyone
who followed Darwin in thinking that evolution worked for the “good of
the group” instead of the good of the individual (or better yet, the good
of the gene),42 was dismissed as a mushy-headed romantic.
The ban on group selection had one loophole. For creatures that really
do compete, live, and die as a group, such as the other ultrasocial animals
(bees, wasps, ants, termites, and naked mole rats), group selection
explanations were appropriate. There is a real sense in which a beehive
or an ant colony is a single organism, each insect a cell in the larger
body.43 Like stem cells, ants can take different physical forms to
perform specific functions needed by the colony: small bodies to care for
larva, larger bodies with special appendages to forage for food or fight
off attackers. Like cells in the immune system, ants will sacrifice
themselves to protect the colony: In one species of Malaysian ant,44
members of the soldier caste store a sticky substance just under their
exoskeletons. In the midst of battle, they explode their bodies, turning
themselves into suicide bombers to gum up their adversaries. For ants
and bees, the queen is not the brain; she is the ovary, and the entire hive
or colony can be seen as a body shaped by natural selection to protect the
ovary and help it create more hives or colonies. Because all members
really are in the same boat, group selection is not just permissible as an
explanation; it is mandatory.
--- END PAGE 240 ---

--- PAGE 241 ---
Might this loophole apply to humans as well? Do humans compete,
live, and die as a group? Tribes and ethnic groups do grow and spread or
fade and die out, and sometimes this process has occurred by genocide.
Furthermore, human societies often have an extraordinary division of
labor, so the comparison to bees and ants is tempting. But as long as each
human being has the opportunity to reproduce, the evolutionary payoffs
for investing in one’s own welfare and one’s own offspring will almost
always exceed the payoffs for contributing to the group; in the long run,
selfish traits will therefore spread at the expense of altruistic traits. Even
during war and genocide, when group interests are most compelling, it is
the coward who runs and hides, rather than joining his comrades on the
front lines, who is most likely to pass on his genes to the next generation.
Evolutionary theorists have therefore stood united, since the early 1970s,
in their belief that group selection simply did not play a role in shaping
human nature.
But wait a second. This is not an all-or-nothing issue. Even if the
competition of individuals within a group is the most important process
in human evolution, group selection (competition between groups) could
have played a role too. The evolutionary biologist David Sloan Wilson45
has recently argued that the banishment of group selection theories on
the basis of some oversimplified computer models from the 1960s was
one of the biggest mistakes in the history of modern biology. If you make
the models more realistic, more like real human beings, group selection
jumps right out at you. Wilson points out that human beings evolve at
two levels simultaneously: genetic and cultural. The simple models of
the 1960s worked well for creatures without culture; for them, behavioral
traits must all be encoded in the genes, which are passed on only along
lines of kinship. But everything a person does is influenced not only by
her genes but also by her culture, and cultures evolve, too. Because
elements of culture show variation (people invent new things) and
selection (other people do or don’t adopt those variations), cultural traits
can be analyzed in a Darwinian framework46 just as well as physical
traits (birds’ beaks, giraffes’ necks). Cultural elements, however, don’t
spread by the slow process of having children; they spread rapidly
whenever people adopt a new behavior, technology, or belief. Cultural
traits can even spread from tribe to tribe or nation to nation, as when the
--- END PAGE 241 ---

--- PAGE 242 ---
plough, the printing press, or reality television programs became popular
in many places in quick succession.
Cultural and genetic evolution are intertwined. The human capacity
for culture—a strong tendency to learn from each other, to teach each
other, and to build upon what we have learned—is itself a genetic
innovation that happened in stages over the last few million years.47 But
once our brains reached a critical threshold, perhaps 80,000 to 100,000
years ago,48 cultural innovation began to accelerate; a strong
evolutionary pressure then shaped brains to take further advantage of
culture. Individuals who could best learn from others were more
successful than their less “cultured” brethren, and as brains became more
cultural, cultures became more elaborate, further increasing the
advantage of having a more cultural brain. All human beings today are
the products of the co-evolution of a set of genes (which is almost
identical across cultures) and a set of cultural elements (which is diverse
across cultures, but still constrained by the capacities and predispositions
of the human mind).49 For example, the genetic evolution of the
emotion of disgust made it possible (but not inevitable) for cultures to
develop caste systems based on occupation and supported by disgust
toward those who perform “polluting” activities. A caste system then
restricts marriage to within-caste pairings, which in turn alters the course
of genetic evolution. After a thousand years of inbreeding within caste,
castes will diverge slightly on a few genetic traits—for example, shades
of skin color—which might in turn lead to a growing cultural association
of caste with color rather than just with occupation. (It only takes twenty
generations of selective breeding to create large differences of
appearance and behavior in other mammals.)50 In this way, genes and
cultures co-evolve;51 they mutually affect each other, and neither
process can be studied in isolation for human beings.
Wilson examines religion from this co-evolutionary perspective. The
word religion literally means, in Latin, to link or bind together; and
despite the vast variation in the world’s religions, Wilson shows that
religions always serve to coordinate and orient people’s behavior toward
each other and toward the group as a whole, sometimes for the purpose
of competing with other groups. The sociologist Emile Durkheim first
developed this view of religion in 1912:
--- END PAGE 242 ---

--- PAGE 243 ---
A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to
sacred things, that is to say, things set apart and forbidden—
beliefs and practices which unite into one single moral
community called a church, all those who adhere to them.52
Wilson shows how religious practices help members solve
coordination problems. For example, trust and therefore trade are greatly
enhanced when all parties are part of the same religious community, and
when religious beliefs say that God knows and cares about the honesty of
the parties. (The anthropologist Pascal Boyer53 points out that gods and
ancestor spirits are often thought to be omniscient, yet what they most
care about in this vast universe is the moral intentions hidden in the
hearts of the living.) Respect for rules is enhanced when rules have an
element of sacredness, and when they are backed up by supernatural
sanction and the gossip or ostracism of one’s peers. Wilson’s claim is
that religious ideas, and brains that responded to those ideas, co-evolved.
Even if the belief in supernatural entities emerged originally for some
other reason, or as an accidental byproduct in the evolution of cognition
(as some scholars have claimed),54 groups that parlayed those beliefs
into social coordination devices (for example, by linking them to
emotions such as shame, fear, guilt, and love) found a cultural solution to
the free-rider problem and then reaped the enormous benefits of trust and
cooperation. If stronger belief led to greater individual benefits, or if a
group developed a way to punish or exclude those who did not share in
its beliefs and practices, conditions were perfect for the co-evolution of
religion and religious brains. (Consistent with Wilson’s proposal, the
geneticist Dean Hamer recently reported evidence from twin studies that
suggests a particular gene may be associated with a stronger tendency to
have religious and self-transcendent experiences.)55
Religion, therefore, could have pulled human beings into the group-
selection loophole. By making people long ago feel and act as though
they were part of one body, religion reduced the influence of individual
selection (which shapes individuals to be selfish) and brought into play
the force of group selection (which shapes individuals to work for the
good of their group). But we didn’t make it all the way through the
loophole: Human nature is a complex mix of preparations for extreme
selfishness and extreme altruism. Which side of our nature we express
--- END PAGE 243 ---

--- PAGE 244 ---
depends on culture and context. When opponents of evolution object that
human beings are not mere apes, they are correct. We are also part bee. 
HARMONY AND PURPOSE 
Reading Wilson’s Darwin’s Cathedral is like taking a journey to
Spaceland. You can look down on the vast tapestry of human cultures
and see why things are woven in the way that they are. Wilson says his
own private hell would be to be locked forever into a room full of people
discussing the hypocrisies of religion, for example, that many religions
preach love, compassion, and virtue yet sometimes cause war, hatred,
and terrorism. From Wilson’s higher perspective, there is no
contradiction. Group selection creates interlocking genetic and cultural
adaptations that enhance peace, harmony, and cooperation within the
group for the express purpose of increasing the group’s ability to
compete with other groups. Group selection does not end conflict; it just
pushes it up to the next level of social organization. Atrocities committed
in the name of religion are almost always committed against out-group
members, or against the most dangerous people of all: apostates (who try
to leave the group) and traitors (who undermine the group).
A second puzzle that Wilson can solve is why mysticism, everywhere
and always, is about transcending the self and merging with something
larger than the self. When William James analyzed mysticism, he
focused on the psychological state of “cosmic consciousness”56 and on
the techniques developed in all the major religions to attain it. Hindus
and Buddhists use meditation and yoga to attain the state of s amadhi, in
which “the subject-object distinction and one’s sense of an individual
self disappear in a state usually described as one of supreme peace, bliss,
and illumination.”57 James found much the same goal in Christian and
Muslim mysticism, often attained through repetitive prayer. He quoted
the eleventh-century Muslim philosopher Al Ghazzali, who spent several
years worshipping with the Sufis of Syria. Al Ghazzali attained
experiences of “transport” and revelation that he said cannot be
described in words, although he did try to explain to his Muslim readers
the essence of Sufism:
--- END PAGE 244 ---

--- PAGE 245 ---
The first condition for a Sufi is to purge his heart entirely of all
that is not God. The next key of the contemplative life consists in
the humble prayers which escape from the fervent soul, and in the
meditations on God in which the heart is swallowed up entirely.
But in reality this is only the beginning of the Sufi life, the end of
Sufism being total absorption in God.58
From Wilson’s perspective, mystical experience is an “off” button for
the self. When the self is turned off, people become just a cell in the
larger body, a bee in the larger hive. It is no wonder that the after effects
of mystical experience are predictable; people usually feel a stronger
commitment to God or to helping others, often by bringing them to God.
The neuroscientist Andrew Newberg59 has studied the brains of
people undergoing mystical experiences, mostly during meditation, and
has found where that off-switch might be. In the rear portion of the
brain’s parietal lobes (under the rear portion of the top of the skull) are
two patches of cortex Newberg calls the “orientation association areas.”
The patch in the left hemisphere appears to contribute to the mental
sensation of having a limited and physically defined body, and thus
keeps track of your edges. The corresponding area in the right
hemisphere maintains a map of the space around you. These two areas
receive input from your senses to help them maintain an ongoing
representation of your self and its location in space. At the very moment
when people report achieving states of mystical union, these two areas
appear to be cut off. Input from other parts of the brain is reduced, and
overall activity in these orientation areas is reduced, too. But Newberg
believes they are still trying to do their jobs: The area on the left tries to
establish the body’s boundaries and doesn’t find them; the area on the
right tries to establish the self’s location in space and doesn’t find it. The
person experiences a loss of self combined with a paradoxical expansion
of the self out into space, yet with no fixed location in the normal world
of three dimensions. The person feels merged with something vast,
something larger than the self.
Newberg believes that rituals that involve repetitive movement and
chanting, particularly when they are performed by many people at the
same time, help to set up “resonance patterns” in the brains of the
participants that make this mystical state more likely to happen. The
--- END PAGE 245 ---

--- PAGE 246 ---
historian William McNeill, drawing on very different data, came to the
same conclusion. When McNeill was drafted into the U.S. Army in
1941, basic training required that he march for hundreds of hours on the
drill field in close formation with a few dozen other men. At first,
McNeill thought the marching was just a way to pass the time because
his base had no weapons with which to train. But after a few weeks of
training, the marching began to induce in him an altered state of
consciousness:
Words are inadequate to describe the emotion aroused by the
prolonged movement in unison that drilling involved. A sense of
pervasive well-being is what I recall; more specifically, a strange
sense of personal enlargement; a sort of swelling out, becoming
bigger than life, thanks to participation in collective ritual.60
Decades later, McNeill studied the role that synchronized movement
—in dance, religious ritual, and military training—has played in history.
In Keeping Together in Time, 61 he concludes that human societies since
the beginning of recorded history have used synchronized movement to
create harmony and cohesion within groups, sometimes in the service of
preparing for hostilities with other groups. McNeill’s conclusion
suggests that synchronized movement and chanting might be evolved
mechanisms for activating the altruistic motivations created in the
process of group selection. The extreme self-sacrifice characteristic of
group-selected species such as ants and bees can often be found among
soldiers. McNeill quotes an extraordinary passage from the book The
Warriors: Reflections of Men in Battle that describes the thrilling
communal state that soldiers sometimes enter:
“I” passes insensibly into a “we,” “my” becomes “our,” and
individual fate loses its central importance. . . . I believe that it is
nothing less than the assurance of immortality that makes self-
sacrifice at these moments so relatively easy. . . . I may fall, but I
do not die, for that which is real in me goes forward and lives on
in the comrades for whom I gave up my life.62
There is indeed something larger than the self, able to provide people
with a sense of purpose they think worth dying for: the group. (Of
course, one group’s noble purpose is sometimes another group’s pure
evil.)
--- END PAGE 246 ---

--- PAGE 247 ---
THE MEANING OF LIFE 
What can you do to have a good, happy, fulfilling, and meaningful life?
What is the answer to the question of purpose within life? I believe the
answer can be found only by understanding the kind of creature that we
are, divided in the many ways we are divided. We were shaped by
individual selection to be selfish creatures who struggle for resources,
pleasure, and prestige, and we were shaped by group selection to be hive
creatures who long to lose ourselves in something larger. We are social
creatures who need love and attachments, and we are industrious
creatures with needs for effectance, able to enter a state of vital
engagement with our work. We are the rider and we are the elephant, and
our mental health depends on the two working together, each drawing on
the others’ strengths. I don’t believe there is an inspiring answer to the
question, “What is the purpose of life?” Yet by drawing on ancient
wisdom and modern science, we can find compelling answers to the
question of purpose within life. The final version of the happiness
hypothesis is that happiness comes from between. Happiness is not
something that you can find, acquire, or achieve directly. You have to get
the conditions right and then wait. Some of those conditions are within
you, such as coherence among the parts and levels of your personality.
Other conditions require relationships to things beyond you: Just as
plants need sun, water, and good soil to thrive, people need love, work,
and a connection to something larger. It is worth striving to get the right
relationships between yourself and others, between yourself and your
work, and between yourself and something larger than yourself. If you
get these relationships right, a sense of purpose and meaning will
emerge.
--- END PAGE 247 ---

--- PAGE 248 ---
11 
Conclusion: On Balance 
All things come into being by conflict of opposites.
—HERACLITUS,1 C. 500 BCE 
Without Contraries is no progression. Attraction and Repulsion,
Reason and Energy, Love and Hate, are necessary to
Human existence.
—WILLIAM BLAKE,2 C. 1790 
T HE ANCIENT CHINESE SYMBOL of yin and yang represents the
value of the eternally shifting balance between seemingly opposed
principles. As the epigrams above from Heraclitus and Blake show, this
is not just an Eastern idea; it is Great Idea, a timeless insight that in a
way summarizes the rest of this book. Religion and science, for example,
are often thought to be opponents, but as I have shown, the insights of
ancient religions and of modern science are both needed to reach a full
understanding of human nature and the conditions of human satisfaction.
The ancients may have known little about biology, chemistry, and
physics, but many were good psychologists. Psychology and religion can
benefit by taking each other seriously, or at least by agreeing to learn
from each other while overlooking the areas of irreconcilable difference.
The Eastern and Western approaches to life are also said to be
opposed: The East stresses acceptance and collectivism; the West
encourages striving and individualism. But as we’ve seen, both
perspectives are valuable. Happiness requires changing yourself and
changing your world. It requires pursuing your own goals and fitting in
--- END PAGE 248 ---

--- PAGE 249 ---
with others. Different people at different times in their lives will benefit
from drawing more heavily on one approach or the other.
And, finally, liberals and conservatives are opponents in the most
literal sense, each using the myth of pure evil to demonize the other side
and unite their own. But the most important lesson I have learned in my
twenty years of research on morality is that nearly all people are morally
motivated. Selfishness is a powerful force, particularly in the decisions
of individuals, but whenever groups of people come together to make a
sustained effort to change the world, you can bet that they are pursuing a
vision of virtue, justice, or sacredness. Material self-interest does little to
explain the passions of partisans on issues such as abortion, the
environment, or the role of religion in public life. (Self-interest certainly
cannot explain terrorism, but the selflessness made possible by group
selection can.)
An important dictum of cultural psychology is that each culture
develops expertise in some aspects of human existence, but no culture
can be expert in all aspects. The same goes for the two ends of the
political spectrum. My research3 confirms the common perception that
liberals are experts in thinking about issues of victimization, equality,
autonomy, and the rights of individuals, particularly those of minorities
and nonconformists. Conservatives, on the other hand, are experts in
thinking about loyalty to the group, respect for authority and tradition,
and sacredness.4 When one side overwhelms the other, the results are
likely to be ugly. A society without liberals would be harsh and
oppressive to many individuals. A society without conservatives would
lose many of the social structures and constraints that Durkheim showed
are so valuable. Anomie would increase along with freedom. A good
place to look for wisdom, therefore, is where you least expect to find it:
in the minds of your opponents. You already know the ideas common on
your own side. If you can take off the blinders of the myth of pure evil,
you might see some good ideas for the first time.
By drawing on wisdom that is balanced—ancient and new, Eastern
and Western, even liberal and conservative—we can choose directions in
life that will lead to satisfaction, happiness, and a sense of meaning. We
can’t simply select a destination and then walk there directly—the rider
does not have that much authority. But by drawing on humanity’s
--- END PAGE 249 ---

--- PAGE 250 ---
greatest ideas and best science, we can train the elephant, know our
possibilities as well as our limits, and live wisely.
--- END PAGE 250 ---

--- PAGE 251 ---
Acknowledgments 
T HIS BOOK EMERGED FROM my relationships with many people,
which developed as I passed through four supportive universities. If this
book is broader in its scope than most in psychology it is because I had
the great fortune to be mentored by John Fischer at Yale, John Baron,
Alan Fiske, Rick McCauley, Judith Rodin, Paul Rozin, and John Sabini
at the University of Pennsylvania, and Richard Shweder at the University
of Chicago. As an assistant professor at the University of Virginia, I
received further mentoring from Dan Wegner, and also from Marty
Seligman back at Penn. I am forever grateful to these generous teachers
and broad-minded thinkers.
Books also require that somebody besides the author sees a possibility
and takes a chance. I am deeply grateful to Sir John Templeton, the John
Templeton Foundation, and its executive vice president, Arthur
Schwartz, for supporting my research on moral elevation and for giving
me a semester of sabbatical leave to begin the research for this book. My
agent, Esmond Harmsworth, also took a chance; he invested a great deal
of time and skill in guiding a first-time author through the complexities
of the publishing world, and then to a partnership with editor Jo Ann
Miller at Basic Books. Jo Ann encouraged me to write this book long
before she became my editor, and she has improved the book in
countless ways. Above all she helped me to aim high while writing
accessibly, and I know my academic writings will benefit from her
wisdom. I thank all these risk takers.
Many friends and colleagues read chapters and saved me from errors,
overstatements, and puns. Jesse Graham, Suzanne King, Jayne Riew, and
Mark Shulman gave me detailed comments on the entire manuscript. The
following people helped me improve one or more chapters: Jonathan
Adler, Sara Algoe, Desiree Alvarez, Jen Bernhards, Robert Biswas-
Diener, David Buss, Fredrik Bjorklund, Jerry Clore, William Damon,
Judy Deloache, Nick Epley, Sterling Haidt, Greg LaBlanc, Angel Lillard,
Bill McAllister, Rick McCauley, Helen Miller, Brian Nosek, Shige Oishi,
--- END PAGE 251 ---

--- PAGE 252 ---
James Pawelski, Paul Rozin, Simone Schnall, Barry Schwartz, Patrick
Seder, Gary Sherman, Nina Strohminger, Bethany Teachman, Kees Van
den Bos, Dan Wegner, Dan Willingham, Nancy Weinfield, Emily
Wilson, and Tim Wilson. I thank them all.
Finally, a book emerges from the personality of its author, and whether
personality is shaped by nature or nurture, I thank my parents, Harold
and Elaine Haidt, as well as my sisters, Rebecca Haidt and Samantha
Davenport, for their loving support. Above all I thank my wife, Jayne
Riew, who gave me a between.
--- END PAGE 252 ---

--- PAGE 253 ---
Notes 
INTRODUCTION: TOO MUCH WISDOM 
1 From Hamlet, II.ii.249-250. All quotations from Shakespeare are from
G. Blakemore (Ed), 1974. The Riverside Shakespeare (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin).
2 Seligman, 2002.
3 Keyes and Haidt, 2003.
4 Technically one should say “The Buddha” (the awakened one), just as
one should say “The Christ” (the anointed one). However, I will follow
common usage in referring to Buddha and Christ.
--- END PAGE 253 ---

--- PAGE 254 ---
CHAPTER 1 
1 This and all subsequent quotations from the Old and New Testaments
are from the New Revised Standard Version.
2 Franklin, 1980/1733-1758, 3.
3 Lakoff and Johnson, 1980.
4 Dhammapada, verse 326, in Mascaro, 1973.
5 Plato, Phaedrus 253d, in Cooper, 1997.
6 Freud, 1976/1900.
7 Ovid, Metamorphoses, Bk. VII, 249.
8 Montaigne, 1991/1588, 115. The second quote is also from page 115.
9 Gershon, 1998.
10 Lyte, Varcoe, and Bailey, 1998.
11 Gazzaniga, 1985; Gazzaniga, Bogen, and Sperry, 1962.
12 Gazzaniga, 1985, 72.
13 Feinberg, 2001.
14 Olds and Milner, 1954.
15 Burns and Swerdlow, 2003.
16 Damasio, 1994; Rolls, 1999.
17 Rolls, 1999.
18 For summaries of findings on the “emotional brain” see Berridge,
2003; LeDoux, 1996.
19 Damasio, 1994, Damasio, Tranel, and Damasio, 1990.
20 Bargh, Chen, and Burrows, 1996.
21 Bargh et al., 1996, for the elderly effect; Dijksterhuis and van
Knippenberg, 1998, for the others.
22 James, 1950/1890.
--- END PAGE 254 ---

--- PAGE 255 ---
23 See review in Leakey, 1994.
24 For a review of why most mental systems work so well, yet logical
reasoning works so poorly, see Margolis, 1987.
25 Rolls, 1999.
26 Hume, 1969/1739, 462.
27 Shoda, Mischel, and Peake, 1990.
28 For a review of these studies and a full account of the interplay
between the hot (automatic) and cool (controlled) systems, see Metcalfe
and Mischel, 1999.
29 Salovey and Mayer, 1990. Possessing emotional intelligence does not 
mean that one’s emotions are intelligent.
30 Baumeister et al., 1998.
31 Obeyesekere, 1985.
32 Wegner, 1994.
33 Haidt, 2001; Haidt, Koller, and Dias, 1993.
34 Gladwell, 2005.
--- END PAGE 255 ---

--- PAGE 256 ---
CHAPTER 2 
1 Meditations, 4:3.
2 Dhammapada, verse 1, in Mascaro, 1973.
3 Carnegie, 1984/1944, 113.
4 From Dr. Phil’s “Ten Life Laws,” retrieved from www.drphil.com on
12/16/04.
5 Boethius, 1962/c. 522 CE, 24.
6 Boethius, 1962/c. 522 CE, 22.
7 Boethius, 1962/c. 522 CE, 29.
8 See Miller and C’de Baca, 2001, for a review.
9 Bargh et al., 1996; Fazio et al., 1986.
10 Nosek, Banaji, and Greenwald, 2002; Nosek, Greenwald, and Banaji,
in press.
11 Pelham, Mirenberg, and Jones, 2002.
12 Pinker, 1997.
13 See two recent reviews: Baumeisteret et al., 2001; Rozin and
Royzman, 2001.
14 Gottman, 1994.
15 Kahneman and Tversky, 1979.
16 Rozin and Royzman, 2001.
17 Franklin, 1980/1733-1758, 26.
18 Gray, 1994; Ito and Cacioppo, 1999.
19 Miller, 1944.
20 LaBar and LeDoux, 2003.
21 Shakespeare, Hamlet, I.ii.133-134.
22 Shakespeare, Hamlet, II.ii.249-250.
--- END PAGE 256 ---

--- PAGE 257 ---
23 Angle and Neimark, 1997.
24 Lykken et al., 1992.
25 Bouchard, 2004; Plomin and Daniels, 1987; Turkheimer, 2000.
26 Marcus, 2004.
27 Plomin and Daniels, 1987.
28 Lykken and Tellegen, 1996.
29 Davidson, 1998.
30 Davidson and Fox, 1989.
31 Kagan, 1994; Kagan, 2003.
32 Milton, Paradise Lost bk. 1, lines 254-255.
33 See Shapiro, Schwartz, and Santerre, 2002, for a review. Most of the
published studies on meditation have used weak or flawed designs (such
as comparing people who chose to sign up for a meditation class with
people who did not). However, Shapiro et al. review several studies that
used random assignment to either a meditation condition or a control
condition. The benefits I mention in the text are those supported by
studies that used random assignment.
34 Definition from Shapiro et al., 2002.
35 Dhammapada, verse 205, in Mascaro, 1973.
36 Beck, 1976.
37 Dobson, 1989; Hollon and Beck, 1994.
38 DeRubeis et al., 2005.
39 Seligman, 1995.
40 An easy place to start is with the popular book Feeling Good by
David Burns, 1999. Just reading this book has been shown to be an
effective treatment for depression (Smith et al., 1997).
41 Proust, 1992/1922b, 291.
42 Nestler, Hyman, and Malenka, 2001.
43 Schatzberg, Cole, and DeBattista, 2003. Occasional reports that
SSRIs are no more effective than placebos appear to be based on flawed
--- END PAGE 257 ---

--- PAGE 258 ---
studies; for example, studies that used very low doses of SSRIs. See
Hollon et al., 2002.
44 Kramer, 1993.
45 Haidt, 2001; Haidt and Joseph, 2004.
--- END PAGE 258 ---

--- PAGE 259 ---
CHAPTER 3 
1 Analects, 15.24. In Leys, 1997.
2 Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Shabbos, Folio 31a, Schottenstein
edition, A. Dicker, trans. (New York: Mesorah Publications, 1996).
3 The Godfather, directed by F. F. Coppola, 1972. Paramount Pictures.
Based on the novel by Mario Puzo.
4 Campbell, 1983; Richerson and Boyd, 1998.
5 Hamilton, 1964, first worked out the details of kin selection. We all
share most of our genes with all people, and even with most
chimpanzees, mice, and fruit flies. What matters here is only the subset
of genes that vary within the human population.
6 Of course, the ancestors did no “parlaying”; they just survived better
than their competitors, and in the process, reproduction shifted over to a
queen and ultrasociality emerged.
7 Described in Ridley, 1996.
8 Kunz and Woolcott, 1976.
9 Cialdini, 2001.
10 Axelrod, 1984.
11 Wilkinson, 1984.
12 Trivers, 1971.
13 Ridley, 1996.
14 Panthanathan and Boyd, 2004; Richerson and Boyd, 2005.
15 Cosmides and Tooby, 2004.
16 Guth, Schmittberger, and Schwarze, 1982.
17 Sanfey et al., 2003.
18 Bjorklund, 1997.
19 Dunbar, 1993.
--- END PAGE 259 ---

--- PAGE 260 ---
20 Dunbar, 1996.
21 Hom and Haidt, in preparation.
22 For a defense of gossip, see Sabini and Silver, 1982.
23 Cialdini, 2001.
24 Cialdini, 2001, cites an unpublished study by Lynn and McCall, 1998.
25 James and Bolstein, 1992.
26 Cialdini et al., 1975.
27 Benton, Kelley, and Liebling, 1972.
28 Lakin and Chartrand, 2003.
29 van Baaren et al., 2004.
30 van Baaren et al., 2003.
--- END PAGE 260 ---

--- PAGE 261 ---
CHAPTER 4 
1 Dhammapada, verse 252, in Mascaro, 1973.
2 “Outing Mr. Schrock,” Washington Post, September 2, 2004, A22.
3 Hom and Haidt, in preparation.
4 For extensive discussions of the prisoner’s dilemma game, see
Axelrod, 1984; Wright, 1994.
5 Machiavelli, The Discourses, 1.25.
6 Byrne and Whiten, 1988.
7 Batson et al., 1997; Batson et al., 1999.
8 Buchanan, 1965, 53.
9 Pachocinski, 1996, 222.
10 Wright, 1994, 13.
11 Kuhn, 1991.
12 Perkins, Farady, and Bushey, 1991.
13 Kunda, 1990; Pyszczynski and Greenberg, 1987.
14 Franklin, 1962/c. 1791, 43.
15 Alicke et al., 1995; Hoorens, 1993.
16 Heine and Lehman, 1999; Markus and Kitayama, 1991.
17 Epley and Dunning, 2000.
18 This analysis of leadership, and the studies cited in this paragraph
come from Dunning, Meyerowitz, and Holzberg, 2002.
19 Cross, 1977.
20 Taylor et al., 2003.
21 Ross and Sicoly, 1979.
22 Epley and Caruso, 2004.
23 Babcock and Loewenstein, 1997.
--- END PAGE 261 ---

--- PAGE 262 ---
24 Pronin, Lin, and Ross, 2002.
25 Hick, 1967.
26 Russell, 1988; Boyer, 2001.
27 Baumeister, 1997.
28 See review in Baumeister, 1997 (chap. 2).
29 Baumeister, Smart, and Boden, 1996; Bushman and Baumeister,
1998. However, evidence that antisocial behavior is associated with low 
self-esteem has recently been reported by Donnellan et al., 2005.
30 Glover, 2000.
31 Skitka, 2002.
32 Geertz, 1973, 5, paraphrasing the sociologist Max Weber.
33 Bhagavad Gita , 12.18-19. In Zaehner, 1969.
34 Sent-ts’an, Hsin hsin ming. In Conze, 1954.
35 Shapiro et al., 2002.
36 Burns, 1999.
--- END PAGE 262 ---

--- PAGE 263 ---
CHAPTER 5 
1 Dhammapada , verse 83, in Mascaro, 1973.
2 Epictetus, 1983/1st-2nd cent. CE, 9.
3 Davidson, 1994; see also Brim, 1992.
4 Troilus and Cressida, I.ii.287.
5 Wilson and Gilbert, 2003.
6 Brickman, Coates, and Janoff-Bulman, 1978; see also Schulz and
Decker, 1985, for long-term follow-up of spinal injury patients. No study
has obtained happiness or life satisfaction ratings in the first days after
winning the lottery or becoming a paraplegic, but appearances suggest
that emotional reactions are very strong. We can therefore infer that the
surprisingly moderate happiness ratings given by both groups a few
months later illustrate a return “most of the way” to baseline.
7 Kaplan, 1978.
8 Interview by Deborah Solomon, New York Times Magazine, Sunday
December 12, 2004, 37. It should be noted, however, that adaptation to
severe disability is slow and often incomplete. Even years later,
paraplegics have not, on average, returned fully to their pre-accident
levels.
9 Helson, 1964.
10 For a sensitive exploration of goal pursuit, ambition, and happiness,
see Brim, 1992.
11 Lykken and Tellegen, 1996.
12 Smith, 1976/1759, 149.
13 Brickman and Campbell, 1971.
14 Diener et al., 1999; Mastekaasa, 1994; Waite and Gallagher, 2000.
However, it is not clear that married people are, on average, happier than
those who never married, because unhappily married people are the least
happy group of all and they pull down the average; see DePaulo and
Morris, 2005, for a critique of research on the benefits of marriage.
--- END PAGE 263 ---

--- PAGE 264 ---
15 Harker and Keltner, 2001; Lyubomirsky, King, and Diener, in press.
16 Baumeister and Leary, 1995. However, it is not certain that marriage
itself is more beneficial than other kinds of companionship. Much
evidence says yes, particularly for health, wealth, and longevity
(reviewed in Waite and Gallagher, 2000); but a large longitudinal study
failed to find a long-lasting benefit of marriage on reports of well-being
(Lucas et al., 2003).
17 Diener et al., 1999; Myers, 2000.
18 Argyle, 1999. Some studies find a larger race difference, but when
differences in income and job status are controlled for, the differences
become small or insignificant.
19 Diener et al., 1999; Lucas and Gohm, 2000.
20 Carstensen et al., 2000; Diener and Suh, 1998. Mroczek and Spiro,
2005, found a peak around age sixty-five.
21 Frederick and Loewenstein, 1999; Riis et al., 2005.
22 Lucas, 2005.
23 Schkade and Kahneman, 1998.
24 Feingold, 1992.
25 Diener, Wolsic, and Fujita, 1995.
26 Diener and Oishi, 2000.
27 Lyubomirsky, King, and Diener, in press; Fredrickson, 2001.
28 Diener and Oishi, 2000; Frank, 1999.
29 Bhagavad Gita , XVI.12. The second quote is from XVI.13-14. In
Zaehner, 1969.
30 Plomin and Daniels, 1987. The unique environment that each child
creates within the family matters, but not usually as much as his or her
unique genes.
31 Lykken, 1999.
32 Marcus, 2004.
33 Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, and Schkade, in press.
--- END PAGE 264 ---

--- PAGE 265 ---
34 See Lyubomirsky et al., in press, and Seligman, 2002, chap. 4.
Lyubomirsky et al. call the last term “activities”; Seligman calls it
“voluntary variables.” I am combining their terms, for simplicity of
explanation, by referring to “voluntary activities.”
35 Glass and Singer, 1972, and others reviewed in Frederick and
Loewenstein, 1999.
36 See review in Frank, 1999.
37 Koslowsky and Kluger, 1995.
38 Csikszentmihalyi, 1997.
39 Glass and Singer, 1972.
40 Langer and Rodin, 1976; Rodin and Langer, 1977.
41 Haidt and Rodin, 1999.
42 Reviewed in Lyubomirsky, King, and Diener, in press; Reis and
Gable, 2003.
43 See Argyle, 1999; Baumeister and Leary, 1995; Myers, 2000;
Seligman, 2002. However, Lucas and Dyrenforth (in press) present
evidence that the direct causal effect of improved social relationships on
happiness may be smaller than most psychologists realize, perhaps no
larger than the effect of income on happiness. This debate has just begun;
its resolution must await future research.
44 Lyubomirsky, King, and Diener, in press; Reis and Gable, 2003.
45 Frederick and Loewenstein, 1999.
46 Bronte, 1973/1847, 110. Spoken by Jane Eyre.
47 Belk, 1985; Kasser, 2002; Kasser and Ryan, 1996.
48 Csikszentmihalyi, 1990.
49 See Miller, 1997, on the “disgust of surfeit.”
50 Seligman, 2002, 102.
51 Wrzesniewski, Rozin, and Bennett, 2003; see also Kass, 1994.
52 Epicurus, Letter to Menoeceus, 126. In O’Connor, 1993.
53 Peterson and Seligman, 2004.
--- END PAGE 265 ---

--- PAGE 266 ---
54 Emmons and McCullough, 2003; Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, and
Schkade, in press.
55 Frank, 1999.
56 Adapted from Solnick and Memenway, 1998.
57 Van Boven and Gilovich, 2003.
58 Tao Te Ching, 12, in Feng and English, 1972.
59 This same argument has been made with neuroscientific evidence by
Whybrow, 2005.
60 Iyengar and Lepper, 2000.
61 Schwartz, 2004.
62 Schwartz et al., 2002.
63 Schwartz et al., 2002.
64 Conze, 1959.
65 Conze, 1959, 40.
66 Some people say “the Buddha” (the awakened one), just as some
people say “the Christ” (the anointed one). However I follow common
usage in referring to Buddha and Christ.
67 Biswas-Diener and Diener, 2001; Diener and Diener, 1996.
68 Biswas-Diener and Diener, 2001, 337.
69 I later found a published version of the talk: Solomon, 1999.
70 Broderick, 1990, 261.
71 Memorial Day Address, delivered on May 30, 1884. In Holmes, 1891,
3.
--- END PAGE 266 ---

--- PAGE 267 ---
CHAPTER 6 
1 Seneca, Epistle XLVIII, in Seneca, 1917-1925/c. 50 CE, 315.
2 Meditation XVII, in Donne, 1975/1623.
3 The facts in this paragraph are drawn from Blum, 2002, Chapter 2.
4 Watson, 1928.
5 My account of Harlow’s career is taken from Blum, 2002.
6 Harlow, Harlow, and Meyer, 1950.
7 Harlow and Zimmerman, 1959.
8 Blum, 2002.
9 For reviews of the development of Bowlby’s life and ideas, see Blum,
2002, and Cassidy, 1999.
10 Lorenz, 1935.
11 Bowlby, 1969; Cassidy, 1999.
12 For a review of the functions of play, see Fredrickson, 1998.
13 Harlow, 1971.
14 Ainsworth et al., 1978.
15 See current reviews of attachment research in Cassidy, 1999;
Weinfield et al., 1999.
16 Harris, 1995.
17 Kagan, 1994.
18 DeWolff and van IJzendoorn, 1997.
19 van IJzendoorn et al., 2000.
20 Hazan and Shaver, 1987. Copyright © 1987 by the American
Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
21 Hazan and Zeifman, 1999.
22 Feeney and Noller, 1996.
--- END PAGE 267 ---

--- PAGE 268 ---
23 Bowlby, 1969.
24 Hazan and Zeifman, 1999.
25 Vormbrock, 1993.
26 Carter, 1998; Uvnas-Moberg, 1998.
27 Taylor et al., 2000.
28 See Fisher, 2004, for a review of oxytocin’s role in love and sex.
29 Fisher, 2004.
30 Moss, 1998.
31 Trevathan, 1987; Bjorklund, 1997.
32 Bjorklund, 1997.
33 Hill and Hurtado, 1996.
34 Buss, 2004.
35 Jankowiak and Fischer, 1992.
36 Berscheid and Walster, 1978; see also Sternberg, 1986.
37 Plato, Symposium 192e, A. Nehamas and P. Woodruff (trans.). In
Cooper, 1997.
38 Berscheid and Walster, 1978.
39 Quoted by Jankowiak and Fischer, 1992.
40 Julien, 1998.
41 Bartels and Zeki, 2000; Fisher, 2004.
42 These are the three components of Sternberg’s (1986) triangular
theory of love.
43 Dhammapada, verse 284, in Mascaro, 1973.
44 Chap. 2, line 213, in Doniger and Smith, 1991.
45 Analects 9.18, in Leys, 1997.
46 Tantric traditions may seem to be ancient exceptions, but their goal
was to use the energy of lust and other passions, often in conjunction
with disgust, as a way to break attachments to carnal pleasures. See
Dharmakirti, 2002.
--- END PAGE 268 ---

--- PAGE 269 ---
47 Plato, Symposium 192e, A. Nehamas and P. Woodruff (trans.). In
Cooper, 1997.
48 Plato, Symposium 210d, A. Nehamas and P. Woodruff (trans.). In
Cooper, 1997.
49 Lucretius, De Rerum Natura, bk. IV, lines 1105-1113.
50 Goldenberg et al., 2001; Goldenberg et al., 1999.
51 Becker, 1973; Pyszcsynski, Greenberg, and Solomon, 1997.
52 Durkheim, 1951/1897, 209.
53 See reviews in Cohen and Herbert, 1996, Waite and Gallagher, 2000.
However, Lucas and Dyrenforth (in press) have recently questioned
whether social relationships are quite as important as the rest of the field
thinks.
54 Fleeson, Malanos, and Achille, 2002.
55 Brown et al., 2003.
56 Baumeister and Leary, 1995.
57 Sartre, 1989/1944, 45.
--- END PAGE 269 ---

--- PAGE 270 ---
CHAPTER 7 
1 Known also as Mencius. From The Book of Mencius, section 6B:15, in
Chan, 1963, 78.
2 Nietzsche, 1997/1889, 6.
3 Taylor, 2003.
4 This story is true, but names and identifying details have been changed.
5 Cleckley, 1955; Hare, 1993.
6 For reviews of posttraumatic growth see Nolen-Hoeksema and Davis,
2002; Tedeschi, Park, and Calhoun, 1998; Tennen and Affleck, 1998;
Updegraff and Taylor, 2000. There were a few early pioneers, such as
Frankl, 1984/1959.
7 Meichenbaum, 1985, reviewed in Updegraff and Taylor, 2000.
8 Dalai Lama, 2001/1995, 40.
9 Nolen-Hoeksema and Davis, 2002, 602-603.
10 Baum, 2004; Tennen and Affleck, 1998.
11 As You Like It, II.i.12-14.
12 Tooby and Cosmides, 1996.
13 Costa and McCrae, 1989.
14 Park, Cohen, and Murch, 1996.
15 Costa and McCrae, 1989.
16 Srivastava et al., 2003.
17 McAdams, 1994; McAdams, 2001.
18 McAdams, 1994, 306.
19 Emmons, 2003; Emmons, 1999.
20 See also the work Tim Kasser: Kasser, 2002; Kasser and Ryan, 1996.
21 McAdams, 2001, 103.
22 Adler, Kissel, and McAdams, in press.
--- END PAGE 270 ---

--- PAGE 271 ---
23 Sheldon and Kasser, 1995.
24 See Emmons, 2003, chap. 6; and James, 1961/1902.
25 See King, 2001, on the “hard road to the good life.”
26 Lerner and Miller, 1978.
27 For new research on sense making as part of the “psychological
immune system” see Wilson and Gilbert, 2005.
28 Nolen-Hoeksema and Davis, 2002; Ryff and Singer, 2003; Tennen
and Affleck, 1998. Other traits that matter, though less than optimism,
are cognitive complexity and openness to experience.
29 Carver, Scheier, and Weintraub, 1989; Lazarus and Folkman, 1984.
30 Pennebaker, 1997.
31 Tavris, 1982.
32 Pennebaker, 1997, 99-100.
33 Myers, 2000; McCullough et al., 2000.
34 Pennebaker, 1997.
35 Chorpita and Barlow, 1998.
36 See Belsky, Steinberg, and Draper, 1991, for a variety of
psychological and biological changes wrought by early stressful
environments.
37 Rind, Tromovitch, and Bauserman, 1998.
38 McAdams, 2001.
39 Fitzgerald, 1988.
40 Elder, 1974; Elder, 1998.
41 I interviewed Elder in 1994 for a report for the MacArthur
Foundation.
42 Durkheim, 1951/1897.
43 Putnam, 2000.
44 Baltes, Lindenberger, and Staudinger, 1998.
45 Proust, 1992a/1922, 513.
--- END PAGE 271 ---

--- PAGE 272 ---
46 Sternberg, 1998; see also Baltes and Freund, 2003.
47 The theologian Reinhold Niebuhr used a variant of this prayer in a
sermon in 1943, and this is thought by some to be the source of the
version given here, which was popularized by Alcoholics Anonymous.
--- END PAGE 272 ---

--- PAGE 273 ---
CHAPTER 8 
1 Epicurus, Principle Doctrines. In Epicurus, 1963/c. 290 BCE, 297.
2 Dhammapada, sec. 9, stanza 118. This translation is from Byrom,
1993. It has the same meaning as the translation in Mascaro, but has
much better flow.
3 Aristotle, 1962/4th cent. BCE, 1098a.
4 Franklin, 1962/c. 1791, 82.
5 Franklin, 1962/c. 1791, 82.
6 Franklin, 1962/c. 1791, 88.
7 Peterson and Seligman, 2004.
8 In Lichtheim, 1976, 152.
9 Templeton, 1997.
10 Hansen, 1991.
11 Aristotle, 1962/4th cent. BCE, 1103b.
12 Kant, 1959/1785.
13 Bentham, 1996/1789.
14 Pincoffs, 1986.
15 M. B. Sure, “Raising a Thinking Child Workbook,” retrieved on April
15, 2005, from www.thinkingchild.com.
16 Singer, 1979.
17 MacIntyre, 1981.
18 See also Taylor, 1989.
19 Peterson and Seligman, 2004.
20 Piaget, 1965/1932.
21 Shweder et al., 1997.
22 Baumeister, 1997, discussed in chapter 4.
--- END PAGE 273 ---

--- PAGE 274 ---
23 Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary, 1976.
24 Lyubomirsky et al., in press.
25 Isen and Levin, 1972. There are limits on this effect, such as when the
helping will ruin the happy mood, Isen and Simmonds, 1978.
26 Piliavin, 2003.
27 Thoits and Hewitt, 2001.
28 Brown et al., 2003.
29 McAdams, 2001, discussed in chapter 7.
30 Piliavin, 2003.
31 Emmons, 2003.
32 Durkheim, 1951/1897, discussed in chapter 6.
33 Sampson, 1993.
34 Hunter, 2000.
35 Appiah, 2005. See also Taylor, 1989.
36 Tajfel, 1982.
37 Haidt, Rosenberg, and Hom, 2003.
38 Damon, 1997.
--- END PAGE 274 ---

--- PAGE 275 ---
CHAPTER 9 
1 Formerly known as Mencius. Quoted in Chan, 1963, 59.
2 From the Hadith, quoted in Fadiman and Frager, 1997, 6.
3 Abbott, 1952/1884. The extended quote is from page 80.
4 Boehm, 1999.
5 Brown and Gilman, 1960.
6 See Leviticus 12; Buckley and Gottlieb, 1988.
7 Rozin and Fallon, 1987.
8 Rozin et al., 1997.
9 Leakey, 1994.
10 For a review of our research on disgust, see Rozin, Haidt, and
McCauley, 2000.
11 Haidt et al., 1997.
12 Reported in Thomas, 1983, 38.
13 John Wesley, 1984/1786, sermon 88, “On Dress,” 249.
14 Shweder et al., 1997.
15 Haidt, Koller, and Dias, 1993.
16 Doniger and Smith, 1991. The long quote is from chap. 4, stanzas
109-122.
17 See Bloom, 2004, on how people are “natural born dualists,” keeping
body and soul apart.
18 From “The Divinity School Address,” in Emerson, 1960/1838, 102.
19 Stall, 1897. The quote is from page 35 of the 1904 edition.
20 Steele, 1867, 191.
21 Le Conte, 1892, 330.
22 Eliade, 1959/1957. The long quote is from page 24.
--- END PAGE 275 ---

--- PAGE 276 ---
23 Based on the seminal work of Ekman, Sorensen, and Friesen, 1969.
24 Jefferson, 1975/1771.
25 Isen and Levin, 1972; see discussion in chap. 8.
26 Algoe and Haidt, 2005.
27 Thrash and Elliot, 2004.
28 McCraty and Childre, 2004.
29 Carter, 1998, and see chap. 6.
30 See a recent finding that oxytocin increases trust, Kosfeld, et al.,
2005.
31 David Whitford, personal communication, 1999. Used with
permission.
32 See discussion of attachment and agape in chap. 6.
33 From the Critque of Practical Reason, quoted in Guyer, 1992, 1.
34 From Darwin’s “Autobiography,” quoted in Wright, 1994, 364.
35 From Nature , in Emerson, 1960b/1838, 24.
36 Wasson, 1986.
37 Shulgin and Shulgin, 1991.
38 Grob and de Rios, 1994.
39 Pahnke, 1966.
40 Keltner and Haidt, 2003.
41 Bhagavad Gita , 2.45. In Zaehner, 1969.
42 James, 1961/1902.
43 James, 1961/1902, 216-217.
44 Maslow, 1964.
45 Daston and Park, 1998.
46 Maslow, 1964, 58.
47 Leary, 2004.
48 Gallup, 1982.
--- END PAGE 276 ---

--- PAGE 277 ---
49 Quoted in Cruikshank, 1999, 95.
50 Warren, 2002.
51 I have extended Shweder’s three ethics into a theory of five
foundations of intuitive ethics, which I use to analyze the culture war.
See Haidt and Bjorklund, in press; Haidt and Joseph, 2004.
52 Warren, 2002, 22.
53 Haidt and Hersh, 2001.
54 Gross and Haidt, 2005.
55 Haidt and Hersh, 2001, 208.
--- END PAGE 277 ---

--- PAGE 278 ---
CHAPTER 10 
1 Isa Upanishad, verses 6-7. In Mascaro, 1965, 49-50.
2 Spoken by Jim in My Antonia; Cather, 1987/1918, 14.
3 “On the Road to Find Out” by Cat Stevens. From the album “Tea for
the Tillerman,” 1970, A&M.
4 Letter to John Augustine Washington, in Irving, 1976/1856-1859.
5 “Sherry Darling” by Bruce Springsteen. Copyright © 1980 Bruce
Springsteen (ASCAP). Reprinted by permission. International copyright
secured. All rights reserved.
6 Allen, 1975.
7 See Klemke, 2000, for a volume of philosophical essays on the
meaning of life. Most of the nontheistic essays try to do just this.
8 For examples, see Appiah, 2005; Churchland, 1998; Flanagan, 1991;
Gibbard, 1990; Nussbaum, 2001; Solomon, 1999.
9 Adams, 1980.
10 Monty Python’s The Meaning of Life, directed by Terry Gilliam
(Universal Studios, 1983).
11 Webster’s Third New International Dictionary, 1993, unabridged, for
both words.
12 Jung, 1963.
13 Nichomachean Ethics , bk. 1, 1094a.
14 Warren, 2002.
15 Bonanno, 2004, and see chap. 7.
16 Gardner, Csikszentmihalyi, and Damon, 2001.
17 A well-respected theory, Ryan and Deci, 2000, says that the
fundamental psychological needs are competence (including work),
relatedness (love), and autonomy. I agree that autonomy is important, but
I don’t think it is as important, universal, or consistently good as the
other two.
--- END PAGE 278 ---

--- PAGE 279 ---
18 This phrase, “lieben und arbeiten,” does not appear in Freud’s
writings. It is often claimed to be something Freud once said in a
conversation. Erik Erikson reports it in this way in Erikson, 1963/1950,
265.
19 Leo Tolstoy, quoted in Troyat, 1967, 158.
20 White, 1959.
21 White, 1959, 322.
22 Troilus and Cressida, I.ii.287.
23 Marx, 1977/1867.
24 Kohn and Schooler, 1983.
25 Bellah et al., 1985.
26 Wrzesniewski et al., 2003; Wrzesniewski, Rozin, and Bennett, 2003.
27 As discussed in chap. 8.
28 Fredrickson, 2001.
29 Gibran, 1977/1923, 27.
30 Nakamura and Csikszentmihalyi, 2003, 87.
31 Nakamura and Csikszentmihalyi, 2003, 86.
32 Gardner, Csikszentmihalyi, and Damon, 2001. See also Damon,
Menon, and Bronk, 2003, on the development of purpose.
33 For example, Fenton, 2005.
34 Much recent work in psychology shows the importance of fit or
coherence for well-being. See Freitas and Higgins, 2002; Tamir,
Robinson, and Clore, 2002.
35 Emmons, 1999; Miller and C’de Baca, 2001.
36 For a well-developed multilevel approach to “optimal human being,”
see Sheldon, 2004.
37 I’m drawing here from interdisciplinary work in cognitive science on
the role of the body and of culture in cognition, such as that of Clark,
1999; Lakoff and Johnson, 1999; and Shore, 1996.
38 Durkheim, 1965/1915; Wilson, 2002.
--- END PAGE 279 ---

--- PAGE 280 ---
39 Brown, 1991.
40 Darwin, 1998/1871, 166.
41 Williams, 1966; Trivers, 1971.
42 Dawkins, 1976.
43 Wilson, 1990.
44 Camponotus saundersi, described in Wilson, 1990, 44.
45 Wilson, 2002. But note that group selection is quite controversial, and
it is presently a minority position among evolutionary biologists.
46 See Aunger, 2000; Gladwell, 2000; Richerson and Boyd, 2005.
47 Richerson and Boyd, 2005; Leakey, 1994.
48 Mithen, 2000, explains the gap between the brain’s reaching its
current size, over 100,000 years ago, and the cultural explosion that
began a few tens of thousands of years later as a result of slowly
accumulating material culture.
49 See Pinker, 1997, 2002, on how the evolved mind constrains the arts,
politics, gender roles, and other aspects of culture.
50 Foxes have been domesticated and made somewhat dog-like in
appearance and behavior in just forty years of selective breeding; see
Belyaev, 1979; Trut, 1999.
51 Richerson and Boyd, 2005.
52 Durkheim, 1965/1915, 62.
53 Boyer, 2001.
54 Boyer, 2001; Dawkins, 1976.
55 Hamer, 2004.
56 The term had recently been coined by R. M. Bucke. See James, 1961/
1902, 313.
57 From the Columbia Encyclopedia, 6th edition, 2001. Entry for
“yoga.”
58 Quoted by James, 1961/1902, 317.
59 Newberg, D’Aquili, and Rause, 2001.
--- END PAGE 280 ---

--- PAGE 281 ---
60 McNeill, 1995, 2.
61 McNeill, 1995.
62 From Gray, 1970/1959, quoted on p. 10 of McNeill, 1995.
--- END PAGE 281 ---

--- PAGE 282 ---
CHAPTER 11 
1 Quoted by Diogenes Laertius, 1925/3rd cent. CE, bk. 9, sec. 8
2 Blake, 1975/1790-1793, 3.
3 Graham and Haidt, in preparation; Haidt and Bjorklund, in press; Haidt
and Hersh, 2001.
4 There are, of course, subtypes of liberals and conservatives that violate
these generalizations, such as the religious left and the libertarian right,
each with its own expertise.
--- END PAGE 282 ---

--- PAGE 283 ---
References 
Abbott, E. A. (1952/1884). Flatland: A romance of many dimensions. 
(6th ed.). New York: Dover.
Adams, D. (1980). The hitchhiker’s guide to the galaxy. New York:
Harmony Books.
Adler, J. M., Kissel, E., and McAdams, D. P. (in press). Emerging from
the CAVE: Attributional style and the narrative study of identity in
midlife adults. Cognitive Therapy and Research .
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M., Waters, E. & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns
of attachment: A psychological study of the strange situation. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Algoe, S., and Haidt, J. (2005). Witnessing excellence in action: The
“otherpraising” emotions of elevation, gratitude, and admiration.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Virginia.
Alicke, M. D., Klotz, M. L., Breitenbecher, D. L., Yurak, T. J., &
Vredenburg, D. S. (1995). Personal contact, individuation, and the better-
than-average effect. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68,
804-825.
Allen, W. (1975). Without feathers. New York: Random House.
Angle, R., & Neimark, J. (1997). Nature’s clone. Psychology Today, 
July/August.
Appiah, K. A. (2005). The ethics of identity . Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Argyle, M. (1999). Causes and correlates of happiness. In D. Kahneman,
E. Diener & N. Schwartz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic
psychology (pp. 353-373). New York: Russell Sage.
Aristotle. (1962/4th cent. BCE). Nichomachean ethics (M. Oswald,
Trans.). Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
--- END PAGE 283 ---

--- PAGE 284 ---
Aunger, R. (Ed.). (2000). Darwinizing culture: The status of memetics as
a science. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Aurelius, M. (1964/2nd cent. CE). Meditations (M. Staniforth, Trans.)
London: Penguin.
Axelrod, R. (1984). The evolution of cooperation. New York: Basic
Books.
Babcock, L., & Loewenstein, G. (1997). Explaining bargaining impasse:
The role of self-serving biases. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11,
109-126.
Baltes, P. B., & Freund, A. M. (2003). The intermarriage of wisdom and
selective optimization with compensation: Two meta-heuristics guiding
the conduct of life. In C. L. M. Keyes & J. Haidt (Eds.), Flourishing:
Positive psychology and the life well-lived (pp. 249-273). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
Baltes, P. B., Lindenberger, U., & Staudinger, U. M. (1998). Life-span
theory in developmental psychology. In W. Damon & R. Lerner (Eds.), 
Handbook of child psychology. Vol. 1, Theoretical models of human
development. (5th ed.). (pp. 1029-1143). New York: Wiley.
Bargh, J. A., Chaiken, S., Raymond, P., & Hymes, C. (1996). The
automatic evaluation effect: Unconditionally automatic activation with a
pronunciation task. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 185-
210.
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of social
behavior: Direct effects of trait construct and stereotype activation on
action. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 230-244.
Bartels, A., & Zeki, S. (2000). The neural basis of romantic love. 
Neuroreport , 11, 3829-3834.
Batson, C. D., Kobrynowicz, D., Dinnerstein, J. L., Kampf, H. C., &
Wilson, A. D. (1997). In a very different voice: Unmasking moral
hypocrisy. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 1335-1348.
Batson, C. D., Thompson, E. R., Seuferling, G., Whitney, H., &
Strongman, J. A. (1999). Moral hypocrisy: Appearing moral to oneself
without being so. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 525-
537.
--- END PAGE 284 ---

--- PAGE 285 ---
Baum, D. (2004). The price of valor. The New Yorker, July 12.
Baumeister, R. F. (1997). Evil: Inside human cruelty and violence. New
York: W. H. Freeman.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratlavsky, E., Finenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2001).
Bad is stronger than good. Review of General Psychology, 5, 323-370.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratlavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (1998).
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1252-1265.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for
interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human motivation. 
Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497-529.
Baumeister, R. F., Smart, L., & Boden, J. M. (1996). Relation of
threatened egotism to violence and aggression: The dark side of high
self-esteem. Psychological Review, 103, 5-33.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New
York: International Universities Press.
Becker, E. (1973). The Denial of Death. New York: Free Press.
Belk, R. W. (1985). Materialism: Trait aspects of living in the material
world. Journal of Consumer Research, 12, 265-280.
Bellah, R., Madsen, R., Sullivan, W. M., Swidler, A., & Tipton, S.
(1985). Habits of the heart. New York: Harper and Row.
Belsky, J., Steinberg, L., & Draper, P. (1991). Childhood experience,
interpersonal development, and reproductive strategy: An evolutionary
theory of socialization. Child Development, 62, 647-670.
Belyaev, D. K. (1979). Destabilizing selection as a factor in
domestication. Journal of Heredity, 70, 301-308.
Bentham, J. (1996/1789). An introduction to the principles of morals and
legislation. Oxford: Clarendon.
Benton, A. A., Kelley, H. H., & Liebling, B. (1972). Effects of extremity
of offers and concession rate on the outcomes of bargaining. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 24, 73-83.
--- END PAGE 285 ---

--- PAGE 286 ---
Berridge, K. C. (2003). Comparing the emotional brains of humans and
other animals. In R. J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer & H. H. Goldsmith
(Eds.), Handbook of affective sciences (pp. 25-51). Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. H. (1978). Interpersonal attraction. New
York: Freeman.
Biswas-Diener, R., & Diener, E. (2001). Making the best of a bad
situation: Satisfaction in the slums of Calcutta. Social Indicators
Research, 55, 329-352.
Bjorklund, D. F. (1997). The role of immaturity in human development. 
Psychological Bulletin, 122, 153-169.
Blake, W. (1975/1790-1793). The marriage of heaven and hell . London:
Oxford University Press.
Bloom, P. (2004). Descartes’ baby: How the science of child
development explains what makes us human. New York: Basic Books.
Blum, D. (2002). Love at Goon Park. Cambridge, MA: Perseus.
Boehm, C. (1999). Hierarchy in the forest: The evolution of egalitarian
behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Boethius. (1962/c. 522 CE). The consolation of philosophy. (R. Green,
Trans.). New York: Macmillan.
Bonanno, G. (2004). Loss, trauma, and human resilience: Have we
underestimated the human capacity to thrive after extremely aversive
events? American Psychologist, 59, 20-28.
Bouchard, T. J. (2004). Genetic influence on human psychological traits:
A survey. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 148-151.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss. Vol.1, Attachment. New York:
Basic Books.
Boyer, P. (2001). Religion explained: The evolutionary origins of
religious thought. New York: Basic Books.
Brickman, P., & Campbell, D. T. (1971). Hedonic relativism and
planning the good society. In M. H. Apley (Ed.), Adaptation-level
theory: A symposium (pp. 287-302). New York: Academic Press.
--- END PAGE 286 ---

--- PAGE 287 ---
Brickman, P., Coates, D., & Janoff-Bulman, R. (1978). Lottery winners
and accident victims: Is happiness relative? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 36, 917-927.
Brim, G. (1992). Ambition. New York: Basic Books.
Broderick, J. C. (Ed.). (1990). Writings of Henry D. Thoreau: Journal,
Volume 3: 1848-1851. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bronte, C. (1973/1847). Jane Eyre. London: Oxford University Press.
Brown, D. E. (1991). Human universals. Philadelphia: Temple
University Press.
Brown, R., & Gilman, A. (1960). The pronouns of power and solidarity.
In T. A. Sebeok (Ed.), Style in language (pp. 253-276). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Brown, S. L., Nesse, R. M., Vinokur, A. D., & Smith, D. M. (2003).
Providing social support may be more beneficial than receiving it:
Results from a prospective study of mortality. Psychological Science, 14,
320-327.
Buckley, T., & Gottlieb, A. (Eds.). (1988). Blood magic: The
anthropology of menstruation. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Buchanan, D. C. (1965). Japanese proverbs and sayings. Norman, OK:
University of Oklahoma Press.
Burns, D. D. (1999). Feeling Good. (2nd ed.). New York: Avon.
Burns, J. M., & Swerdlow, R. H. (2003). Right orbitofrontal tumor with
pedophilia symptom and constructional apraxia sign. Archives of
Neurology, 60, 437-440.
Bushman, B. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Threatened egotism,
narcissism, self-esteem, and direct and displaced aggression: Does self-
love or self-hate lead to violence? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 219-229.
Buss, D. M. (2004). Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the
mind. (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Byrne, R., & Whiten, A. (Eds.). (1988). Machiavellian intelligence. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
--- END PAGE 287 ---

--- PAGE 288 ---
Byrom, T. (Ed. and Trans.). (1993). Dhammapada: The sayings of the
Buddha. Boston: Shambhala.
Campbell, D. T. (1983). The two distinct routes beyond kin selection to
ultrasociality: Implications for the humanities and social sciences. In D.
Bridge-man (Ed.), The nature of prococial development: Theories and
strategies (pp. 11-39). New York: Academic Press.
Carnegie, D. (1984/1944). How to stop worrying and start living. New
York: Pocket Books.
Carstensen, L. L., Pasupathi, M., Mayr, U., & Nesselroade, J. R. (2000).
Emotional experience in everyday life across the adult life span. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 644-655.
Carter, C. (1998). Neuroendocrine perspectives on social attachment and
love. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 23, 779-818.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition, behavioral
activation, and affective responses to impending reward and punishment:
The BIS/BAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67,
319-333.
Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., & Weintraub, J. K. (1989). Assessing
coping strategies: A theoretically based approach. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 56, 267-283.
Cassidy, J. (1999). The nature of the child’s ties. In J. Cassidy & P. R.
Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and
applications (pp. 3-20). New York: Guilford.
Cather, W. (1987/1918). My Antonia ; New York: Library of America.
Chan, W. T. (1963). A source book in Chinese philosophy. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The development of anxiety:
The role of control in the early environment. Psychological Bulletin, 
124, 3-21.
Churchland, P. M. (1998). Toward a cognitive neuriobiology of the moral
virtues. Topoi , 17, 83-96.
Cialdini, R. B. (2001). Influence: Science and practice. (4th ed.). Boston:
Allyn and Bacon.
--- END PAGE 288 ---

--- PAGE 289 ---
Cialdini, R. B., Vincent, J. E., Lewis, S. K., Catalan, J., Wheeler, D., &
Darby, B. L. (1975). Reciprocal concessions procedure for inducing
compliance: The door-in-the-face technique. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 31, 206-215.
Clark, A. (1999). Being there: Putting brain, body, and world together
again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cleckley, H. (1955). The mask of sanity. St. Louis, MO: Mosby.
Cohen, S., & Herbert, T. B. (1996). Health psychology: psychological
factors and physical disease from the perspective of human
psychoneuroimmunology. Annual Reviews of Psychology, 47, 113-142.
Conze, E. (Ed.). (1954). Buddhist texts through the ages. New York:
Philosophical Library.
Conze, E. (Ed.). (1959). Buddhist Scriptures. London: Penguin.
Cooper, J. M. (Ed.). (1997). Plato: Complete works. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2004). Knowing thyself: The evolutionary
psychology of moral reasoning and moral sentiments. Business, Science,
and Ethics, 91-127.
Costa, P. T. J., & McCrae, R. R. (1989). Personality continuity and the
changes of adult life. In M. Storandt & G. R. VandenBos (Eds.), The
adult years: Continuity and change (pp. 45-77). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Cross, P. (1977). Not can but will college teaching be improved. New
Directions for Higher Education, 17, 1-15.
Cruikshank, B. (1999). Will to empower: Democratic citizens and other
subjects. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal
experience. New York: Harper & Row.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Finding flow. New York: Basic Books.
Dalai Lama. (2001/1995). The art of living: A guide to contentment, joy,
and fulfillment . (G. T. Jinpa, Trans.) London: Thorsons.
--- END PAGE 289 ---

--- PAGE 290 ---
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason, and the human
brain. New York: Putnam.
Damasio, A. R., Tranel, D., & Damasio, H. (1990). Individuals with
sociopathic behavior caused by frontal damage fail to respond
autonomically to social stimuli. Behavioral Brain Research, 41, 81-94.
Damon, W. (1997). The youth charter: How communities can work
together to raise standards for all our children. New York: Free Press.
Damon, W., Menon, J. & Bronk, K. (2003). The development of purpose
during adolescence. Applied Developmental Science 7, 119-128.
Darwin, C. (1998/1871). The descent of man and selection in relation to
sex. Amherst, NY: Prometheus.
Daston, L., and Park, C. (1998). Wonders and the order of nature, 1150-
1750. New York: Zone.
Davidson, R. J. (1994). Asymmetric brain function, affective style, and
psychopathology: The role of early experience and plasticity. 
Development and Psychopathology, 6, 741-758.
Davidson, R. J. (1998). Affective style and affective disorders:
Perspectives from affective neuroscience. Cognition and Emotion, 12,
307-330.
Davidson, R. J., and Fox, N. A. (1989). Frontal brain asymmetry predicts
infants’ response to maternal separation. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 98, 127-131.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The selfish gene. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press. DePaulo, B. M., & Morris, W. L. (2005). Singles in society and
science. Psychological Inquiry, 16, 57-83.
DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, R. C., Young,
P. R., Salomon, R. M., et al. (2005). Cognitive therapy vs medications in
the treatment of moderate to severe depression. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 62, 409-416. DeWolff, M., & van Ijzendoorn, M. (1997).
Sensitivity and attachment: A meta-analysis on parental antecedents of
infant attachment. Child Development, 68, 571-591.
Dharmakirti. (2002). Mahayana tantra. New Delhi, India: Penguin.
--- END PAGE 290 ---

--- PAGE 291 ---
Diener, E., & Diener, C. (1996). Most people are happy. Psychological
Science, 7, 181-185.
Diener, E., & Oishi, S. (2000). Money and happiness: Income and
subjective well-being across nations. In E. Diener & E. M. Suh (Eds.), 
Culture and subjective well-being (pp. 185-218). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Diener, E., & Suh, M. E. (1998). Subjective well-being and age: An
international analysis. In K. Schaie & M. Lawton (Eds.), Annual review
of gerontology and geriatrics, Vol 17: Focus on emotion and adult
development, Annual review of gerontology and geriatrics (pp. 304-324).
New York: Springer.
Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjective
well-being: Three decades of progress. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 276-
302.
Diener, E., Wolsic, B., & Fujita, F. (1995). Physical attractiveness and
subjective well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69,
120-129.
Dijksterhuis, A., & van Knippenberg, A. (1998). The relation between
perception and behavior, or how to win a game of Trivial Pursuit. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 865-877.
Dobson, K. S. (1989). A meta-analysis of the efficacy of cognitive
therapy for depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
57, 414-419.
Doniger, W., & Smith, B. (Eds. & Trans.). (1991). The laws of Manu. 
London: Penguin.
Donne, J. (1975/1623). Devotions upon emergent occasions: A critical
edition with introduction and commentary. Salzburg: University of
Salzburg.
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., Robins, R. W., Moffitt, T. E., &
Caspi, A. (2005). Low self-esteem is related to aggression, antisocial
behavior, and delinquency. Psychological Science, 16 , 328-335.
Dunbar, R. (1993). Coevolution of neocortical size, group size and
language in humans. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 16, 681-735.
--- END PAGE 291 ---

--- PAGE 292 ---
Dunbar, R. (1996). Grooming, gossip, and the evolution of language. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dunning, D., Meyerowitz, J. A., & Holzberg, A. D. (2002). Ambiguity
and self-evaluation: The role of idiosyncratic trait definitions in self-
serving assessments of ability. In Heuristics and biases: The psychology
of intuitive judgment. (pp. 324-333). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Durkheim, E. (1951/1897). Suicide. (J. A. Spalding & G. Simpson,
Trans.) New York: Free Press.
Durkheim, E. (1965/1915). The elementary forms of the religious life. (J.
W. Swain, Trans.) New York: Free Press.
Ekman, P., Sorensen, E., & Friesen, W. V. (1969). Pan-cultural elements
in the facial displays of emotion. Science, 164, 86-88.
Elder, G. H., Jr. (1974). Children of the great depression. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Elder, G. H. (1998). The life course and human development. In R. M.
Lerner (Ed.), Handbook of child psychology. Vol. 1, Theoretical models
of human development (pp. 939-991). New York: Wiley.
Eliade, M. (1959/1957). The sacred and the profane: The nature of
religion. (W. R. Task, Trans.). San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace.
Emerson, R. W. (1960a/1838). The divinity school address. In S.
Whicher (Ed.), Selections from Ralph Waldo Emerson (pp. 100-116).
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Emerson, R. W. (1960b/1838). Nature. In S. Whicher (Ed.), Selections
from Ralph Waldo Emerson (pp. 21-56). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Emmons, R. A. (1999). The psychology of ultimate concerns: Motivation
and spirituality in personality. New York: Guilford.
Emmons, R. A. (2003). Personal goals, life meaning, and virtue:
Wellsprings of a positive life. In C. L. M. Keyes & J. Haidt (Eds.), 
Flourishing: Positive psychology and the life well-lived (pp. 105-128).
Washington DC: American Psychological Association.
Emmons, R. A., & McCullough, M. E. (2003). Counting blessings
versus burdens: An experimental investigation of gratitude and
--- END PAGE 292 ---

--- PAGE 293 ---
subjective well-being in daily life. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84, 377-389.
Epictetus (1983/1st-2nd cent. CE). The manual. (N. White, Trans.).
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Epicurus (1963/c. 290 BCE). The philosophy of Epicurus. (G. K.
Strodach, Trans.). Chicago: Northwestern University Press.
Epley, N., & Caruso, E. M. (2004). Egocentric ethics. Social Justice
Research, 17, 171-187.
Epley, N., & Dunning, D. (2000). Feeling “holier than thou”: Are self-
serving assessments produced by errors in self- or social prediction. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 861-875.
Erikson, E. H. (1963/1950.) Childhood and society. (2nd ed.). New York:
Norton.
Fadiman, J., & Frager, R. (Eds.). (1997). Essential Sufism. San
Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco.
Fazio, R. H., Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Powell, M. C., & Kardes, F. R.
(1986). On the automatic evaluation of attitudes. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 50, 229-238.
Feeney, J. A., & Noller, P. (1996). Adult attachment. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Feinberg, T. E. (2001). Altered egos: How the brain creates the self. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Feingold, A. (1992). Good looking people are not what we think. 
Psychological Bulletin, 111, 304-341.
Feng, G. F., & English, J. (Eds.). (1972). Tao Te Ching. New York:
Random House.
Fenton, T. (2005.) Bad news: The decline of reporting, the business of
news, and the danger to us all. New York: Regan Books.
Fisher, H. (2004). Why we love: The nature and chemistry of romantic
love. New York: Henry Holt.
Fitzgerald, J. M. (1988). Vivid memories and the reminiscence
phenomenon: The role of a self-narrative. Human Development, 31, 261-
--- END PAGE 293 ---

--- PAGE 294 ---
273.
Flanagan, O. (1991.) Varieties of moral personality: Ethics and
psychological realism. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Fleeson, W., Malanos, A. B., & Achille, N. M. (2002). An
intraindividual process approach to the relationship between extraversion
and positive affect: Is acting extraverted as “good” as being extraverted? 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1409-1422.
Frank, R. H. (1999). Luxury fever: Why money fails to satisfy in an era of
excess. New York: Free Press.
Frank, R. H. (1988). Passions within reason: The strategic role of the
emotions. New York: Norton.
Frankl, V. E. (1984). Man’s search for meaning. New York: Pocket
Books.
Franklin, B. (1962/c. 1791). Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. New
York: MacMillan.
Franklin, B. (1980/1733-1758). Poor Richard’s Almanack (selections). 
Mount Vernon, NY: Peter Pauper Press.
Frederick, S., & Loewenstein, G. (1999). Hedonic adaptation. In D.
Kahneman, E. Diener & N. Schwartz (Eds.), Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 302-329). New York: Russell
Sage.
Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). What good are positive emotions? Review of
General Psychology, 2, 300-319.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive
psychology: The broaden-and-build theory of positive emotions. 
American Psychologist, 56, 218-226.
Freitas, A. L., and Higgins, E. T. (2002). Enjoying goal-directed action:
The role of regulatory fit. Psychological Science, 13, 1-6.
Freud, S. (1976/1900). The interpretation of dreams . (J. Strachey, Trans.)
New York: Norton.
Gallup, G. (1982). Self-awareness and the emergence of mind in
primates. American Journal of Primatology, 2, 237-248.
--- END PAGE 294 ---

--- PAGE 295 ---
Gardner, H., Csikszentmihalyi, M., & Damon, W. (2001). Good work:
When excellence and ethics meet. New York: Basic Books.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1985). The social brain. New York: Basic Books.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Bogen, J. E., & Sperry, R. W. (1962). Some functional
effects of sectioning the cerebral commissures in man. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 48, 1765-1769.
Geertz, C. (1973). Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of
culture. In C. Geertz (Ed.), The interpretation of cultures. New York:
Basic Books.
Gershon, M. D. (1998). The second brain. New York: HarperCollins.
Gibbard, A. (1990). Wise choices, apt feelings. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Gibran, K. (1977/1923). The prophet. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Gladwell, M. (2000). The tipping point: How little things can make a big
difference. New York: Little Brown.
Gladwell, M. (2005). Blink: The power of thinking without thinking. New
York: Little, Brown.
Glass, D. C., & Singer, J. E. (1972). Urban stress; Experiments on noise
and social stressors. New York: Academic Press.
Glover, J. (2000). Humanity: A moral history of the twentieth century. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Goldenberg, J. L., Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., McCoy, S. K., &
Solomon, S. (1999). Death, sex, love, and neuroticism: Why is sex such
a problem? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 1173-
1187.
Goldenberg, J. L., Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., Solomon, S., Kluck,
B., & Corn-well, R. (2001). I am NOT an animal: Mortality salience,
disgust, and the denial of human creatureliness. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General , 130, 427-435.
Gottman, J. (1994). Why marriages succeed or fail. New York: Simon &
Schuster.
--- END PAGE 295 ---

--- PAGE 296 ---
Graham, J., and Haidt, J. (manuscript in preparation). The implicit and
explicit moral values of liberals and conservatives. University of
Virginia, Dept. of Psychology.
Gray, J. A. (1994). Framework for a taxonomy of psychiatric disorder. In
S. H. M. van Goozen & N. E. Van de Poll (Eds.), Emotions: Essays on
emotion theory (pp. 29-59). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gray, J. G. (1970/1959). The Warriors: Reflections of men in battle. New
York: Harper & Row.
Grob, C. S., & de Rios, M. D. (1994). Hallucinogens, managed states of
consciousness, and adolescents: Cross-cultural perspectives. In P. K.
Bock (Ed.), Psychological Anthropology (pp. 315-329). Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Gross, J., & Haidt, J. (2005). The morality and politics of self-change.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Virginia.
Guth, W., Schmittberger, R., and Schwarze, B. (1982). An experimental
analysis of ultimatum bargaining. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 3, 367-388.
Guyer, P. (Ed.). (1992). The Cambridge companion to Kant. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Haidt, J. (2001). The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social
intuitionist approach to moral judgment. Psychological Review, 108, 
814-834.
Haidt, J. (2003). Elevation and the positive psychology of morality. In C.
L. M. Keyes and J. Haidt (Eds.), Flourishing: Positive psychology and
the life well-lived (pp. 275-289). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Haidt, J., Koller, S., and Dias, M. (1993). Affect, culture, and morality,
or is it wrong to eat your dog? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 613-628.
Haidt, J., Rozin, P., McCauley, C. R., & Imada, S. (1997). Body, psyche,
and culture: The relationship between disgust and morality. Psychology
and Developing Societies, 9, 107-131.
Haidt, J., & Rodin, J. (1999). Control and efficacy as interdisciplinary
bridges. Review of General Psychology, 3, 317-337.
--- END PAGE 296 ---

--- PAGE 297 ---
Haidt, J., & Hersh, M. A. (2001). Sexual morality: The cultures and
reasons of liberals and conservatives. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 31, 191-221.
Haidt, J., Rosenberg, E., & Hom, H. (2003). Differentiating diversities:
Moral diversity is not like other kinds. Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 33, 1-36.
Haidt, J., & Joseph, C. (2004). Intuitive ethics: How innately prepared
intuitions generate culturally variable virtues. Daedalus (Fall), 55-66.
Haidt, J., & Keltner, D. (2004). Appreciation of beauty and excellence.
In C. Peterson and M. E. P. Seligman (Eds.), Character strengths and
virtues (pp. 537-551). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Haidt, J., & Bjorklund, F. (in press). Social intuitionists answer six
questions about morality. In W. Sinnott-Armstrong (Ed.), Moral
psychology. Vol. 2, The cognitive science of morality. 
Hamer, D. H. (2004). The God gene: How faith is hardwired into our
genes. New York: Doubleday.
Hamilton, W. D. (1964). The genetical evolution of social behavior, parts
1 and 2. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 7, 1-52.
Hansen, C. (1991). Classical Chinese Ethics. In P. Singer (Ed.), A
companion to ethics (pp. 69-81). Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Hare, R. D. (1993). Without conscience. New York: Pocket Books.
Harker, L., & Keltner, D. (2001). Expressions of positive emotion in
women’s college yearbook pictures and their relationship to personality
and life outcomes across adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 80, 112-124.
Harlow, H. F. (1971). Learning to love. San Francisco, CA: Albion.
Harlow, H. F., Harlow, M. K., & Meyer, D. R. (1950). Learning
motivated by a manipulation drive. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
40, 228-234.
Harlow, H. F., & Zimmerman, R. (1959). Affectional responses in the
infant monkey. Science, 130, 421-432.
--- END PAGE 297 ---

--- PAGE 298 ---
Harris, J. R. (1995). Where is the child’s environment? A group
socialization theory of development. Psychological Review, 102, 458-
489.
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an
attachment process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52,
511-524.
Hazan, C., & Zeifman, D. (1999). Pair bonds as attachments. In J.
Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory,
research, and applications (pp. 336-354). New York: Guilford.
Heine, S. J., & Lehman, D. R. (1999). Culture, self-discrepancies, and
self-satisfaction. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 915-
925.
Helson, H. (1964). Adaptation level theory: An experimental and
systematic approach to behavior. New York: Harper & Row.
Hick, J. (1967). The problem of evil. In P. Edwards (Ed.), The
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vols. 3 & 4 (pp. 136-141). New York:
Macmillan.
Hill, K., & Hurtado, A. M. (1996). Ache life history. New York: Aldine
de Gruyter.
Hollon, S. D., & Beck, A. T. (1994). Cognitive and cognitive-behavioral
therapies. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of
psychotherapy and behavior change (4th ed.). New York: Wiley.
Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., & Weiss, B. (2002). The
emperor’s new drugs: Effect size and moderation effects. Prevention and
Treatment, 5, n.p.
Holmes, O. W., Jr. (1891). Speeches . Boston: Little, Brown.
Hom, H., & Haidt, J. (in preparation). The bonding and norming
functions of gossip. Unpublished manuscript, University of Virginia.
Hoorens, V. (1993). Self-enhancement and superiority biases in social
comparisons. In Vol. 4 of W. Strobe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European
review of social psychology (pp. 113-139). Chichester, UK: John Wiley.
Hume, D. (1969/1739). A treatise of human nature. London: Penguin.
--- END PAGE 298 ---

--- PAGE 299 ---
Hunter, J. D. (2000). The death of character: Moral education in an age
without good and evil. New York: Basic Books.
Irving, W. (1976). George Washington: A biography. Charles Neider
(Ed.). Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Isen, A. M., & Levin, P. F. (1972). Effect of feeling good on helping:
Cookies and kindness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 21,
384-388.
Isen, A. M., & Simmonds, S. (1978). The effect of feeling good on a
helping task that is incompatible with good mood. Social Psychology, 41,
346-349.
Ito, T. A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1999). The psychophysiology of utility
appraisals. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, and N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-
being: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 470-488). New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When choice is demotivating:
Can one desire too much of a good thing? Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 79, 995-1006.
James, W. (1950/1890). The principles of psychology. Vol. 2. New York:
Dover.
James, W. (1961/1902). The varieties of religious experience. New York:
Macmillan.
James, J. M., & Bolstein, R. (1992). Effect of monetary incentives and
follow-up mailings on the response rate and response quality in mail
surveys. Public Opinion Quarterly, 54, 442-453.
Jankowiak, W. R., & Fischer, E. F. (1992). A cross-cultural perspective
on romantic love. Ethnology, 31, 149-155.
Jefferson, T. (1975/1771). Letter to Robert Skipwith. In M. D. Peterson
(Ed.), The portable Thomas Jefferson (pp. 349-351). New York:
Penguin.
Julien, R. M. (1998). A primer of drug action. (8th ed.). New York: W.
H. Freeman.
Jung, C. G. (1963). Memories, dreams, reflections. New York: Pantheon.
--- END PAGE 299 ---

--- PAGE 300 ---
Kagan, J. (1994). Galen’s prophecy: Temperament in human nature. New
York: Basic Books.
Kagan, J. (2003). Biology, context, and developmental inquiry. Annual
Review of Psychology, 54, 1-23.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of
decisions under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263-291.
Kant, I. (1959/1785). Foundation of the metaphysics of morals. (L. W.
Beck, Trans.) Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Kaplan, H. R. (1978). Lottery winners: How they won and how winning
changed their lives. New York: Harper and Row.
Kass, L. R. (1994). The hungry soul: Eating and the perfecting of our
nature. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Kasser, T. (2002). The high price of materialism. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (1996). Further examining the American
dream: Differential correlates of intrinsic and extrinsic goals. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 280-287.
Keller, H. (1938). Helen Keller’s journal. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Keltner, D., & Haidt, J. (2003). Approaching awe, a moral, spiritual, and
aesthetic emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 17 , 297-314.
Keyes, C. L. M., & Haidt, J. (Eds.). (2003). Flourishing: Positive
psychology and the life well lived. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
King, L. A. (2001). The hard road to the good life: The happy, mature
person. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 41, 51-72.
Klemke, E. D. (Ed.). (2000). The meaning of life. (2nd ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Kohn, M. L., and Schooler, C. (1983). Work and personality: An inquiry
into the impact of social stratification. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P.J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005).
Oxytocin increases trust in humans. Nature, 435, 673-676.
--- END PAGE 300 ---

--- PAGE 301 ---
Koslowsky, M., & Kluger, A. N. (1995). Commuting stress. New York:
Plenum.
Kramer, P. D. (1993). Listening to Prozac. New York: Viking.
Kuhn, D. (1991). The skills of argument. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological
Bulletin, 108, 480-498.
Kunz, P. R., & Woolcott, M. (1976). Season’s greetings: from my status
to yours. Social Science Research, 5, 269-278.
LaBar, K. S., & LeDoux, J. E. (2003). Emotional learning circuits in
animals and humans. In R. J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer & H. H.
Goldsmith (Eds.), Handbook of affective sciences (pp. 52-65). Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Laertius, D. (1925/3rd cent. CE). Lives of eminent philosophers. (R. D.
Hicks, Trans.) London: Heinemann.
Lakin, J. L., and Chartrand, T. L. (2003). Using nonconscious behavioral
mimicry to create affiliation and rapport. Psychological Science, 14, 334-
339.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh. New York:
Basic Books.
Langer, E. J., & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced
personal responsibility for the aged: A field experiment in an
institutional setting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34,
191-198.
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. 
New York: Springer.
Leakey, R. (1994). The origin of humankind. New York: Basic Books.
Leary, M. (2004). The curse of the self: Self-awareness, egotism, and the
quality of human life. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
--- END PAGE 301 ---

--- PAGE 302 ---
Le Conte, J. (1892). Evolution: Its nature, its evidences, and its relation
to religious thought. (2nd ed.). New York: D. Appleton.
LeDoux, J. (1996). The Emotional Brain. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Lerner, M. J., & Miller, D. T. (1978). Just world research and the
attribution process: Looking back and ahead. Psychological Bulletin, 85,
1030-1051.
Leys, S. (Ed.). (1997). The analects of Confucius. New York: Norton.
Lichtheim, M. (1976). Ancient egyptial literature: A book of readings. 
Vol. 2, The new kingdom. Berkeley: University of California.
Lorenz, K. J. (1935). Der kumpan in der umvelt des vogels. Journal für
Ornithologie, 83, 137-213.
Lucas, R. E. (2005). Happiness can change: A longitudinal study of
adaptation to disability. Unpublished manuscript. Michigan State
University.
Lucas, R. E., Clark, A. E., Georgellis, Y., & Diener, E. (2003).
Reexamining adaptation and the set point model of happiness: Reactions
to changes in marital status. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84, 527-539.
Lucas, R. E., & Dyrenforth, P. S. (in press). Does the existence of social
relationships matter for subjective well-being? In K. D. Vohs & E. J.
Finkel (Eds.), Intrapersonal processes and interpersonal relationships:
Two halves, one self . New York: Gulford.
Lucas, R. E., & Gohm, C. L. (2000). Age and sex differences in
subjective well-being across cultures. In E. Diener & E. M. Suh (Eds.), 
Culture and subjective well-being (pp. 291-318). Cambridge, MA: MIT
press.
Lucretius. (1977/c. 59 BCE). The nature of things. (F. O. Copley, Trans.)
New York: Norton.
Lykken, D. T. (1999). Happiness: What studies on twins show us about
nature, nurture, and the happiness set-point. New York: Golden Books.
Lykken, D. T., McGue, M., Tellegen, A., & Bouchard, T. J. (1992).
Emergenesis: Genetic traits that may not run in families. American
Psychologist, 47, 1565-1577.
--- END PAGE 302 ---

--- PAGE 303 ---
Lykken, D. T., & Tellegen, A. (1996). Happiness is a stochastic
phenomenon. Psychological Science, 7, 186-189.
Lynn, M., & McCall, M. (1998). Beyond gratitude and gratuity.
Unpublished manuscript, Cornell University, School of Hotel
Administration, Ithaca, NY.
Lyte, M., Varcoe, J. J., & Bailey, M. T. (1998). Anxiogenic effect of
subclinical bacterial infection in mice in the absence of overt immune
activation. Physiology and behavior, 65, 63-68.
Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E. (in press). The benefits of
frequent positive affect: Does happiness lead to success? Psychological
Bulletin. 
Lyubomirsky, S., Sheldon, K. M., & Schkade, D. (in press). Pursuing
happiness: The architecture of sustainable change. Review of General
Psychology. 
Machiavelli, N. (1940/c. 1517). The prince and the discourses. (L. Ricci
& C. E. Detmold, Trans.). New York: Modern Library.
MacIntyre, A. (1981). After virtue. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press.
Marcus, G. (2004). The birth of the mind. New York: Basic Books.
Margolis, H. (1987). Patterns, thinking, and cognition. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications
for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224-
253.
Marx, K. (1977/1867). Capital: A critique of political economy. New
York: Vintage.
Mascaro, J. (Ed. and Trans.). (1965). The Upanishads. London: Penguin.
Mascaro, J. (Ed. and Trans.). (1973). The Dhammapada. 
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Maslow, A. H. (1964). Religions, values, and peak-experiences. 
Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press.
--- END PAGE 303 ---

--- PAGE 304 ---
Mastekaasa, A. (1994). Marital status, distress, and well-being: An
international comparison. Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 25,
183-205.
McAdams, D. P. (1994). Can personality change? Levels of stability and
growth in personality across the life span. In T. F. Heatherton & J. L.
Weinberger (Eds.), Can personality change? (pp. 299-313). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association.
McAdams, D. P. (2001). The psychology of life stories. Review of
General Psychology, 5, 100-122.
McCraty, R., and Childre, D. (2004). The grateful heart: The
psychophysiology of appreciation. In R. A. Emmons and M. E.
McCullough (Eds.), The psychology of gratitude (pp. 230-255). New
York: Oxford.
McCullough, M. E., Hoyt, W. T., Larson, D. B., Koenig, H. G., &
Thoresen, C. (2000). Religious involvement and mortality: A meta-
analytic review. Health Psychology, 1, 211-222.
McNeill, W. H. (1995). Keeping together in time: Dance and drill in
human history. Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press.
Meichenbaum, D. (1985). Stress innoculation training. New York:
Pergamon. Metcalfe, J., & Mischel, W. (1999). A hot/cool-system
analysis of delay of gratification: Dynamics of willpower. Psychological
Review, 106, 3-19.
Miller, N. E. (1944). Experimental studies of conflict. In J. M. Hunt
(Ed.), Personality and the behavior disorders . New York: Ronald Press.
Miller, W. I. (1997). The anatomy of disgust. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Miller, W. R., & C’de Baca, J. (2001). Quantum Change. New York:
Guilford.
Mithen, S. (2000). Mind, brain and material culture: An archaeological
perspective. In P. Carruthers and A. Chamberlain (Eds.), Evolution and
the human mind (pp. 207-217) , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Montaigne, M. (1991/1588). The complete essays. (M. A. Screech, Ed. &
Trans.). London: Penguin.
--- END PAGE 304 ---

--- PAGE 305 ---
Moss, C. (1998). Elephant Memories: Thirteen years in the life of an
elephant family. New York: William Morrow.
Mroczek, D. K., & Spiro, A. (2005). Change in life satisfaction during
adulthood: Findings from the veterans affairs normative aging study. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 189-202.
Myers, D. G. (2000). The funds, friends, and faith of happy people. 
American Psychologist, 55, 56-67.
Nakamura, J., and Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2003). The construction of
meaning through vital engagement. In C. L. M. Keyes and J. Haidt
(Eds.), Flourishing: Positive psychology and the life well-lived (pp. 83-
104). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Nestler, E. J., Hyman, S. E., & Malenka, R. C. (2001). Molecular
neuropharmacology: A foundation for clinical neuroscience. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Newberg, A., D’Aquili, E., & Rause, V. (2001). Why God won’t go
away: Brain science and the biology of belief. New York: Ballantine.
Nietzsche, F. (1997/1889). Twilight of the idols. (R. Polt, Trans.)
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Davis, C. G. (2002). Positive responses to loss.
In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology 
(pp. 598-607). New York: Oxford.
Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (2002). Harvesting
intergroup implicit attitudes and beliefs from a demonstration web site. 
Group Dynamics, 6, 101-115.
Nosek, B. A., Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (in press). The Implicit
Association Test at age 7: A methodological and conceptual review. In J.
A. Bargh (Ed.), Automatic processes in social thinking and behavior. 
Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Nussbaum, M. C. (2001). Upheavals of thought. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
O’Connor, E. (Ed. & Trans.). (1993). The essential Epicurus. Amherst,
NY: Prometheus Books.
--- END PAGE 305 ---

--- PAGE 306 ---
Obeyesekere, G. (1985). Depression, Buddhism, and work of culture in
Sri Lanka. In A. Klineman & B. Good (Eds.), Culture and depression 
(pp. 134-152). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Olds, J., & Milner, P. (1954). Positive reinforcement produced by
electrical stimulation of septal areas and other regions of rat brains. 
Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 47, 419-427.
Ovid (2004/c. 10 CE). Metamorphoses. (D. Raeburn, Trans.). London:
Penguin.
Pachocinski, R. (1996). Proverbs of Africa: Human nature in the
Nigerian oral tradition. St. Paul, MN: Professors World Peace Academy.
Pahnke, W. N. (1966). Drugs and mysticism. International Journal of
Parapsychology, 8, 295-313.
Panthanathan, K., and Boyd, R. (2004). Indirect reciprocity can stabilize
cooperation without the second-order free rider problem. Nature, 432,
499-502.
Park, C. L., Cohen, L., & Murch, R. (1996). Assessment and prediction
of stress-related growth. Journal of Personality, 64, 71-105.
Pelham, B. W., Mirenberg, M. C., & Jones, J. K. (2002). Why Susie sells
seashells by the seashore: Implicit egotism and major life decisions. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 469-487.
Pennebaker, J. (1997). Opening up: The healing power of expressing
emotions (Rev. ed.). New York: Guilford.
Perkins, D. N., Farady, M., & Bushey, B. (1991). Everyday reasoning
and the roots of intelligence. In J. F. Voss, D. N. Perkins & J. W. Segal
(Eds.), Informal reasoning and education (pp. 83-105). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2004). Character strengths and
virtues: A handbook and classification. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association and Oxford University Press.
Piaget, J. (1965/1932). The moral judgment of the child. (M. Gabain,
Trans.) New York: Free Press.
Piliavin, J. A. (2003). Doing well by doing good: Benefits for the
benefactor. In C. L. M. Keyes and J. Haidt (Eds.), Flourishing: Positive
--- END PAGE 306 ---

--- PAGE 307 ---
psychology and the life well-lived (pp. 227-247). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Pincoffs, E. L. (1986). Quandaries and virtues: Against reductivism in
ethics. Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the mind works . New York: Norton.
Pinker, S. (2002). The blank slate: The modern denial of human nature. 
New York: Viking.
Plomin, R., & Daniels, D. (1987). Why are children in the same family
so different from one another? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 10, 1-60.
Pronin, E., Lin, D. Y., & Ross, L. (2002). The bias blind spot:
Perceptions of bias in self versus others. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 28, 369-381.
Proust, M. (1992a/1922). In search of lost time. Vol. 2, Within a budding
grove. (C. K. S. Moncreiff & T. Kilmartin, Trans.) London: Chatto and
Windus.
Proust, M. (1992b/1922). In search of lost time. Vol. 5, The captive and
the fugitive. (C. K. S. Moncreiff & T. Kilmartin, Trans.) London: Chatto
and Windus.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of
American community. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Pyszcsynski, T., Greenberg, J., & Solomon, S. (1997). Why do we want
what we want? A terror management perspective on the roots of human
social motivation. Psychological Inquiry, 8, 1-20.
Pyszczynski, T., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Toward an integration of
cognitive and motivational perspectives on social inference: A biased
hypothesis-testing model. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 
20, 297-340.
Reis, H. T., & Gable, S. L. (2003). Toward a positive psychology of
relationships. In C. L. M. Keyes & J. Haidt (Eds.), Flourishing: Positive
psychology and the life well-lived (pp. 129-159). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (1998). The evolution of human ultra-
sociality. In I. Eibl-Eibesfeldt & F. K. Salter (Eds.), Indoctrinability,
--- END PAGE 307 ---

--- PAGE 308 ---
ideology, and warfare: Evolutionary perspectives (pp. 71-95). New York:
Berghahn.
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2005). Not by genes alone: How culture
transformed human evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ridley, M. (1996). The origins of virtue. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
Riis, J., Loewenstein, G., Baron, J., Jepson, C., Fagerlin, A., & Ubel, P.
A. (2005). Ignorance of hedonic adaptation to hemodialysis: A study
using ecological momentary assessment. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General , 134, 3-9.
Rind, B., Tromovitch, P., & Bauserman, R. (1998). A meta-analytic
examination of assumed properties of child sexual abuse using college
samples. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 22-53.
Rodin, J., & Langer, E. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant
intervention with the institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 35, 897-902.
Rolls, E. T. (1999). The brain and emotion. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Ross, M., & Sicoly, F. (1979). Egocentric biases in availability and
attribution. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37, 322-336.
Rozin, P., & Fallon, A. (1987). A perspective on disgust. Psychological
Review, 94, 23-41.
Rozin, P., Haidt, J., McCauley, C., & Imada, S. (1997). Disgust:
Preadaptation and the evolution of a food-based emotion. In H. MacBeth
(Ed.), Food preferences and taste (pp. 65-82). Providence, RI: Berghahn.
Rozin, P., Haidt, J., & McCauley, C. (2000). Disgust. In M. Lewis and J.
M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (pp. 637-653). New
York: Guilford Press.
Rozin, P., and Royzman, E. B. (2001). Negativity bias, negativity
dominance, and contagion. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 5,
296-320.
Russell, J. B. (1988). The prince of darkness: Radical evil and the power
of good in history. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
--- END PAGE 308 ---

--- PAGE 309 ---
Ryan, R. M., and Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the
facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. 
American Psychologist, 55, 68-78.
Ryff, C. D., & Singer, B. (2003). Flourishing under fire: Resilience as a
prototype of challenged thriving. In C. L. M. Keyes & J. Haidt (Eds.), 
Flourishing: Positive psychology and the life well-lived (pp. 15-36).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Sabini, J., & Silver, M. (1982). Moralities of everyday life. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Salovey, P., & Mayer, J. D. (1990). Emotional intelligence. Imagination,
Cognition, and personality, 9, 185-211.
Sampson, R. J. (1993). Family management and child development:
Insights from social disorganization theory. Vol. 6 of J. McCord (Ed.), 
Advances in criminological theory (pp. 63-93). New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction Press.
Sanfey, A. G., Rilling, J. K., Aronson, J. A., Nystrom, L. E., & Cohen, J.
D. (2003). The neural basis of economic decision-making in the
ultimatum game. Science, 300, 1755-1758.
Sartre, J. P. (1989/1944). No exit and three other plays. (S. Gilbert,
Trans.). New York: Vintage International.
Schatzberg, A. F., Cole, J. O., & DeBattista, C. (2003). Manual of
Clinical Psychopharmacology, (4th Ed.). Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Publishing.
Schkade, D. A., & Kahneman, D. (1998). Does living in California make
people happy? A focusing illusion in judgments of life satisfaction. 
Psychological Science, 9, 340-346.
Schulz, R., & Decker, S. (1985). Long-term adjustment to physical
disability: The role of social support, perceived control, and self-blame. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48, 1162-1172.
Schwartz, B. (2004). The paradox of choice. New York: HarperCollins.
Schwartz, B., Ward, A., Monterosso, J., Lyubomirsky, S., White, K., &
Lehman, D. R. (2002). Maximizing versus satisficing: Happiness is a
matter of choice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83,
1178-1197.
--- END PAGE 309 ---

--- PAGE 310 ---
Seligman, M. E. P. (1995). The effectiveness of psychotherapy: The
Consumer Reports study. American Psychologist, 50, 965-974.
Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). Authentic happiness. New York: Free Press.
Seneca, L. A. (1917-1925/c. 50 CE). Moral epistles. Vol. 1, The Loeb
Classical Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Shapiro, S., Schwartz, G. E. R., & Santerre, C. (2002). Meditation and
positive psychology. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of
positive psychology (pp. 632-645). New York: Oxford University Press.
Sheldon, K. M. (2004). Optimal human being: An integrated multi-level
perspective. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sheldon, K. M., & Kasser, T. (1995). Coherence and congruence: Two
aspects of personality integration. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 68, 531-543.
Shoda, Y., Mischel, W., & Peake, P. K. (1990). Predicting adolescent
cognitive and self-regulatory competencies from preschool delay of
gratification: Identifying diagnostic conditions. Developmental
Psychology, 26, 978-986.
Shore, B. (1996). Culture in mind: Cognition, culture, and the problem
of meaning. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shulgin, A. (1991). PIHKAL: A chemical love story. Berkeley:
Transform Press.
Shweder, R. A., Much, N. C., Mahapatra, M., & Park, L. (1997). The
“big three” of morality (autonomy, community, and divinity), and the
“big three” explanations of suffering. In A. Brandt & P. Rozin (Eds.), 
Morality and Health (pp. 119-169). New York: Routledge.
Singer, P. (1979). Practical ethics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Skitka, L. J. (2002). Do the means always justify the ends, or do the ends
sometimes justify the means? A value protection model of justice
reasoning. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 588-597.
Smith, A. (1976/1759). The theory of moral sentiments. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
--- END PAGE 310 ---

--- PAGE 311 ---
Smith, N. M., Floyd, M. R., Scogin, F., & Jamison, C. S. (1997). Three
year followup of bibliotherapy for depression. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 65, 324-327.
Solnick, S. J., & Memenway, D. (1998). Is more always better? A survey
on positional concerns. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 
37, 373-383.
Solomon, R. C. (1999). The joy of philosophy: Thinking thin versus the
passionate life. New York: Oxford University Press.
Srivastava, S., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2003).
Development of personality in early and middle addulthood: Set like
plaster or persistent change? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84, 1041-1053.
Stall, S. (1904/1897). What a young man ought to know. London: Vir
Publishing.
Steele, J. D. (1867). Fourteen weeks in chemistry. New York: A. S.
Barnes.
Sternberg, R. J. (1986). A triangular theory of love. Psychological
Review, 93, 119-135.
Sternberg, R. J. (1998). A balance theory of wisdom. Review of General
Psychology, 2, 347-365.
Tajfel, H. (1982). Social psychology of intergroup relations. Annual
Review of Psychology, 33, 1-39.
Tamir, M., Robinson, M. D., & Clore, G. L. (2002). The epistemic
benefits of trait-consistent mood states: An analysis of extraversion and
mood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(3), 663-677.
Tavris, C. (1982). Anger: The misunderstood emotion. New York: Simon
& Schuster.
Taylor, C. (1989). Sources of the self: The making of the modern identity .
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Taylor, S. E. (2003). Health psychology. Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, R.
A., & Updegraff, J. A. (2000). Biobehavioral responses to stress in
--- END PAGE 311 ---

--- PAGE 312 ---
females: Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-flight. Psychological Review, 
107, 411-429.
Taylor, S. E., Lerner, J. S., Sherman, D. K., Sage, R. M., & McDowell,
N. K. (2003). Portrait of the self-enhancer: Well adjusted and well liked
or maladjusted and friendless. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84, 165-176.
Tedeschi, R. G., Park, C. L., & Calhoun, L. G. (1998). Posttraumatic
growth: Conceptual issues. In R. G. Tedeschi, C. L. Park & L. G.
Calhoun (Eds.), Posttraumatic growth: Positive changes in the aftermath
of crisis (pp. 1-22). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Templeton, J. M. (1997). Worldwide laws of life: 200 eternal spiritual
principles. Philadelphia: Templeton Foundation Press.
Tennen, H., & Affleck, G. (1998). Personality and transformation in the
face of adversity. In R. G. Tedeschi, C. L. Park & L. G. Calhoun (Eds.), 
Posttraumatic growth: Positive changes in the aftermath of crisis (pp.
65-98). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Thoits, P. A., & Hewitt, L. N. (2001). Volunteer work and well-being. 
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 42, 115-131.
Thrash, T. M., and Elliot, A. J. (2004). Inspiration: Core characteristics,
component processes, antecedents, and function. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 87, 957.
Thomas, K. (1983). Man and the Natural World. New York: Pantheon.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1996). Friendship and the banker’s paradox:
Other pathways to the evolution of adaptations for altruism. Proceedings
of the British Academy, 88, 119-143.
Trevathan, W. (1987). Human birth. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Trivers, R. L. (1971). The evolution of reciprocal altruism. Quarterly
Review of Biology, 46, 35-57.
Troyat, H. (1967). Tolstoy. (N. Amphoux, Trans). New York: Doubleday.
Trut, L. N. (1999). Early canid domestication: The farm fox experiment. 
American Scientist, 87, 160-169.
Turkheimer, E. (2000). Three laws of behavior genetics and what they
mean. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 9, 160-164.
--- END PAGE 312 ---

--- PAGE 313 ---
Updegraff, J. A., & Taylor, S. E. (2000). From vulnerability to growth:
Positive and negative effects of stressful life events. In J. Harvey & E.
Miller (Eds.), Loss and trauma: General and close relationship
perspectives (pp. 3-28). Philadelphia: Brunner-Routledge.
Uvnas-Moberg, K. (1998). Oxytocin may mediate the benefits of
positive social interaction and emotions. Psychoneuroimmunology, 23,
819-835.
van Baaren, R. B., Holland, R. W., Steenaert, B., & van Knippenberg, A.
(2003). Mimicry for money: Behavioral consequences of imitation. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 39, 393-398.
van Baaren, R. B., Holland, R. W., Kawakami, K., & van Knippenberg,
A. (2004). Mimicry and Prosocial Behavior. Psychological Science, 15,
71-74.
Van Boven, L., & Gilovich, T. (2003). To do or to have? That is the
question. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 85, 1193-1202.
van IJzendoorn, M. H., Moran, G., Belsky, J., Pederson, D., Bakermans-
Kranenburg, M. J., & Kneppers, K. (2000). The similarity of siblings’
attachments to their mother. Child Development, 71, 1086-1098.
Vormbrock, J. K. (1993). Attachment theory as applied to war-time and
job-related marital separation. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 122-144.
Waite, L. J., & Gallagher, M. (2000). The case for marriage: Why
married people are happier, healthier, and better off financially. New
York: Doubleday.
Warren, R. (2002). The purpose driven life: What on earth am I here for? 
Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan.
Wasson, R. G. (1986). Persephone’s quest: Entheogens and the origins
of religion. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Watson, J. B. (1928). Psychological care of infant and child. New York:
W. W. Norton.
Wegner, D. (1994). Ironic processes of mental control. Psychological
Review, 101, 34-52.
Weinfield, N. S., Sroufe, L. A., Egeland, B., & Carlson, E. A. (1999).
The nature of individual differences in infant-caregiver attachment. In J.
--- END PAGE 313 ---

--- PAGE 314 ---
Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory,
research, and applications (pp. 68-88). New York: Guilford.
Wesley, J. (1986/1786). Works of John Wesley. A. Outler (Ed.).
Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press.
White, R. B. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of
competence. Psychological Review 66, 297-333.
Whybrow, P. C. (2005). American mania: When more is not enough. 
New York: Norton.
Wilkinson, G. S. (1984). Reciprocal food sharing in the vampire bat. 
Nature, 308, 181-184.
Williams, G. C. (1966). Adaptation and natural selection: A critique of
some current evolutionary thought. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Wilson, D. S. (2002). Darwin’s cathedral: Evolution, religion, and the
nature of society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, E. O. (1990). Success and dominance in ecosystems: The case of
the social insects. Oldendorf, Germany: Ecology Institute.
Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2003). Affective forecasting. In Vol. 35
of M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental psychology (pp. 345-
411). San Diego, CA: Academic.
Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2005). Making sense: A model of
affective adaptation. Unpublished manuscript.
Wright, R. (1994). The moral animal. New York: Pantheon.
Wrzesniewski, A., McCauley, C. R., Rozin, P., & Schwartz, B. (1997).
Jobs, careers, and callings: People’s relations to their work. Journal of
Research in Personality, 31, 21-33.
Wrzesniewski, A., Rozin, P., & Bennett, G. (2003). Working, playing,
and eating: Making the most of most moments. In C. L. M. Keyes & J.
Haidt (Eds.), Flourishing: Positive psychology and the life well-lived 
(pp. 185-204). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Zaehner, R. C. (Ed. and Trans.). (1969). The Bhagavad-Gita. Oxford:
Clarendon.
--- END PAGE 314 ---

--- PAGE 315 ---
Index 
Abbot, Edwin
Adaptation principle
Adversity
Aesop
Affect
affective forecasting
affective priming
affective styles
negative affect 
After Virtue (MacIntyre)
Agape (emotional state)
Ainsworth, Mary
Algoe, Sara
Allen, Woody
Altruism
and free-rider problem
Analects (Confucius)
Anomie
Appiah, Anthony
Aristotle
Ashoka (Mauryan king)
Attachment
philosophers’ rejection of
and romantic love
styles of
theories of
Augustine
Aurelius, Marcus
Autonomy, ethic of
Awe (emotional state)
Bargaining
--- END PAGE 315 ---

--- PAGE 316 ---
Bargh, John
Barrie, J. M.
Batson, C. Daniel
Baumeister, Roy
Beck, Aaron
Beckett, Samuel
Behaviorism
Bentham, Jeremy
Berscheid, Ellen 
Bhagavad Gita 
Bias
Biswas-Diener, Robert
Blake, William 
Blink (Gladwell)
Boethius
Bogen, Joseph E.
Borges, Jorge Luis
Bowlby, John
and features of attachment relationships
Boyer, Pascal
Brain structure
amygdala
“exchange organ,”
forebrain
frontal insula
hippocampus
hypothalamus
left brain-right brain division
neocortex
orbitofrontal cortex
Brain studies
Brontë, Charlotte
Buddha
on detachment
quoted
Buddhism
Burns, David
--- END PAGE 316 ---

--- PAGE 317 ---
Bush, George W.
Carnegie, Dale
Catharsis
Cather, Willa
Chapin, Henry
Character
Child development
and moral education
China
Choice
Christianity 
Christmas Carol, A (Dickens)
Cialdini, Robert
Cognitive therapy
Coherence
Community, ethic of
Confabulation
Confucius 
Consolation of Philosophy, The (Boethius)
Conspicuous consumption
Controlled and automatic processes
Cooperation
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihalyi
Culture 
Curse of the Self, The (Mark Leary)
Dalai Lama
Damasio, Antonio
Damon, William
Darwin, Charles 
Darwin’s Cathedral (Wilson)
Daston, Lorraine
Davidson, Richard
Death, fear of
--- END PAGE 317 ---

--- PAGE 318 ---
Death of Character, The (Hunter)
Depression 
De Rerum Natura (Lucretius)
Descartes, René 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) 
Dickens, Charles
Diener, Ed
Disgust, role of in social life and sexuality
Diversity
Divinity and sacredness
ethic of
“Dr. Phil” (Phil McGraw)
Donne, John
Dopamine
Drugs, psychedelic
Dunbar, Robin
Dunning, David
Durkheim, Emile
Ecclesiastes
Effectance
Elder, Glen
Elevation (emotional state)
physiology of
Eliade, Mircea
Emerson, Ralph Waldo
Emmons, Robert
Emotion
awe
agape
disgust
elevation
like and dislike
love
pleasure and gratification 
See also Happiness; Morality and moral emotions
--- END PAGE 318 ---

--- PAGE 319 ---
Epictetus
Epicurus
Epley, Nicholas 
Ethics of Identity, The (Appiah)
Evil 
Evil: Inside Human Cruelty and Aggression (Baumeister)
Evolution. See Natural selection 
Faces of Death (documentary) 
Feeling Good (Burns) 
Flatland (Abbot)
Flow
Frank, Robert
Franklin, Benjamin
Freud, Anna
Freud, Sigmund
Games and game theory
tit for tat
Gardner, Howard
Gazzaniga, Michael
Geertz, Clifford
Ghazali, al-
Gibran, Kahlil
Gilovich, Tom
Gladwell, Malcolm
Glass, David 
Godfather, The 
Goldenberg, Jamie
Gossip
Group selection
Gut feelings
Hamer, Dean
--- END PAGE 319 ---

--- PAGE 320 ---
Happiness
and affective style
and altruism
pursuit of
and search for meaning
and social relationships
and “vertical coherence” of goals
and virtue
Happiness formula
Harlow, Harry
Hawking, Stephen
Hazen, Cindy
Hedonic treadmill
Heraclitus
Heredity and behavior
Hillel
Hinde, Robert
Hinduism 
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy,
The 
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Jr.
Hom, Holly
Homer
Hume, David
Hunter, James
Hypocrisy 
Imp of the Perverse (Poe)
India 
Influence (Cialdini)
Isen, Alice
James, William
Jefferson, Thomas
Jesus
--- END PAGE 320 ---

--- PAGE 321 ---
Jordan, Michael
Jung, Carl
Justice
Kant, Immanuel
Kasser, Tim 
Keeping Together in Time (McNeill)
Keillor, Garrison
Keltner, Dacher
Kerry, John
King, Martin Luther, Jr.
King, Rodney
Klein, Melanie
Kohn, Melvin
Koran
Kramer, Peter
Kuhn, Deanna
Langer, Ellen
Language
Lao Tzu 
Laws of Manu , The 
Leary, Mark
Leary, Timothy
Le Conte, Joseph
Lerner, Mel 
Library of Babel (Borges)
Life stories
Like and dislike
Limbaugh, Rush 
Listening to Prozac (Kramer)
Loewenstein, George
Lorenz, Konrad
Love
Christian
--- END PAGE 321 ---

--- PAGE 322 ---
familial
romantic 
See also Agape (emotional state)
LSD. See Drugs, psychedelic
Lucretius 
Luxury Fever (Frank)
Lyubomirsky, Sonja
Machiavelli, Niccolo
MacIntyre, Alasdair
Manichaeism
Marriage, and relation to happiness
Marx, Karl
Maslow, Abraham
Mason, Bill
Mather, Cotton
Maximizers and satisficers
McAdams, Dan
McCauley, Clark
McGraw, Phil (“Dr. Phil”)
McNeill, William
Meaning, search for
Meditation
Meng Tzu
Mental intrusions 
Metamorphoses (Ovid)
Metaphor
Milton, John
Mischel, Walter
Montaigne, Michel de 
Monty Python’s The Meaning of Life
Moral Animal, The (Wright)
Morality
and education
and ethics of autonomy, community, and divinity
and evil
--- END PAGE 322 ---

--- PAGE 323 ---
and hypocrisy
and moral emotions
and nature
and religious purity
and virtue
Motivation
Muhammad
Mysticism
Naive realism (Pronin and Ross)
Nakamura, Jeanne
Natural selection
and brain size
and cooperation
and disgust
and group selection
and sexual behavior
Nature, and divinity
Negativity
Newberg, Andrew
New Testament 
Nichomachean Ethics (Aristotle)
Nietszche 
No Exit (Sartre)
Nolen-Hoeksema, Susan
Old Testament 
Opening Up (Pennebaker) 
Our Bodies, Ourselves 
Oveis, Chris
Ovid
Oxytocin
Pahnke, Walter
--- END PAGE 323 ---

--- PAGE 324 ---
Parasympathetic nervous system
Park, Katherine 
Passions Within Reason (Frank)
Paul
Pavlov, Ivan
Peak experiences
Pelham, Brett
Pennebaker, Jamie
Perkins, David
Personality 
Peter Pan (Barrie)
Peterson, Chris
Piaget, Jean
Piliavin, Jane
Pincoffs, Edmund
Pinker, Steven
Plato
Pleasure and gratification
Poe, Edgar Allan 
Poor Richard’s Almanack (Franklin)
Positive psychology
Posttraumatic growth
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
Practical Ethics (P. Singer)
Progress principle
Promethean script
Pronin, Emily
Proust, Marcel
Prozac. See Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Psychoanalysis 
Psychological Care of Infant and Child (Watson)
Purpose 
Purpose Driven Life, The (Warren)
Reason and reasoning
Reciprocity
--- END PAGE 324 ---

--- PAGE 325 ---
and hypocrisy
Relationships. See Love; Social networks 
Religions, Values, and Peak Experiences (Maslow)
Religious experience
and altered mental state
and life purpose
and relation to happiness See also Divinity and sacredness 
Republic (Plato)
Rodin, Judith
Rosenberg, Evan
Ross, Lee
Rozin, Paul 
Sacred and the Profane, The (Eliade)
Sanfey, Alan
Sartre, Jean-Paul
Science
and divinity
Schkade, David
Schooler, Carmi
Schrock, Ed
Schwartz, Barry
Seinfeld, Jerry
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
Self
left brain/right brain division
metaphors of
mind/body division
reason/emotion division
self-control and automatic response
Self-control
Seligman, Martin
Semmelweis, Ignaz
Seneca
Sense making
Sen-ts’an
--- END PAGE 325 ---

--- PAGE 326 ---
Separation anxiety
Sexuality
Shakespeare, William
Shaver, Phil
Sheldon, Ken
Sherman, Gary
Shweder, Richard
Silvers, Jen
Singer, Jerome
Singer, Peter
Skinner, B. F.
Skipwith, Robert
Skitka, Linda
Smith, Adam
Social networks, and psychological health
Social psychology
Socrates
Solomon, Robert
Springsteen, Bruce
Stall, Sylvester
Steinem, Gloria
Sternberg, Robert
Stevens, Cat
Stoicism
Strengths
Success 
Symposium, The (Plato)
Tao te Ching 
Teaching of Amenemope 
Thoreau, Henry David
Tolstoy, Leo
Trauma. See Adversity; Posttraumatic stress disorder
Twin studies
--- END PAGE 326 ---

--- PAGE 327 ---
Ultrasociality
Upanishads
Utilitariansim
Van Boven, Leaf
Virtue
Volunteer work, effect of on health 
Waiting for Godot (Beckett)
Walster, Elaine
Warren, Rick 
Warriors: Reflections of Men in Battle, The, (Gray)
Washington, George
Watson, John
Wealth, and relation to happiness
Wegner, Daniel M. 
What a Young Man Ought to Know , (Stall)
White, Robert
Whitford, David
Wilson, David Sloan
Winfrey, Oprah
Wisdom
Work
and coherence
and vital engagement
Wright, Robert
Wrzesniewski, Amy
--- END PAGE 327 ---

--- PAGE 328 ---
Jonathan Haidt is an Associate Professor of Psychology at the University
of Virginia. His research examines the emotional basis of morality and
the ways that morality varies across cultures, including the cultures of
liberals and conservatives. He is the co-editor of Flourishing: Positive
Psychology and the Life Well-Lived. He lives in Charlottesville, Virginia.
For further information on topics discussed in this book, visit 
www.happinesshypothesis.com.
--- END PAGE 328 ---

--- PAGE 329 ---
Copyright © 2006 by Jonathan Haidt 
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever
without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied
in critical articles and reviews. For information, address
Basic Books, 387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016-8810. 
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for
bulk purchases in the United States by corporations, institutions,
and other organizations. For more information, please contact the
Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group,
11 Cambridge Center, Cambridge MA 02142,
or call (617) 252-5298 or (800) 255-1514,
or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com. 
Haidt, Jonathan.
The happiness hypothesis : finding modern truth in ancient
wisdom / Jonathan Haidt.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
eISBN : 978-0-465-00368-6
1. Happiness. I. Title.
BJ1481.H14 2005
170—dc22 2005021163
--- END PAGE 329 ---
